ANTARCTIC TREATY               
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE 
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         

                          TRATADO ANTARTICO         
TERCERA REUNION CONSULTATIVA    
ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           

BRUXELLES                        

Doc. 13           
June 2nd, 1964    
Original: English  

ADDRESS BY MR. M.J.C. TEMPLETON  
CHAIRMAN OF THE NEW ZEALAND DELEGATION

Mr. Chairman,

May I first express the pleasure of the New Zealand
delegation at your election as our Chairman.  We are
fortunate to have a distinguished diplomat with your
experience of Antarctic affairs to preside over our
deliberations.  I should also like to take this early
opportunity to thank the Belgian Government for the evident
care and attention which it has given to the preparations
for this meeting.  We look forward to our stay in this
beautiful and historic city.

Mr. Chairman, the Antarctic Treaty is regarded by my
Government as of the greatest significance.  In the first
place, it is important to us because it prohibits nuclear
explosions and ensures the demilitarization of a vast area
not far, in terms of modern communications, from our shores.
Secondly, it has permitted controversies and problems over
territorial claims to be put on one side and active
co-operation to proceed.  Thirdly, it has created a forum
in which from time to time discussions can be held to promote
and assist scientific activity in the area.  For its size,
New Zealand carries out a substantial programme in
Antarctica;  and we have long believed that the nature of
the scientific problems in Antarctica is such that
international co-operation is essential for their solution.
- 2 -

I am happy to be able to announce here that the New 
Zealand Government recently considered what its Antarctic 
programme should be over the next five years and decided 
that work at our bases should continue through this period 
at approximately the same level as at present.

In general, we in New Zealand are satisfied that the 
sims and objectives of the Treaty are being realized in a 
satisfactory manner.  We were pleased to note that the 
recommendations of the Second Consultative lieeting at 
Buenos Aires were approved by participating Governments 
much more expeditiously than those of the First Consultative 
Meeting.  During the past year, my Government was also 
impressed by the smooth way in which, for the first time, 
the inspection provisions of the Treaty were implemented 
by a number of countries.

New Zealand was among these countries and, in 
accordance with the provisions of the Treaty, the report 
of the New Zealand inspection team has been circulated to 
all your Governments.  As the New Zealand Prime Minister 
emphasised when announcing the decision to designate 
observers, there is of course no suggestion that the Treaty 
is not being faithfully observed by all parties.  New 
Zealand does however feel strongly that agreements on 
demilitarization or disarmament should incorporate 
appropriate measures to ensure their observance, if 
confidence is to be maintained.  For this reason we 
considered it desirable to demonstrate the importance
- 3 -

which we attach to the relevant provisions of the 
Treaty.

Our major task at this Third Consultative Meeting
is to complete the task of drafting the Agreed Measures
on Antarctic Fauna and Flora which has been so well
begun by the Preparatory Group.  The New Zealand
delegation has a number of suggestions to put forward
which it hopes will contribute towards the best possible
text.  We feel, however, that the Preparatory Group has
proceeded on the right lines and in general has struck a
reasonable balance between what is desirable for the
protection of wild life in Antarctica and what is possible
at this point of time.

    I am sure that with the goodwill and spirit of
co-operation customary at these meetings, we shall bring
to a satisfactory conclusion our deliberations on this
as on the other items on our agenda.
