ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING     TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

CONFIDENTIAL
D6c/F 13
June 1st 1964
Original : English

Item 8 on the Agenda.

Questions concerning meetings of experts

Working paper submitted by New Zealand ( see next page).
B.1964/10

THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING : ANTARCTIC TREATY POWERS

BRUSSELS, 2 - 13 JUNE 1964

Proposed Agenda Item 8 :  Problems of Technical Meetings
                        and Expert Meetings.

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand.

The Antarctic Treaty does not give a clear indication
of the status of technical meetings held under its provisions.
It could be argued from the terms of Article IX that both
technical and Consultative meetings have the same status and
that both are competent to make recommendations to Governments
which may then approve them with binding effects.  It seems,
however, that, in practice, Governments have acted as if
there were a difference between the kinds of meetings.  The
telecommunications meeting, for example, resulted from the
recommendations of Consultative Meetings (Canberra I-XI and
Buenos Aires II-III) in which it was referred to as a
"meeting of specialists".  This meeting was not on the same
level as those of representatives of the Contracting Parties
to the Antarctic Treaty.  Similarly, the proposed logistics
symposium (Canberra recommendation I-VIII and Buenos Aires
recommendation II-V)  has been referred to as a "meeting or
symposium of experts".  It could, moreover, occur that not
all Treaty nations consider it essential to be represented
at a specialists' meeting, whereas all would be present at
a Consultative Meeting.  It is the New Zealand view accord-
ingly that technical meetings do not have the same status as
Consultative Meetings.

The New Zealand authorities have studied the draft
recommendation submitted by the United Kingdom concerning
-2-

principles on the relationship between technical meetings 
and Consultative meetings.  New Zealand would agree that 
technical meetings should, as a general rule, report to the 
next Consultative Meeting.  (This does not exclude the 
possibility that Governments may wish to act on reports 
before Consultative Meetings.)  On the other hand, it is 
doubted whether it is advisable to make it a firm rule that 
technical meetings should be called only as a result of 
a recommendation of a Consultative Meeting. It is possible 
that the Treaty nations might wish to hold a technical meeting 
at short notice.  It would, therefore, seem appropriate that 
there should be less rigidity on this point.

New Zealand feels that it is important that in future 
there should be agreement beforehand on the terms of 
reference and the destination of recommendations of technical 
meetings.  It is felt, however, that it would be preferable 
to deal with future meetings of this type on an ad hoc basis 
until some sort of pattern is established.  While New Zealand 
has no fixed views on the manner in which the objective should 
be gained, it seems that a formula along the following lines 
might be adequate at this stage:

Specialists' or technical meetings may be called either 
in accordance with the recommendation of a Consultative 
Meeting or as a result of consultations between the 
Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.  In 
cases where such a meeting is called in accordance 
with a recommendation of a Consultative Meeting,that 
recommendation should lay down the terms of 
reference of the meeting and the destination of its 
suggestions or recommendations.  In other cases the 
Contracting Parties should agree on these details 
before the meeting takes place
