ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING     TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

Doc. 18
June 13th 1964.

PRESS RELEASE

The Antarctic Treaty Powers held their Third
Consultative Meeting in Brussels from June 2nd to 13th 1964.

The Meeting had been convened in accordance
with Article IX of the Treaty, for the purpose of exchanging
information, consulting together on matters of common interest
pertaining to Antarctica, and formulating, considering and
recommending to the Governments measures in furtherance of the
principles and objectives of the Treaty.

Representatives of the following countries were
present: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, and the United States of America.

His Excellency Viscount Obert de Thieusies,
Ambassador, was elected Chairman of the Meeting; Mr. Marcel
Foullez, Secretary of Embassy, was appointed Secretary General;
Mr. Jean De Breucker of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was
appointed Assistant Secretary General.

The Representatives drew up and adopted eleven
recommendations on such matters as the protection of native
fauna and flora in the Antarctic Treaty Area and on the role
of the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR)
in this field, the coordination of telecommunications and the
exchange of information concerning aircraft landing facilities
and refuges. The full list of matters to which these recommend-
ations were directed is as follows:

Information on facilities for the landing of aircraft.
Notification of unoccupied refuges.
Logistics.
The next Meeting.
Telecommunications.
Questions concerning Meetings of Specialists.
Acceptance of approved recommendations.
Agreed Measures for the conservation of Antarctic
fauna and flora.
Interim guide lines for conservation of fauna and flora.
- 2 -

Interest of SCAR in the conservation of Antarctic
fauna and flora.
Pelagic sealing and the taking of fauna on  pack ice.

The discussions took place in a spirit of
constant cooperation and cordiality. The Delegates expressed
their appreciation to the Chairman for the perfect organiz-
ation of the Meeting.

The Representatives unanimously agreed to
recommend to their Governments that they accept the
invitation from the Chilean Government to hold the Fourth
Consultative Meeting at Santiago on a date to be agreed upon
subsequently.
