ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE                   TPETE КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

Doc. 5
June 2nd, 1964
Original: English

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION

Mr. Chairman,

I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your unanimous
election as Chairman of this Third Consultative Meeting.  It
is very fitting that we should today be honoured by the presence
in the Chair of one of the "founding fathers" of the Antarctic
Treaty, whose wisdom and statecraft were responsible for the
creation of this landmark in peaceful co-operation between
nations.

May I at the same time, on behalf of my Delegation, express
our appreciation to the Belgian Government to whose generous
hospitality we owe this opportunity of meeting together.  It
is a happy augury that our meeting should take place in Brussels,
which is not only one of the great capitals of the world, but
also the centre of a great experiment in international co-operation.
What more appropriate place could we have chosen, since our theme
is also co-operation between nations for the benefit of mankind
as a whole.

This theme - the going forward of many nations together in
a spirit of harmony and friendship for the advancement of human
knowledge - is one of the achievements of our time of which we
can be particularly proud.  The scientific and technical progress
of the Twentieth Century has been phenomenal, but much remains
to be done, and in this regard Antarctica continues to be an
immediate and fascinating challenge.

A great magnetic anomaly for example spans the Southern
Oceans between Cape Town and Antarctica, and we are keen to
- 2 -

learn more about it.  Moreover the theory of continental drift 
becomes more plausible as increasing geological and paleo-
botanical evidence tends to prove that Southern Africa and 
Antarctica were once part of the same land mass.

  To a country like South Africa where agriculture and 
communications play so important a role, weather is of the first 
importance.  The meteorological data, which we receive from the 
South African Antarctic base at Sanae and from our weather stations 
in the Southern islands, is consequently of immense practical 
value to South Africa, and indeed to many other States as well.

  In other directions too South African scientists have been 
occupied in implementing our five-year Antarctic research programme 
which was initiated in April last year.  This has involved close 
co-operation with S.C.A.R., and last Se?tember my country was 
honoured to act as host to the delogates who attended the S.C.A.R. 
meeting in Cape Town.

  A notable achievement which was associated with that meeting 
was the epic flight which took place at its conclusion.  A party 
of United States scientists and airmen, with a South African 
observer, initiated the air-route from Cape Town to McMurdo Sound 
over the South Pole.  It is just conceivable that this could 
become one of the routine air-routes to Antarctica in the years 
ahead.

  This flight provides an instance of co-operation in the 
Antarctic context and in the spirit of the Treaty.  It is only 
one of many examples;  but, while our achievements in the past 
are encouraging, we cannot afford to become too complacent about 
those achievements.  Unless we remain constantly alive to the 
need for expanding and improving our scientific co-operation
- 3 -

within the framework of the Treaty, and unless we remain receptive
to new ideas for promoting the efficient implementation of the
Treaty, we run the risk of losing the momentum already generated,
and of losing also the opportunities which the Treaty offers for
joint action by its signatories.

The improvements to which I refer could take many forms.
One form is that which is envisaged in the memorandum which my
Delegation has circulated in regard to administrative arrangements
between Consultative Meetings.  Another is the possibility which
might be explored of joint or collaborative expeditions on the
part of scientific teams based at various points on the Continent.
These might facilitate the opening up of Antarctica to more
extensive and more intensive research.

In all this joint endeavour, South Africa's contribution
must necessarily be modest in comparison with the great achieve-
ments of some other countries.  Nevertheless, that contribution
is positive and active, and it is our intention that those two
qualities will continue to characterise South African partici?ation
in the international research programme in Antarctica during the
years which lie ahead.
