ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING     TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

AGENDA ITEM No 13              CONFIDENTIAL
                                Doc/PI7
                                1 June 1964
                                Original: English

ANTARCTIC TREATY: ADMINISTRATIVE
ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN CONSULTATIVE
MEETINGS

Documents Submitted by the South African delegation.

It will be recalled that, at the Second Consultative
Meeting in Buenos Aires in July, 1962, and again at the
Fourth and Fifth Preparatory Meetings in Brussels last year,
the South African representatives raised the question of
administrative arrangements between Consultative Meetings.
The two documents circulated on those occasions are attached
hereto for reference purposes.

The South African Government is still of the opinion
that a problem exists in this regard and that its consider-
ation and discussion would be of value.  In making this
proposal, the South African Government would like to
emphasise two points.  The first is that the objective of
such a discussion should, in its opinion, be threefold,
namely to maintain the momentum of co-operation and
203

consultation within the framework of the Treaty, to 
provide a greater measure of continuity than exists at 
present; and to improve the effective implementation 
of the aims and provisions of the Treaty.

The second point to be emphasised is that the 
purpose of inscribing this item on the Agenda is to 
stimulate discussion of the topic with which it deals. 
It is not the intention of the South African Government 
to present the Meeting with cut and dried solutions. 
The proposals submitted in the attached memorandum are 
no more than suggestions which may or may not prove 
acceptable.  These suggestions have been drafted in a 
spirit of compromise and if alternative proposals which 
are more effective and more acceptable are submitted, 
it goes without saying that the  South African Government 
would be happy to consider them.
204

ANTARCTIC TREATY: ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS

The representatives of the Antarctic Treaty Powers will recall that, at the Second Consultative Meeting in Buenos Aires in July, 1962, the South African Delegation initiated an exploratory discussion on the question of administrative arrangements between Consultative Meetings. 
It is our belief that those discussions were fruitful, and that some progress was made in seeking an arrangement which would prove acceptable to all the Antarctic Treaty Powers. 
We have accordingly been encouraged to suggest that the matter be further pursued at these Preparatory Meetings in Brussels in the hope that a further exchange of views will establish sufficient common ground for a recommendation to be agreed upon at the Third Consultative Meeting in 1964.

At Buenos Aires, we expressed the opinion that the system which has evolved for implementing the Treaty provisions and the Recommendations of Consultative Meetings has certain shortcomings in that it does not provide the necessary machinery,

(a)    for arranging consultation between Governments as provided by the Treaty or by the Recommendations;

(b)    for co-ordinating the activities of Governments in Antarctica as required by the Treaty or by Recommendations;

(c)    for reminding Governments of their obligations and responsibilities arising from the Treaty or from Recommendations;

(d)    for initiating discussion or action in this field.

As a result of these inadequacies, some of the Recommendations of the First Consultative Meeting were not fully or effectively implemented. As a consequence, much of the time of the Second Consultative Meeting was taken up in going over once again ground which had already been covered in Canberra.  This state of affairs not only diminishes the productive potential of Consultative Meetings, but it is also inclined to induce a negative and unco-ordinated approach to the problems of international co-operation in the area, and an apathy towards Antarctic Affairs which all the Treaty Powers must necessarily deprecate.
- 2 -

It was against this background that South Africa raised 
the issue of Administrative Arrangements in Buenos Aires.  We 
felt that if the ideals of the Antarctic Treaty were to be 
achieved, and if this unique experiment in international co-
operation was to be fruitful, a fresh approach was required 
which would breathe new life into the system. The arrangement 
which we proposed for general discussion offered, in our 
opinion, the basis for an acceptable and effective solution 
to the problem. There was no attempt in Buenos Aires to reach 
any final decision in the matter.  The discussion which took 
place there was purely exploratory, and was designed simply 
to establish the points of common agreement.  We now propose 
that the examination which was initiated in the Second 
Consultative Meeting be continued during the present series of 
Preparatory Meetings in Brussels.  It is our hope that 
sufficient progress will be made for the subject to be included 
in the agenda for the Third Consultative Meeting in 1964.

    A copy of the Working paper presented by the South 
African Delegation in Buenos Aires is attached for information. 
It is no longer entirely relevant (although it contains some 
elements which might still be considered of practical value) 
for the reason that the character of the inter-sessional 
Preparatory Meetings has undergone a revolutionary change since 
July, 1962.  Prior to th.t date, that is before the Second 
Consultative Meeting, the Preparatory Meetings were concerned 
solely with the Agenda for the Meeting in Buenos Aires. 
Matters of substance were not touched upon. The current series 
of Preparatory Meetings, on the other hand, has gone much 
further by dealing also with matters of substance such as, for 
example, the Draft Instrument for the Conservation of Natural 
Resources in Antarctica.

This change has come about naturally and in response to 
a real need for some form of machinery of this type.  A 
Committee without substantive authority or functions has 
evolved almost involuntarily, with the tacit consent of all 
the Treaty Powers, into a Committee with accepted functions 
of a substantive and advisory nature.  The South African 
Government feel that it would be more profitable to build on 
this new system which has evolved than to attempt to introduce 
some entirely new procedure.  They suggest that this could 
perhaps best be done by isolating the problems which still 
exist and then seeking ways and means of overcoming them. In 
the hope that this procedure will commend itself to Represent-
atives, the South African Government have noted the following 
problems which seem to them to be still very much in evidence:
- 3 -

(i)    CONTINUITY.  Under the existing arrangement, the 
Preparatory Meetings are scheduled to be convened elsewhere 
after the conclusion of the Third Consultative Meeting.  A 
new group of perhaps uninitiated Representatives will be 
required to assume the functions of inter-sessional con-
sultation, and their usefulness must necessarily be limited 
at least during the initial stages of the new series of 
Meetings.  After the Fourth will shift once again, and so on. 
Scarcely will each group of Representatives have acquired 
the necessary knowledge and experience of Antarctic affairs., 
when they will be required to transfer their functions to 
another group, and the benefit of that knowledge and exper-
ience will be lost to the Treaty Powers.  In short, the system 
does not seem to be one which is likely to produce con-
structive discussion.

      It seems imperative that some arrangement be devised 
so as to enable the Representatives concerned, or at 
least the Diplomatic Missions to which they are attached, to 
contribute for several years to the work of the Preparatory 
Group.  The question arises whether it is absolutely nec-
essary for the location of the Preparatory Meetings to be 
dependant upon the venue for a particular Consultative Meeting. 
The importance which may be ascribed to the maintenance of 
the present system would seem to be very much less than 
the importance of preserving the continuity of these Pre-
paratory Meetings.  Another reason for not insisting too 
rigidly upon having the same venues for Consultative and 
Preparatory Meetings at any given time is that the twelve 
Contracting Parties are not all represented by Diplomatic 
or Consular Missions in all the capitals of their co-
signatories;  this is likely to raise representational 
problems at Preparatory Meetings.  In short, we see great 
advantage to be derived from convening the Preparatory 
Meetings in one capital continuously for two,three, four 
or more years, even if the venue of the Consultative Meetings 
should rotate as at present.

(ii)   INITIATIVE.  One of the principal shortcomings of the 
present system seems to the South African Government to be 
the absence of any established means of initiating discus-
sion or joint action which the Treaty or the Recommendations 
may have prescribed.  We have hitherto relied upon the 
initiative of one or other Government, but this arrangement 
is not wholly satisfactory in that it appears to be too 
haphazard.  The impetus given to Antarctic co-operation
- 4 -

by each Consultative Meeting is in danger of being dissipated 
during the period between meetings. What is required is a 
means of keeping interest and enthusiasm alive, and ensuring 
active and prompt compliance with directives and recommendations.

Other international organisations rely on their 
Secretariats to perform these functions; we must seek an 
alternative means of doing so since the Treaty Powers are 
all agreed that the creation of a Secretariat, as this 
expression is understood in present-day terminology, should 
be avoided at all costs. It has occurred to the South African 
Government that this alternative solution may possibly lie 
in the appointment of a single individual on a long-term basis, 
who could perhaps carry out the essential tasks of a Secretary 
to the Preparatory Group, such as the convening and servicing 
of meetings of the Group, the preparation and circulation of 
agendas, procès-verbaux, working papers, etc. He would thus 
take over some of the functions hitherto assumed automatically 
by the host Government for the next Consultative Meeting. In 
addition, he would seek methods of fostering international 
co-operation, as envisaged by the Antarctic Treaty. This 
international, as contrasted with the purely national, aspect 
has not hitherto received very much emphasis yet the cir-
cumstances and opportunities for such co-operation are unique 
and are potentially valuable.

The appointment of an individual immediately raises 
problems of a political nature. This should not, however, 
be the case. The problems in Antarctica cut right across 
the conventional East-West problems, and the objections and 
fears which could often be substantiated in the context of 
appointments to conventional international organisations have 
no place in the Antarctic context What is required for 
Antarctic co-operation is a man of drive, initiative and vision. 
His nationality is unimportant and irrelevant.

The questions of continuity and initiative mentioned 
in the preceding paragraphs appear to the South African 
Government to be particularly important and to merit priority 
treatment. Other Governments may attach special significance 
to other questions in this context, and the answers to those 
questions may themselves create problems for consideration. 
All this is appreciated, but there is no reason to sup?ose that 
these difficulties cannot be overcome in a manner acceptable 
to all. Moreover, the whole question of administrative arrange-
ments is so vital to the effective implementation of the 
Antarctic Treaty that open discussion of the subject should not, 
we feel, be delayed any longer.
208

WORKING PAPER SUBMITTED BY SOUTH AFRICAN 

DELEGATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS

AT THE SECOND CONSULTATIVE MEETING OF THE

ANTARCTIC TREATY POWERS:     BUENOS. AIRES:

      JULY, 1962


"Having in mind the need of improved administrative
arrangements to maintain efficient contact between the Antarc-
tic Treaty Powers and other organisations and to assist them
in carrying out their commitments under the Antarctic Treaty,
the South African Delegation proposes the following as a basis
of non-committal discussion preparatory to a more concrete
arrangement to be decided upon at the next Consultative Meeting:

The formation of a working group consisting of the
Diplomatic Missions accredited in the Capital of one of the
Contracting Parties, preferably in the Southern Hemisphere,
to deal with the business of the Treaty Powers.

The tasks of the working group will be:

(i)  to make the administrative arrangements for the next
Consultative Meeting;

(ii) remind member governments of their commitments under
the Treaty;

(iii)co-ordinate and distribute papers amongst the member
governments;

(iv)  to deal with such other matters as may be entrusted to
it by member governments or Consultative Meetings.

The Working Group will remain in the capital mentioned
above for the duration of 2, 3 or such number of Consultative
Meetings as may be decided upon, having regard to the increased
efficiency provided by continuity of personnel dealing with
Antarctic problems.
209

After this period the Working Group could b   common 
consent be established in another capital always bearing in 
mind that all Treaty Powers should be diplomatically represented 
in such capital.

The Chairman of the Working Group will be the Representative 
of the country responsible for convening the next Consultative 
Meeting.

The Working Group will have facilities provided free of 
charge by the host government, consisting of an official to-
gether with such typing staff as may be necessary to carry out 
the administrative requirements of the Working Group.

The above measures are designed to eliminate the possibility 
of even the embryo of a permanent secretariat.  It will provide 
an "address" for the Treaty Powers and thus establish an 
efficient communications channel for me?ber governments interest 
and with other organisations.
