ANTARCTIC TREATY                      
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE         
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
                                        
TRATADO ANTARTICO                      
TERCERA REUNION CONSULTATIVA           
TPETE КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE       
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                   


BRUXELLES                                


                                     Doc. 8
                                     June 2nd 1964
                                     Original: Spanish


ADDRESS by the Head of the Chilean        
Delegation at the Third Consultative      
Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty.


Mr. Chairman,


The delegation of Chile wishes first of all to
express the warmest congratulations for the well deserved
hommage paid to you on the occasion of your election by
the Member Countries to preside at the Third Consultative
Meeting. We cannot forget that this important international
instrument, upon the provisions of which our meeting is based,
bears your signature as representative of the Belgian Govern-
ment. All those who are present here, who took part in the
Washington meetings, will remember with emotion and gratitude
your activity and your spirit of co-operation in the con-
clusion of this important agreement.


The delegation of Chile wishes to take this occasion
also to recall the important participation by Belgium in
Antarctic research and exploration.


In 1895, the International Geographical Congress at
London recognized that it was urgent to explore the Antarctic
region. The first country to respond was Belgium. It was
only two years after the appeal was made that, in 1897,
Adrian de Gerlache sailed from the port of Antwerp towards
the unexplored South, thus opening the route which has since
been followed and completed by DRYGALSKI from Germany,
- 2 -

NORDENSKJOELD from Sweden, Charcot from France and Scott 
from Great Britain.

de Gerlache called twice at Punta Arenas, a Chilean 
town on the Magellan Strait, an obligatory port of call for 
all the expeditions, and especially those voyaging in the 
direction of what de Gerlache and Charcot called the "South 
American Antarctic Regions", a name which is truly justified, 
although these regions lie 700 km (465 miles) south of Cape 
Horn. On board the "Belgica" there was a brilliant scientific 
team; it is enough to mention the names of Arctowski, Danco, 
Racovitza. The crew included a very young Norwegian 2nd 
Lieutenant of whom much was to be heard later on: AMUNDSEN.

The Chilean delegation is pleased to be able to pay 
tribute to the valiant expedition led by Adrien de Gerlache; 
it was of great importance to Antarctic Studies.

The fact that the Third Consultative Meeting is held 
in this fine city and your hospitable country also provides 
the Chilean delegation with very great reason for satisfaction. 
We should like you to be kind enough to convey to your Govern-
ment the most cordial thanks of the Chilean Government for 
their efforts which have made it possible for us and the 
other delegations to meet in this fine capital.

My country recognises the fundamental importance of the 
necessity to hold consultative meetings at regular intervals, 
as referred to by Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. The 
time that has elapsed since the Second Consultative Meeting 
at Buenos Aires shows that there was an imperative need for 
this Meeting in Brussels; that relations between Treaty 
Members must be maintained, and that the functioning of the 
Treaty must be studied provide ample justification for it. 
Between the Buenos Aires Meeting and the present, there have 
occurred certain important factors in relation to the imple-
- 3 -

mentation of the Treaty.

Among other things the delegation of Chile is glad
to note the satisfaction with which the United States has
greeted the execution of inspection rights provided for
by irt VII of the Treaty. My Covemment believes that the
experience to be gained from this first inspection may be
of great use for future inspections. Chile, as well as the
other Antarctic countrics, wil accept with great satisfaction
any information whatever from the United States concerning
the experience that may have acquired.

The Government of Chile has had inscribed on the draft
agenda of this meeting, a provision concerning the exercise
of this right. The Chilean motion is strictly in conformity
with the provisions of the Treaty, and aims at nothing more
than to urge Member Countries to examine the means that
exper ence indicates should be adopted to facilitate the
exercise of t is right.

The Government of Chile has observed with great
satisfaction that the antarctic Treaty is giving positive
results, particularly with regard to the questions of a
scientific nature, wich is our opinion justifies the sig-
nature that we appended to it on 1st December 1959.

We firmly believe in the usefulness of establishing
day by day in the strictest manner the proposals for coll-
aboration of all forms inscientific questions established
in the Treaty, and to reaffirm the nigh peaceful principles
of international harmony and understanding which form the
aims of this Treaty.

But we also bulive that in its application we have
to proceed with extreme prudence in order to ensure its
success.
- 4 -

An exaggerated extension of its provisions, or any provisions out of keeping with its aims and objects, might lead us to unsuspected and insoluble difficulties.

The adoption of measures or recommendations which are out of harmony with the objectives which were borne in mind in concluding the Antarctic Treaty, would constitute a hazard of the greatest gravity. The Chilean delegation, in defence of these principles and proposals, will try, while harmonising their points of view with those of other delegations, to avoid situations of this nature occurring.

My Government repeats its decision to proceed in these matters with the greatest moderation, so that any further extensions to the Treaty will be the result of experience acquired uniformly in its application, without our hurrying to take too large steps forward, which would give rise to disillusion tomorrow or cause regret at the signing of the Treaty, which in good faith and inspired by the noble principles of scientific collaboration and peaceful purposes, we subscribed to in Washington in the international agreement which is the reason for cur being here today.

Within the scope indicated previously, the Chilean delegation is attending the present meeting and offers here and now its fullest and most decisive support in carrying forward the work which is being initiated today.

We are certain that the Brussels meeting will be extraordinarily fruitful for the objects already pointed out, and which the twelve Antarctic countries had in view when they signed the Treaty in Washington on the 1st December, 1959.

Thank you very much, Mr. Presiden.
