ANTARCTIC TREATY
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE





TRATADO ANTARTICO
TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TPETE КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

Doc. 15
June 2nd 1964
Criginal: Russian.

Inaugural Declaration by the Head of the Delegation of
the U.S.S.R.

Mr Chairman,
Gentlemen,

On behalf of the Soviet Delegation allow me to
greet the representatives of the Governments signatory to
the Antarctic Treaty, met together here on the occasion
of the 3rd Consultative Meeting.

Less than four years have elapsed since the Antarctic
Treaty came into force, but we can already note that as a
result of this Treaty, great progress has be n made in
Antarctic Studies. All kinds of scientific research for
peaceful purposes only, are being effected with rewarding
results in the austral regions of the Globe.

Thanks to the joint efforts by the Antarctic Powers,
this monstrous continent of ice has become in reality the
first continent on our Planet to be devoted to peace and
science.

A vast region of Antarctica has now become suff-
iciently known from the geographic, geophysical and geo-
logical aspects, through multiply efforts by many Antarctic
expeditions.
- 2 -

On a basis of the problems of Theory and of 
practice at the present moment, problems that are connected 
with future Antarctic exploration, scientists have already 
begun to systemize all the observations made in Antarctica 
and the surrounding waters by expeditions from various countries. 
Soviet scientists, in particular, are at present compiling a 
comprehensive atlas of Antarctica. For the first time in the 
history of man, the results of explorations effected by 
specialists from many countries will combine to form a 
whole.

Since January 1st of this year, scientists from the 
U.S.S.R., Australia, Argentina, the United Kingdom, France, 
the United States of America, Chile, New Zealand and other 
countries, continue to study Antarctica in conformity to 
the programme laid down by the International Calm Sun Year.

I am glad to note that in correlation with the applic-
ation of this important international scientific measure, 
Belgium has once again sent an expedition to the shores of 
the South Polar continent.

The exchange of scientific staff, equipment, and the 
results of expeditions becoming intensified. Specialists 
from the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, 
Great Britain, France and the United States are taking part 
in the Soviet expedition during the Antarctic summer of 1963 - 
1964. Soviet research workers are engaged in making scientific 
observations in the British and United States Antarctic Stations.

All this testifies that the provisions of the 
Antarctic Treaty have the way to the prospect of wide colla-
boration between States, in scientific research in the Antarctic.

The Antarctic Treaty, which provides for development 
uniquely for peaceful purposes, could serve as an example 
for the normalization of international relations in the name
- 3 -

of world peace. The aims and principles of the Treaty respond to the fundarental problem confronting humanity,
i.e., to ensure peace between all States independently
of their different sociological structures.

The two previous consultative meetings, at which
various Governments took place, were remarkable because of
their spirit of mutual understanding and the constant
aspiration of all the participants towards the develorment
and strengthening of common collaboration, with the view
of teaching acceptable and co-ordinated decisions upon the
many questions concerning the implementation of the aims
and principles of the Antarctic Treaty.

    The working programme for the present Consutlative
Meeting includes various questions connected with the
implementation of the Treaty regarding peaceful use of
Antarctica, future exchange of information about Antarctic
e:peditions, protection of flora and fauna, development of
collaboartion between States at the time of the International
Calm Sun Year.

    The Soviet delegation expresses the hope that, as
before, this meeting will, in a spirit of efficient coll-
aboration, draw up measures that will contribute to the
systematic realization of Antarctic Treaty decisions, of its
noble aims and principles.

    We should like to take advantage of this occasion
to underline the efforts by the Belgian Government in the
organization of the Third Consultative Meeting of the
Antarctic Tresty, and to express our gratitude to the Prime
Minister, Mr. Lefèvre, for the words of welcome which he
addressed to all the participants at the Mee ing.

Gentlemen, I thank you for your attention.
