ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO 153
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING     TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  TPETbE KОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

AGENDA ITEM  2                  Doc/P6.
                                1 June 1964
                                Original: English

ANTARCTIC TREATY MEETING ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Washington, D. C. -- June 24-28, 1963

FINAL REPORT
154

ANTARCTIC TREATY MEETING ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Washington, D. C. - June 24-28,  1963

FINAL REPORT

The Antarctic Treaty Meeting on Telecommunications was
convened in the International Conference Suite of the Department
of State at Washington, D. C. at 10:30 a.m. on June 24,1963.
There were representatives from the twelve nations signatory to
the Antarctic Treaty and observers from the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO), the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
in attendance. (See Appendix A for list of participants.)

Mr. John M. Jones, Chairman of the United States Delegation,
presided as temporary Chairman and introduced the Honorable
Harlan Cleveland, Assistant Secretary of State for International
Organization Affairs, who welcomed the representatives on behalf
of the United States Government.

Following the order of business, the temporary Chairman
called for election of officers. Upon the proposal of the
representative of South Africa, seconded by the representative
of Chile, Mr. Jones was unanimously elected Chairman of the
Meeting. Mr. Henry E. Allen of the Department of State was
unanimously appointed Secretary of the Meeting.

The Meeting then proceeded to the consideration of the
draft rules of procedure as proposed by the United States.  The
Representative of the United Kingdom proposed that the name of
the Meeting be changed to Antarctic Treaty Meeting on Tele-
communications, since the title proposed in the Rules of Procedure
referred to radio communications alone and was too limiting.  This
proposal was unanimously accepted.  During a discussion of the
desirability of including in the Final Report recommendations
which might receive less than unanimous approval,  the United
Kingdom Representative suggested that if any Representative,
although agreeing in principle with a recommendation, wished his
comments to appear in the Final Report, this should be done.
This was agreed by the Meeting and the Rules of Procedure were
adopted.  (Appendix B.)

The agenda proposed jointly by the United States and
Australia was then considered by the Meeting and, there being
no discussion, was adopted unanimously. ( Appendix C.)
- 2 -

The Meeting then proceeded during the next seven sessions with a discussion of the several items of the agenda, based on nine draft recommendations which had been submitted by the Australian Delegation, and additional draft recommendations submitted during the Meeting by the French Delegation, by the United Kingdom Delegation, and by New Zealand and South Africa.  These discussions, in which all delegations actively participated, resulted in the exchange of views on many detailed facets of communications operations in the Treaty area.  Great emphasis was placed on the necessity for prompt transmission of meteorological data and, during the second session, the Observer from the WMO discussed the requirements of his organization and subsequently submitted a statement to the Meeting covering these and other items.  (Appendix D.)

The Observer from SCAR introduced for the information of the participating Governments a paper prepared by the Communications Working Group of SCAR which set forth  details of the radio stations in Antarctica operated by the countries signatory to the Antarctic Treaty.  The document was augmented by both additional and revised information received during the course of the Meeting and is included as Appendix E. (English only.)

During the discussion of Recommendation II the United Kingdom delegation presented a memorandum describing the results of their study of other possible methods of passing traffic to the IAWAC, including the use of international cable systems.  Some Representatives expressed support of the idea of studying other possible means of passing traffic to the IAWAC.

In connection with the adoption of Recommendation IV the Representative of Norway stated that:

"The Norwegian Government will not object to the adoption of this recommendation, but will reserve the right to establish and operate radio stations in the Antarctica if this should be required for Norwegian activities
- 3 -

in the area and, in particular, to
establish radio communications with
the homeland. Norway would in that
case be willing to discuss her communi-
cations requirements with the other
contracting parties in view of possible
co-ordination."

The Observer from SCAR, in connection with the adoption
of this recomendation asked that the record show that he did
not consider that the language referring to "the appropriate
authority" is sufficiently clear.

Discussion on all draft recommendations was characterized
by a marked spirit of co-operation which was perhaps best
demonstrated in consideration of the draft recommendation on
"Continuing Liaison" presented by the United Kingdom.

In introducing this draft, the United Kingdom Representative
said that his government regarded this as one of the most
important items to be considered by the Meeting.  In his capacity
as Chairman of the Communications Working Group of SCAR he had
found that a considerable number of problems arose every year
which usually demanded immediate attention.  These were matters
which could not be sttled through bilateral action because they
concerned all signatory nations or because more than two nations
would be involved.  SCAR, he said, felt that as a scientific
body it shoud not continue to be responsible for the co-ordination
of the operations of the telecommunications network.

The United Kingdom Representative said that his government
regarded this Meeting as the first step towards the assumoption
of responsibility by the Governments signatory to the Antarctic
Treaty of the responsibilities in the field of telecommunications
now being carried by SCAR.  He suggested that, as the experience
of SCAR had demonstrated the need for a co-ordinating official,
the governments might consider the appointment of one of their
officials to undertake this function on a part-time basis and that
with Antarctic telecommunications to act as correspondant for
his country.
- 4 -

The United States spokesman indicated that his government believed that there was no need for the appointment of a
co-ordinating official and felt that bilateral action would be
sufficient to cover all detailed scheduling between stations.  He
noted the continued existence of the SCAR Working Group on
Communications which has so effectively carried out the co-
ordinating function.

New Zealand and South Africa submitted a recommendation to the
effect that, since agreement seemed unlikely, the question of
continued co-ordination in the field of telecommunications be
referred to the next Consultative Meeting.

Following lengthy discussions on this recommendation during
both the seventh and eighth sessions, the Chairman appointed a
working group to resolve drafting difficulties.  This working
group, recognizing the basic problems faced by the participating
delegations and their governments, presented a revised draft which
was at once accepted by all Representatives.

All of the eleven recommendations considered by the Meeting
thus were approved unanimously by the twelve Representatives.
They present possible solutions to telecommunications problems
in the Antarctic.  By approving these recommendations, the
Representatives recognize that such recommendations are not binding
on their respective governments and that their governments may not
necessarily implement the provisions thereof.

The Meeting directed the Secretary to transmit a certified
copy of the Final Report to the Preliminary Meeting at Brussels
for its information.

On this basis the Meeting submits for the consideration of
the Governments signatory to the Antarctic Treaty the following
Recommendations:
- 5 -

RECOMMENDATION I

CO-ORDINATED TIMETABLE FOR URGENT TRAFFIC

CONSIDERING:

(a)     that meteorological data constitute a large proportion 
of the total radio traffic handled by operators at 
Antarctic stations,

(b)     that they lose much of their value for analysis and fore-
casting if they do not reach the analysis centers within 
a few hours of the time the observations commence,

(c)     that forecasts for flight and other field operations are 
an urgent and important requirement at a number of 
Antarctic stations, and

(d)     that the International Antarctic Weather Analysis Centre 
(I.A.A.C.) in Melbourne requires all meteorological data 
collected south of 30°S, to prepare analyses for operational 
and other uses.

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

1.     that all Antarctic Stations should arrange radio schedules 
at times which will allow meteorological data collectives 
to reach the forecasting centers, the Southern Ocean 
regional analysis centers and the I.A.A.C. in Melbourne 
as soon as possible, but, in any case, no later than two 
hours for the surface data obtained from the six-hourly 
observations, and four hours for upper air data, after 
the nominal time of commencement of the relevant observation,

2.     that sufficient time should be allotted in the schedules 
so arranged to permit the handling of other urgent traffic 
offering on the same route at the same time,

3.     that the attached framework for a provisional timetable 
of schedules should be adopted for these purposes, as 
may be practicable, and
159

- 6 -

4.      that other transmissions which contracting parties arrange 
        for other radio traffic offering should not interfere 
        with this timetable of schedules except in emergency 
        involving the safety of life, subject always to the right 
        of the base leader to decide otherwise.

                RECOMENDATION II

        LINK BETWEEN ANTARCTIC PENINSULA AND McMURDO

        CONSIDERING:

(a)      that meteorological data collected from the Antarctic 
        peninsula area and McMurdo are required for analysis at 
        the I.A.A.C. and for forecasting at McMurdo and Mirny 
        and occasionally elsewhere in Antarctica,

(b)      that broadcasting of meteorological data across the auroral 
        zone gives a lower degree of circuit reliability than is 
        required, and

(c)      that the provision of a southern hemisphere data exchange 
        network which would meet this requirement satisfactorily 
        is unlikely to be realized for some years.

        THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

        that the best method for providing reliable communications 
        to transmit data obtained in the Antarctic peninsula area 
        to McMurdo be investigated as soon as practicable by the 
        nations concerned.

                RECOMMENDATION III

        TENTATIVE ROUTING OF METEOROLOGICAL DATA

(a)      that the introduction of some new routes is necessary 
        to achieve the desired improvement in the handling of 
        meteorological data,

(b)      that there are nevertheless some important practical 
        limitations to the facilities which can be provided
- 7 -

economically at some Antarctic stations,

(c)     that the Representatives have examined these limitations
at each terminal of the new radio circuit paths desired,

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

that the attached tentative schedule should be agreed as
the normal routing for passing meteorological data from
the observing areas to the terminal stations of the
Antarctic radio network.

Note:  It would be desirable that the forthcoming SCAR
meeting could examine whether this tentative routing meets
the requirements of the users of scientific information.

RECOMMENDATION    IV

RATIONALIZATION OF INTERNATIONAL LINKS

CONSIDERING:

that it is desirable to keep the number of international
radio links in Antarctica to the minimum number necessary
to handle the traffic authorized by the appropriate
authority.

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

1.     that Antarctic's international radio links should be
limited as far as possible to those shown in the attached
diagram, and

2.     that states which accede to the Antarctic Treaty and are
entitled to participate in the meetings referred to in
Article IX of the Treaty, should be invited to co-ordinate
their communications with those already established in
Antarctica.
- 8 -

RECOMMENDATION V

EMERGENCY ROUTES FOR INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC

CONSIDERING:

that there is a need for a limited number of alternative routes to be kept open in case the route selected for a main link is inoperative for any reason.

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

that the following alternate routes should be maintained and that test schedules should be operated on them at regular intervals -

        Mawson      -       Perth
        Wilkes      -       Esperance

RECOMMENDATION VII

MODES    OF    TRANSMISSION

CONSIDERING:

the need for co-ordinating the techniques employed at both ends of each international radio link to produce effective communication.

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

1.  that all modes of transmission on main links shall  be in accordance with the recommendations of the International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (including inter alia the use of 50 baud machine speeds, not 45 baud), and the International Radio Consultative Committee,
and

2   that the objective should be to employ five unit RTT operation on all of the following routes as soon as practicable-

        McMurdo     -       Decepcion
        -           -       Melbourne
        -           -       Mirny
- 9 -

                        -   Port Stanley
                        -   Wilkes
Mawson               -   Johannesburg
                        -   Mirny
                        -   New Amsterdam
                        -   Wilkes
Mirny                   -   Wilkes
Wilkes                  -   Melbourne

3. that it would be advisable to consider the possibility of
utlizing systems that are less susceptible to harmful
interference than the amplitude modulation system, such
as frequncy modulation system.

                        RECO:IMENDATION  VIII

SEARCH AND RESCUE  PROCEDURES

CONSIDERING  :

(a) that stations requiring search and rescue will be those which
themselves cannot provide the means of rescuing or relieving
a distressed party within the time required,

(b) that those stations from which such assistance will be
sought will most likely be those operating long-range
aircraft in Antarctica,

(c) that those aircraft are not normally standing ready for an
immediate take off on a long transcontinental flight and
that some time will be required to prepare them for such an
operation, and

(d) that when the rescue aircraft reaches the area it may have to
undertake a search for the party in distress.
- 10 -

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

that the following uniform procedure be adopted for the
operation of radio equipment involved in search and rescue
operations in Antarctica:

i)      The distress traffic shall have absolute priority over all
        other traffic offering at that time.

ii)     The radio operating procedure shall be that specified for
        the mobile services, in Chapter VIII, Article 36 of the
        Radio Regulations, Geneva, 1959, of the International
        Telecommunication Union.

iii)    Furthermore, after passing the initial request for
        assistance the station or stations providing the assistance
        shall maintain continuous communication during the search
        and rescue operation with the stations requesting
        assistance until the station requesting assistance is
        satisfied that the operation is completed.

RECOMMENDATION IX

RADIO AIDS TO AIR NAVIGATION

CONSIDERING:

(a)     that international flights are becoming more frequent
        in Antarctica,

(b)     that some planned provision of basic radio aids to air
        navigation at certain ground stations is essential to
        improve the safety of aircraft operating in the area,

(c)     that it is desirable for the countries to agree on a plan
        which they may follow in the next five years at least
        when installing ground-based radio aids to air navigation
        or modifying any associated facilities at their stations,
        and
- 11 -

(d)      that the ultimate plan for Antarctica should be developed 
         having regard to the route pattern at the appropriate time 
         and that the International Civil Aviation Organization 
         will probably be required to develop it.

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

1.       that nondirectional beacons of sufficient power to provide 
         an adequate service for air navigation be provided as soon 
         as practicable at each station offering aircraft landing 
         facilities and that MF nondirectional beacons should be 
         provided at each such station on the coast as soon as 
         practicable,

2.       that the details of type, frequency and power of air 
         navigational aids installed shall be listed each year 
         in the information exchanged under the terms of Recommend-
         ation I-VI paragraph (6) of the Antarctic Treaty  First 
         Consultative Meeting so that parties wishing to equip their 
         aircraft to use the ground aids may do so.

                        RECOMMENDATION X

     TIME FOR BEGINNING RADIO TRANSMISSIONS

CONSIDERING:

(a)      that it is not always possible to avoid harmful interference 
         of ionospheric observations by radio transmissions, since 
         the various installations are located in limited areas for 
         reasons of logistics,

(b)      that an international agreement on this matter is required, 
         since the ionospheric observations must be undertaken 
         simultaneously in all the stations and the transmission of 
         data utilizes the radiocommunications centers of all 
         the bases at the same time,

(c)      that there is extremely heavy traffic at H 4 00 minutes, 
         which decreases very rapidly,
- 12 -

(d)         that the recommendations of the international scientific 
organizations require categorically that the ionospheric 
soundings  be made at H 4 00 minutes on the world-wide 
network.

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

        that, except for distress calls, the beginning of radio 
transmission schedules of Antarctic stations, on the 
international Antarctic network, where ionospheric 
soundings are made should be fixed systematically at 
H 4 05 minutes wherever the beginning of the schedule 
lies between H 4 00 and H 05.

RECOMMENDATION XI
CONTINUING LIAISON

CONSIDERING:

(a)         that since the commencement of planning the Antarctic 
telecommunications network for the International 
Geophysical Year (IGY), a Communications Working Group 
has been operating, first under the auspices of the 
Special Committee for the International Geophysical Year 
(CSAGI), and since the conclusion of the IGY period 
under SCAR,

(b)         that the SCAR Observer has reported that in the operation 
of such a network problems have arisen from day to day 
which have demanded urgent attention of the Chairman of 
the Communications Working Group of SCAR,

(c)         that information provided by the SCAR Observer indicates 
that the SCAR Communications Working Group may wish to 
limit its responsibilities in the field to the co-ordina-
tion of scientific requirements for telecommunication 
services, and taking into account Recommendation V.C-2 
of the Fifth Meeting of SCAR,

(d)         that the question of continued co-ordination in the 
field of telecommunications has been raised and that 
there is a need of further consideration,
166

- 13 -

THE MEETING RECOMMENDS:

that, if deemed necessary at that time, the question of
continued co-ordination in the field of telecommunications
be discussed at the next consultative meeting under the
Antarctic Treaty
