ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       TERCERA REUNION CONSULTATIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE                   TPETE КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

CONFIDENTIAL
Doc/P15/Rev.1.
June 4th, 1964
Original:  English

AGENDA ITEM No. 11

WORKING PAPER PREPARED BY THE
UNITED KINGDOM DELEGATION:
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE TREATY
POWER AND VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS.

1.      The success of the international effort in scientific
co-operation during the International Geophysical Year and
the stimulus given to continued scientific research and
exchange of information by the Antarctic Treaty have
contributed to the mounting interest in scientific programmes
carried out in the Antarctic.  Moreover this interest is
heightened by the growing tendency for scientific projects
to be global rather than local in scope and to demand an
Antarctic contribution to complete a world-wide survey of
any particular problem.

2.      According to the information at present available to
the United Kingdom Delegation the following Specialized
Agencies (see Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty) have
an existing or potential interest in, and are making
recommendations about, the Antarctic:-

        (a)     World Meteorological Organization
        (b)     World Health Organization
        (c)     Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization
        (d)     International Civil Aviation Organization
        (e)     Food and Agriculture Organization.

3.      There are also an increasing number of Projects,
- 2 -

Commissions, Committees, etc., with interests in the 
Antarctic.  Examples are:-

        (a) International Whaling Commission

        (b) International Quiet Sun Year (the most
important at the present time)

        (c) The International Biological Programme

        (d) The Hydrological Decade

        (e) The World Magnetic Survey

        (f) The Upper Mantle Project (the upper mantle
is the upper 1,000 kms. of the earth and
the object of the project is to study its
various properties:  this can be done with
particular profit in the Antarctic)

        (g) The Intergovernmental Meeting on Seismology
and Earthquake Research (Geneva 1964)

        (h) The International Association of Meteorology
and Atmospheric Physics (which set up in
1964 a permanent International Commission
on polar meteorology)

        (i) S.C.A.R.

4.  There has already been some discussion in the Plenary
Session and in a working group, with reference also to
Item 3 of the Agenda, of the decision by the World
Meteorological Organization to set up a Standing Committee
for the Antarctic (to which (h) above also seems relevant).
As an example of the sort of recommendation which is being
produced by the Organizations the United Kingdom Delegation
has attached to this paper the conclusions of a conference
- 3 -

on "Medicine and Public Health in the Arctic and Antarctic" 
arranged recently by the World Health Organization.  There 
may be more such bodies developing an interest in the area.

5. All these organizations are making, or are likely to 
make, requests for information to be sup)lied from the 
Antarctic.  They also are asking for programmes to be 
carried out there.  These ruquests are going to place 
increasingly heavy pressure on the arrangements made for 
scientific research there.  Yet it is unrealistic to 
expect these groups of specialists to be fully aware of 
the logistic and administrative problems involved.

6. The United Kingdom authorities therefore think that 
it is of considernble importance that something should be 
done to restrict the number of unco-ordinated requests and 
recommendations being made about the Antarctic.  While 
they are unco-ordinated it is extremely difficult for the 
governments and administrators to whom they are addressed 
to fulfil them adequately, particularly if no funds are 
made available by the sponsoring organization.

7. The United Kingdom Delegation therefore suggest that 
the Antarctic Treaty Powers should give careful consideration 
to the possibility of taking steps to arrange for the 
co-ordination of these recommendations.  Although it is 
understood that governments do not normally like to 
interfere with the deliberations of scientific organizations 
whe ther national or international, this is a problem which 
governments are best prepared to consider as in many cases 
they are responsible for the logistic and administrative 
arrangements for the Antarctic and because recommendations
- 4 -

of the organizations concerned are addresses to them.
The United Kingdom Delegation does not at this stage
wish to make any specific pro?osals because a matter of
this complexity will require much thought but they would
be most interested to learn the views of other delegations
on this question.

8. The United Kingdom Delegation hopes that the present
meeting will agree that this is a problem which requires
consideration, that delegations will recommend to their
governments that they give it very careful attention and
that more detailed proposals which might lead to satisfactory
arrangements could be prepared for consideration at the next
Consultative ileeting.

9. In conclusion the United Kingdom Delegation wishes to
make it clear that it is not the intention of the United
Kingdom authorities to discourage this increase in interest
in the Antarctic.  The United Kingdom Delegation has been
moved to bring this subject up for consideration rather by
a contrary motive, the desire to ensure that a steadily
increasing amount of scientific work in the Antarctic can
be efficiently and profitably carried out.
197

ANNEX

In August-September 1962 the World Health Organization
organized a conference on "Medicine and Public Health in
the Arctic and Antarctic".

The report of this conference (W.H.O. Technical Report
Series, No. 253, 1963) contained a summary of the discussions
and ended with the following conclusions:

"1. The Conference concludes that there is urgent
need to stimulate research in the several specific areas
discussed, and suggests that W.H.O. should explore
effective ways and means to foster and support such
research and to assemble and disseminate information
on the status and progress of research on health problems
in high latitudes.

2. The Conference, after a broad review and discussion
of health problems in high latitudes, concludes that
early attention should be focused on: (1) environmental
health, with special regard to the development of fresh
water resources, their protection from biological and
chemical pollution, and satisfactory waste disposal; and
(2) problems of mental health, especially in relation
to transient populations, including station personnel.

3. In view of the great influence of various meteorolo-
gical factors on life in the Antarctic and Arctic, it is
suggested that a study should be made of the present
meteorological observation programmes in these regions,
to ensure that the elements of interest to research
198

workers in medicine and public health are adequately covered,
and that efforts should also be made to ensure that the result-
ing data are presented in form that is convenin  for these
research workers.  It is also suggested that the World
Meteorological Organization be invited to collaborate in this
study and in ensuring that the resulting recommendations are
implemented by the responsible meteorological services.
4.  The Conference notes with satisfaction the resolution
of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
relating to co-operation with W.H.O. in the development of
medicine and public health in high latitudes.
5.  The Conference concludes that W.H.O. is the appropriate
international body to encourage and facilitate the effective
exchange of information between nations and between institutions
concerned with research and investigations on health problems
in high latitudes, and it urges W.H.O. to explore practical
means for such action.
6.  The Conference concludes that it would be most useful
if the more important papers and reports presented at the
sessions were published as early and as fully as possible by
W.H.O.
7.  The Conference concludes that when sufficient new inform-
ation on high-latitude health problems has come to hand a
second conference of this kind would be most appropriate and
beneficial and that it might concentrate on one or more specific
topics.
8.  Taking note of the success of this first conference as
a much needed mechanism to exchange views, outline status and
explore needs, the Conference invites the Director-General of
W.H.O. to continue by such means as he considers appropriate
the study of the health problems in high latitudes."
