ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING     TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  TPETE КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

Doc. 9
June 2nd, 1964
Original: English

ADDRESS BY THE HONOURABLE DOUGLAS MACARTHUR II
HEAD OF THE UNITED STATES DELEGATION.

Mr. Chairman and distinguished delegates,

I should like first to thank the Belgian Government for
its warm hospitality and generous arrangements which have
made this conference possible.  We were particularly honoured
to have had the distinguished Prime Minister of Belgium,
M. Theo Lefevre, open our meeting.

I should also like to express my delegation's
congratulations to you, Mr. Chairman, on your unanimous
election to preside over us during this significant Antarctic
meeting.  Your Chairmanship is most appropriate when it is
recalled that, on behalf of the Belgian Government, it was
you Mr. Chairman who signed the Antarctic Treaty at Washington
in December, 1959.

At any meeting of this kind, the past is inexorably
servant to the present.

Thus, it is impossible to consider measures to be taken
in Antarctica, without recalling the gallant men of many
nations who opened the continent and made this important
scientific and political effort possible.

As our knowledge of Antarctica grows, so too does our
appreciation of the measures required to further in that
region the co-operation begun in the International Geophysical
- 2 -

Year. Since then we have been able to take giant strides.
Foremost among those was the Antarctic Treaty itself.

That historic document excludes from Antarctica all 
measures of a military nature, prohibits nuclear explosions 
and the disposal of nuclear waste, and guarantees freedom 
of scientific research in the South Polar region.

But the Treaty is not only important: it is successful.
Three years of experience in working together under the 
Treaty have established that fact, and the recent inspections 
have confirmed it.

On the frozen waste, the men who serve science are also 
serving the cause of international accord. Surely this 
situation must gratify all those concerned with Antarctic 
affairs and those on whom the main responsibility for the 
implementation of the Treaty falls.

More importantly, the satisfaction we all quite 
justifiably feel has facilitated reaching solutions to 
other questions as they arise. Previous Consultative 
Meetings have dealt with a variety of problems with signal 
success. At Canberra and Buenos Aires, and at the 
Telecommunications Meeting in Washington, we have been able 
to reconcile different viewpoints in the common interest.

In the coming days we shall be dedicated to continuing 
this process of collaboration. The subjects before us are 
of supreme interest, and our conclusions regarding them can 
have far reaching effects.
55

- 3 -

The proposals for the conservation of the living
resources of Antarctica illustrate most clearly the
significance of the tasks we are here to undertake.
Our scientists have asked us to devise measures which will
effectively conserve the unique biological laboratory
that Antarctica represents.  In this enlightened age,
we are all conscious of our responsibility for conservation.
None of us would wish to be the instrument by which a
species vanishes from the earth, nor would any of us wish
to see a unique natural system disrupted and destroyed.
We are aware of the delicate balance of nature, and the
fundamental changes that can be wrought by careless or
ill-considered actions.  One of the primary objectives
of this meeting is, therefore, to agree on measures to
prevent such a misfortune.

Other items of the agenda are of similar importance.
I shall not discuss them now, for the time at our disposal
is short, and the items to be considered, in many cases,
very complex, but I believe they can be satisfactorily
resolved.  For its part, the United States intends to
do all it can to achieve that result.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
