ANTARCTIC TREATY
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE


                          TRATADO ANTARTICO
                          TERCERA REUNION CONSULTATIVA
                          ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

Doc. 14
June 2nd 1964
Original: English

Opening speech by the Leader of the United Kingdom
Delegation, His Excellency Sir Roderick Barclay,K.C.M.G.,K.C.V.O.

May I add my congratulations to you, Mr. Chairman, on
your election, which is a just recognition both of Your
Excellency's own long experience of Antarctic affairs and of
the distinguished part played by Belgium in the history of
Antarctic exploration and research.

2.    The exploits of the "Belgica" expedition, the first
to winter in the Antarctic, are well known to all who study
Antarctic history. The great series of published reports
which resulted from that expedition set a pattern and a
standard of quality which will survive as a permanent record
of high achievement in scientific endeavour. It is a pleasure
to see here today Baron Gaston de Gerlache - a distinguished
son  of a distinguished father. There has been no other case
in which two generations of the same family have been leaders
of expeditions to the Antarctic.

3.    It is perhaps not so well known that the Belgian
Government sponsored the first serious move (apart from the
First International Polar Year of 1882-83, which was mainly
- 2 -

concentrated on the Arctic) towards international 
co-operation in Antarctic exploration.  In 1907 the 
Belgian Government established an International Polar 
Institute in Brussels to act as co-ordinating centre 
and library.

4.  This organisation was unfortunately one of the 
casualties of the First World War, but it pioneered 
the way towards international co-operation in Antarctic 
affairs on a scale that was not again achieved until 
the International Geophysical Year and the subsequent 
negotiation of the Antarctic Treaty.  My delegation 
would like to pay tribute to this important Belgian 
initiative.

5.  Other speakers have recalled that you yourself 
played a part in the negotiation of the Treaty and I 
think that I speak not only for my own delegation, but 
for us all in saying that it is with particular pleasure 
that we meet here and under your distinguished chair-
manship.  We are confident that you will guide us 
smoothly through our complicated agenda, and the desire 
that we all share to maintain and expand the co-operation 
envisaged by the Antarctic Treaty is strengthened by the 
feeling that we are participating in a continuing process 
which can be said to have had its origins in this city 
nearly 60 years ago.

6.  One of the most important subjects which we shall be 
discussing at this conference are the proposed measures 
to conserve the unique fauna and flora of the Antarctic.
- 3 -

As you, Mr. Chairman, will know from your experience 
in London, the conservation of wildlife is of special 
interest to the British people.  Many other people 
throughout the world are watching with interest our 
efforts to achieve practical agreement on this subject. 
My delegation believes that these proposed measures 
will provide a significant contribution towards an 
objective which has very wide supoort, and I hope that 
delegations will seize this opportunity to initiate a 
concerted conservation policy in the Antarctic while 
the wildlife of the area is still in almost its natural 
state.

7.      Finally, may I express the appreciation and thanks 
of my delegation for the warm welcome which has been 
accorded to us by the Belgian Government, and in 
particular to the Prime Minister for coming to inaugurate 
our meeting.
