ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING     TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

CONFIDENTIAL
Doc/P32
June 8th, 1964.
Original: English

AGENDA ITEM No.15 OTHER BUSINESS.

REPORT TO THE THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING
OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY NATIONS ON RESTORATION
OF SCOTT'S HUT, HUT POINT, MCMURDO SOUND.

Submitted by the United States of America
and New Zealand.

In accordance with Recommendation I - XI of the First
Consultative Meeting that all member nations take the
necessary steps to conserve and, if necessary, reconstruct
or repair buildings and monuments of historic interest in
those areas of the Antarctic on which their nationals are
engaged, bilateral action was taken in the 1963/64 summer
by the United States and New Zealand to preserve the hut
erected in 1902 on Hut Point, McMurdo Sound, by the National
Antarctic Expedition led by Captain R.F. Scott.

New Zealand had previously placed a metal plaque on
the hut indicating its historical significance and had
from time to time effected minor repairs. In 1960-61, a
New Zealand party spent nearly three months excavating,
restoring and strengthening the huts at Cape Royds and Cape
Evans built and occupied by Shackleton's expedition in 1907-
1909 and by Scott's expedition in 1911-13 respectively.  The
hut at Hut Point, in addition to being of less direct
historical significance, presented special problems because
of its close proximity to the now substantial living and
- 2 -

and operational facilities in the area.

Both United States and New Zealand authorities; however,
were conscious of the desirability of preserving and
restoring the hut.  Early in the 1963/64 season the United
States authorities at McMurdo erected a substantial fence
around the hut area and a notice composed by New Zealand
authorities.  Clearing away of the area surrounding the
hut was begun by the American authorities but discontinued
when it was realised that relics of importance might be
inadvertently destroyed or irrevocably damaged.

Concurrently United States and New Zealand authorities
became concerned at the rapid deterioration of the hut and
its environs, and therefore decided to effect clearance and
repairs immediately.  The New Zealand Antarctic Society,
a private body; provided a team of volunteers who carried
out the necessary work at their own expense.  The United
States housed the men and provided transport, equipment and
additional labour.  The New Zealand Antarctic Division
outfitted the men and made the necessary logistic arrangements,
and the New Zealand Antarctic Society met medical inspection,
insurance and victualling charges.

The team of four men was flown to McMurdo on the
8th January, 1964, and began work immediately.  The large
32' x 27' wooden hut built of Douglas Fir was largely a
shell, never having been used as the permanent home of an
expedition, and was practically filled with ice and snow.
Various parties using the hut in 1907-08, 1910-12 and 1915-16,
- 3 -

had however erected partitions of cases and canvas or felt awnings.  These were cleared and where possible retained in position.  Some full provision cases and seal meat found in the course of excavation were also left in the hut but other items not regarded as mere rubbish were carefully collected and removed to Scott Base for storage until their final destination has been decided.

The material retrieved included tins of biscuits and flour, cases of oatmeal, Patent barley, tinned meat, etc., oddments of clothing and equipment, and a quantity of old newspapers, magazines, and books.  A few of the more interesting items were forwarded to New Zealand and remain meanwhile in the custody of the Antarctic Division.  These includ letters written by Captain Mackintosh and E.E. Joyce, part of the script of a play written and produced in the hut in 1902, and a number of hand-carved chessmen.

After the completion of the excavation on 29th January, the United States Navy personnel cleared away the rubbish and snow outside the hut and levelled the site.  They also completely closed in the building by battering tarpaulins over the entire roof and sides.

Instructions have been issued to all personnel to ensure the hut and its environs are respected as an historic monument.

United States and New Zealand authorities are considering what further action is necessary to preserve
234

- 4 -

the hut and the relics found in it while at the same time,
if possible, making this historical monument accessible to
all those who wish to inspect it.  In the meantime, the
hut itself is secured a[?]ainst intrusion and the relics not
returned to New Zealand have been stored under the supervision
of the Leader, Scott Base.
