ANTARCTIC TREATY           
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                 TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                 ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
                                                 ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES

Doc. 10
June 2nd 1964
Original:French

Address by H.E. Mr. Henry Spitzmuller,
Ambassador of France to Belgium, Head
of the French Delegation

Mr. Prime Minister,

Gentlemen,

First of all I wish to express my sincere thanks
to you for your welcome, which testifies once more to the
quality and warmth of Belgian hospitality, from which I
personally have constantly benefited during my previous visits.

This kindness, in the fullest and noblest sence of
the word, has never ceased to inspire your representatives
throughout the preparatory work for the conference which
you have first opened.

It is particularly gratifying to me that my capacity
as Representative of the French Republic to H.M. the King
of the Belgians has earned for me to-day the honour of heading
the Delegation of my country to the Third Consultative Meet-
ing of the Antarctic Treaty.

The fact that in 1959 twelve nations decided, in a
troubled world, to set aside those things that could bring
them into opposition, in order to combine the resources of
their intellect, their spirit of invention and their tech-
nology for a joint enterprise - a knowledge of the Antarctic -
- 2 -

might in effect appear to be a gamble, a challenge which 
they did not hesitate to take.

The remarkable results obtained so far - and 
which it will be up to us to preserve during the course of 
this Consultative Meeting - prove that this gamble is on the 
point of coming off.  The spirit of solidarity and co-
operation which has characterised the researches undertaken 
in the Antarctic since the coming into force of the Treaty 
testify to the fact that, despite vicissitudes of the moment, 
the modern world is capable, when it has the will to do so, of 
producing the formulas which lead to a better understanding 
and effective collaboration between the nations.

Numerous examples are to be found in the zone 
which is to form the object of our work: this year, in 
particular, the presence of an American scientist in the 
summer campaign in Adélie Land and the participation of five 
French scientists on the great Russian - 3,000 kilometres 
across the ice, under particularly difficult conditions.

By highlighting the advantages and the effi-
cacy of this international co-operation for the exploration, 
for peaceful purposes, of a region of particularly hazardous 
conditions for human existence, the Antarctic expeditions 
have blazed the trail of the great conquests which await 
mankind on the eve of the Third millennium.

Although, in much the same way as those which 
preceded it, this meeting is only of a consultative nature, 
it seems clear to my Government that it will also be of such 
a nature as to yield positive and important results in the 
search for measures susceptible of furthering the increas-
ingly complete application of the common ideal inspired by the 
Treaty.
- 3 -

Mr. Frime Minister, Gentlemen, it is in this 
spirit, animated by a sincere desire for co-operation, that 
the French Delegation will participate in the work.
