ANTARCTIC TREATY           
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          


                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO        
                                  TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA    
                                  ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BRUXELLES                          

Doc. 11                             
June 2nd, 1964                     
Original:French                     

ADDRESS BY H.E. MR. YUKAWA, AMBASSADOR,
HEAD OF THE JAPANESE DELEGATICN      

Mr. Chairman,

It is an honour and a pleasure for me to 
participate, in the capacity of head of the Japanese 
delegation, at this Third Consultative Meeting, in company 
with the distinguished representatives of the eleven countries 
signatory to the Antarctic Treaty.

I should like first of all to thank the Belgian 
Government for the hospitality which it has been kind 
enough to offer to the participants from the four corners 
of the earth.

I am convinced, Mr. Chairman, that, in the 
friendly and open spirit which is tradionally that of con-
sultative meetings on Antarctica, we shall, at the close 
of this Third Meeting, have made a great step forward in 
the direction of our common goal as defined by the Treaty:
the pursuit of peaceful aims in Antarctica, and international 
co-operation in the matter of scientific research with as 
unique aim the good of all humanity.

Mr. Chairman, may I take this occasion of making 
known to you the fundamental positon taken by our country 
with regard to the Antarctic.
- 2 -

Japan reaffirms that the Antarctic must be
devoted to peaceful activities only, and consequently
she supports any measure in conformity with those intentions
and principles of the Treaty recognize and guarantee the
peaceful use of the Antarctic, and freedom of scientific
research in that region.

We are all glad to note the extent of the progress
achieved by science, thanks to international co-operation
concerning scientific research in the Antarctic, particu-
larly since the Treaty came into force.  Japan has played
a part, a small part, in this field, and she has never
ceased to continue with this co-operation.  It is precisely
in this spirit of co-operation that the Japanese Government,
in spite of incalculable difficulties has decided to re-open
in October of next year, the Japanese base of SYOWA in the
Antarctic; it has been closed since March 1962.

Before closing, Mr. Chairman, I should like to
express the wish that the international harmony which so
fortunately revails in Antarctica, may be maintained
indefinitely with the sole purpose of furthering science
and the progress of humanity.

Thank you.
