ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING     TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  TPETbE КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ПРОТОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ




BRUXELLES

Doc. 7
June 2nd 1964
Original: English

OPENING STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY
MR. W.P. CROCKER, C.B.E., LEADER OF
THE AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION

Mr. Chairman:

I should like, first of all, to congratulate you on your
election as Chairman of our meeting. I am sure that, under your
wise guidance, we shall make good progress in furthering our
objectives under the Antarctic Treaty.  I should also like to
thank the Belgian Government for its generous hospitality on the
occasion of this Third Consultative Meeting and to congratulate
all those concerned on the excellent arrangements made for the
Conference.  For more than a year a great deal of careful work has
been done in the Preparatory Meetings in Brussels - meetings which
have derived a considerable part of their value from the able
chairmanship of M. van der Essen.

It seems appropriate that this year when the Consultative
Meeting is being held in Brussels Antarctic activities should
have been so actively resumed by Belgium in the Antarctic.  We
welcome the reopening of the King Baudouin base.  I should add
- 2 -

that we also look forward to the reopening next year of the
Syowa base by Japan.

Australia continues to attach importance to the basic
principles enshrined in the Antarctic Treaty.  One of those
goals which it is the Treaty's function to promote, is scientific
co-operation which has already gone far and which we hope will
continue to be one of the great benefits under the Treaty.

As a southern hemisphere country with a relative proximity
to the Antarctic and with a long history of activity there, we
wish to develop co-operation among the parties to the Treaty and
their expeditions in Antarctica.  We shall act in accordance
with this objective.  We are ready to co-o erate in practical
ways, such as the recommendations of the recent Telecommunications
Meeting and those which we trust will emerge from the proposed
measures to protect flora and fauna in the Antarctic.

We hope that the Consultative Meetings will take on
increasingly the character of routine consultations among the
Treaty partners.  We would like consultation and co-operation
to become a simple regular habit.  This habit might sometimes
- 3 -

be expressed in more dramatic ways but for the most part we would contemplate that it would be expressed by dealing effectively with practical matters such as those appearing on our provisional agenda for this meeting. That is to say, the Australi?n Delegation hopes that this Third Consultative Meeting will quietly intensify the habit of co-operation which we have already begun.  The Australian Delegation will do all it can to help in this direction.

Thank you ir. Chairman.
