ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO              178
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING    TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA     TPETEЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE

BRUXELLES

CONFIDENTIAL

Doc/F 10

June 1st 1964

Original : English

Item 7 on the Agenda.

Notification of refuges that are unoccupied but could be used
by an expedition in difficulty, and report upon the condition
of the refuge after use.

Opposite appear two draft recommandations ( A and B)
on this subject, presented by Great Britain, each accompanied
by an amendment proposed by Australia.
DRAFT A

The Representatives recommend to their governments that 
they should exchange through diplomatic channels as early 
in each year as possible, and in any case before the end of 
September each year, lists of all unoccupied buildings or 
huts maintained by them in the Treaty area in a condition 
suitable for use as emergency refuges. These lists should 
include:-

    (i)     The name and position of each refuge.
   (ii)     A description of its location.
  (iii)     The date on which it was established.
   (iv)     The approximate date on which it was 
            last inspected.
    (v)     An estimate of the facilities, accommodation 
            and supplies available.

The Representative further recommend that governments 
should report to the maintaining government any use made of 
a refuge by their expeditions and should supply to the 
maintaining government the information necessary to make it 
possible to estimate the amount of supplies which remain 
available after such use. This report should be made as soon 
as possible, but in any case before the end of the July 
following the season in which the refuge was used.

Australian amendment

Notification shall also include a report about the 
conditions of the refuge after use.
DRAFT B

The Representatives recommend to their governments
that they should add to the information furnished in
accordance with Article VII paragraph 5 and to be exchanged
through diplomatic channels lists of all unoccupied buildings
or huts maintained by them in the Treaty area in a condition
suitable for use as emergency refuges. These lists should
be transmitted under Item 9 of Recommendation I-VI of the
First Consultative Meeting. The lists should include:-

(i)    The name and position of each refuge.

(ii)   A description of its location.

(iii)  The date on which it was established.

(iv)   The approximate date on which it was last
inspected.

(v)    An estimate of the facilities, accommodation
and supplies available.

The Representatives further recommend that governments
should report to the maintaining government any use made
of a refuge by their expeditions and supply to the maintaining
government the information necessary to make it possible to
estimate the amount of supplies which remain available after
such use.  This report should be made as soon as possible,
but in any case before the end of the September following
the season which the refuge was used.

Australian amendment

Notification shall also include a report about the
condition of the refuge after use.
