ANTARCTIC TREATY               
THIRD CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TROISIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE   
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          


                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO         
                                  TERCERA REUNION CONSULTIVA     
                                  ТРЕТЬЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
                                  ПРОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          

BRUXELLES                           



Doc. 6.
June 2nd,1964
Criginal: Spanish

ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE
ARGENTINIAN DELEGATION

Mr President,

This meeting is one of supreme importance for my
ccuntry.

  I circuld just like to say that in making this initial
assertion I am not merely stating a concept devoid of meaning.
On the countrary, I am expressing a singularly real
and pertinent fact.

  It is not inopportune, Mr. President, for me to affirm
the basis of this meaningful appreciation within the restricted
scope of this inau[?][?][?][?].

  One part of the antarctic comprises argentinian
national territory, which accounts furthermore for the fact
that other circumstances also stimulate our interest in the
region.

  The fact that my country has carried out intensive
and sustained activity in this region, and its physical
proximity to other points of argentinian soil, explains
sufficiently the reasons justifying the importance which we
attach to the consultative conference.  Furthermore, this
Third Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty derives a
prominence of its own from the item proposed for inclusion on
the agenda, which are to be analysed in the course of the con-
ference.
- 2 -

If one analyses the juridical structure of the
Treaty, it can be inferred that the substance of its economy,
its dynamism, is concentrated in those consultative meetings
proposed under Article IX. In them, the parties concerned
can proceed to a fruitful exchange of ideas and information.

This is not the occasion to enter into a detailed
analysis of the various items which are to be dealt with at
this meeting. Nevertheless, I would just like to mention
that we note with satisfaction that the topic proposed is the
matter concerning the protection of the flora and fauna of the
Antarctic regions. This is a matter which has preoccupied the
Argentinian authorities for a very long time indeed. We
consider that recommendations intended to prevent the exter-
ination of the limited forms of animal and vegetable life in
this region which is almost devoid of any, could emerge from
this conference.

The items relative to the logistic problems merit
our particular attention; this is an aspect of concrete import-
ance, if one considers the harsh climate of the Antarctic and
the particular configuration of its physical centre.

The fact that a considerable space of time has elapsed
since the last consultative meeting has enabled experience to
be acquired which must find its expression in the recommenda-
tions which we have to propose to our respective governments.

I am pleased to state that we will collaborate to
the utmost in the task of attaining this end. In conclusion,
in resident, I just wish to express my wishes for the success
of your endeavours, as well as the conviction that the friendly
spirit of mutual understanding, which characterised the previous
meetings, must prevail in the course of these proceedings.
