ANTARCTIC TREATY                      
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                              NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                     
девятое консультативное совешание        TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                              NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                              LONDON

irovisional Agenda Item 7                 
(Paper submitted by the                   
United States of America)                  ANT/IX/INF. 2
                                              14 September 1977
                                              Original: English

A Summary of                          

A framework for assessing environmental impacts of 
possible Antarctic mineral development

prepared at

Institute of Polar Studies
The Ohio State University

Dr. David H. Elliot
Director
Institute of Polar Studies

_____________________________________________________

January 1977

The study was prepared for the U.S. Department 
of State under the direction of the Institute of Polar 
Studies, The Ohio State University. Views expressed 
are those of the authors and are not to be construed 
as representing the official position of the Department 
of State or any other agency of the U.S. Government.

Institute of Polar Studies
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio  43210
Summary
of

A framework for assessing environmental impacts
of possible Antarctic mineral development

1. The Antarctic environment

Antarctica is the coldest, highest, windiest, and most isolated
continent on earth.  It is characterized physically by a cover of ice
that limits rock exposure to about 100,000 square miles or a fiftieth
of the total area of the continent, that is equivalent to the state of
Colorado in a continent one and a half times the size of the United
States excluding Alaska.  Continental shelves add 1.5 million square
miles to the 5 million square miles of Antarctica.  The continent is
centered on the South Pole and completely surrounded by the Southern
ocean.  The Antarctic Peninsula reaches within 500 miles of the tip of
South America, but in other sectors the closest land is New Zealand
which lies some 1,400 miles distant.

The Antarctic ice sheet forms a carapace whose thickness in places
exceeds 13,000 feet.  The ice flows out toward the coast and terminates
on land as glaciers calving into the sea, or in floating ice shelves
such as the Ross Ice Shelf.  The ice shelves are the source of the
large tabular icebergs.  The ice cover restricts rock exposures to
coastal regions and their hinterland, major mountain belts (the Trans-
antarctic and the Ellsworth Mountains), and isolated peaks.

Antarctica is physically isolated by an annual pack ice belt that
extends at its maximum some 900 miles out from the continent.  The
minimum sea ice cover of about 1.9 million square miles occurs in
March, but by September has grown to nearly 8 million square miles thus
doubling the total snow and ice cover of the Southern Hemisphere.  The
sea ice consists of individual floes 30 to 300 feet across and up to
10 feet thick.  In spring and summer the sea ice drifts northward and
melts, and open water is encountered along many coastal areas.

The isolation and ice cover lead to a climate more severe than the
Arctic.  The mean temperatures of the warmest months are about +32°F
-1-
on the coast and fall to near -40°F on the high polar plateau, whereas 
in the coldest months the mean temperatures are 0 to -20°F in coastal 
areas, and as low as -90°F in the interior.  The northwestern part of 
the Antarctic Peninsula is milder because of its maritime climate; 
winter mean temperatures are only +15°F, and winds over the central 
part of the continent are persistent but not fierce, however many coastal 
areas experience stormy conditions resulting from either surface flow of 
air from the continental interior--these are the katabatic winds that 
are exceptionally violent--or the passage of low pressure systems. 
Depressions are generated frequently in a circum-Antarctic belt between 
70° and 60°S, and strong westerly winds occur on the northern flank of 
this belt.  Individual depressions may form in less than a day and as 
many as six depressions in various stages of growth and decay may occur at 
any one time around the continent.  These centers may follow one another 
with greater frequency than is experienced in the northern hemisphere 
belt of westerlies, and there is little assurance of calm conditions 
between successive centers.  The southern parts of the depressions 
frequently penetrate the coastal regions of Antarctica and bring strong 
winds, blizzards and heavy snowfall.

The belt of westerly winds is a major factor in the circulation of 
the Southern Ocean, the main component of which is the eastward flowing 
Antarctic Circumpolar current.  The winds induce a northeastward drift 
of surface waters and thus a divergence (the Antarctic Divergence) is 
produced in coastal regions and a convergence (the Antarctic Convergence) 
north of the strong westerly winds at 50° to 60°S.  The circumpolar deep 
water extends the full depth of the ocean below the surface water mass 
that has the wind induced drift.  The deep water has a southerly com-
ponent of flow, is derived from the deep waters of the other oceans, and 
brings warm, saline and nutrient-rich waters into polar latitudes.  These 
waters come to the surface at the Antarctic Divergence, flow northeast-
ward and sink below the sub-Antarctic surface waters at the Antarctic 
Convergence.  These upwelling nutrient-rich waters give rise to the 
unusually high levels of biological productivity of the Southern Ocean. 
The phytoplankton blooms, mainly diatoms, form during a limited growing

-2-
season in the austral summer and are concentrated in a limited number of 
areas.  The zooplankton, notably krill, also appear in large concentrations 
in the summer months and like the phytoplankton are unevenly distributed 
both temporally and spatially.  The krill swarms provide the food for 
large numbers of birds, seals, whales and squid, and even some benthic 
organisms.  Fish appear to be a relatively small proportion of the marine 
ecosystem.  Benthic communities are important in shallow coastal waters.

The higher vertebrates, that is the birds, seals and whales, are 
entirely dependent on the marine environment for food.  The balaen whales 
feed on krill and other zooplankton whereas the sperm whale utilizes squid. 
The whales migrate to warmer latitudes during the winter months.  Four 
of the seal species are truly Antarctic in that they are closely associ-
ated with the pack ice; these seals mainly feed on krill, fish and squid. 
The remaining seals, the Southern Fur and Elephant Seal occur principally 
in sub-Antarctic and temperate latitudes; they utilize the same food 
source as the other seals.  Nearly all the fifty species of birds breeding 
around Antarctica derive their food supply from the ocean and again krill 
appear to be a major source.

The birds, of which the penguins are the dominant group, and the 
Elephant and Southern Fur seals use the land as breeding grounds.  Few 
coastal areas lack rookeries and in the case of penguins the breeding 
colonies may attain very large numbers of individuals.  It is not un-
common for rookeries to occupy all the available ice-free land at any one 
locality.  Seal breeding areas on shore are confined to the sub-Antarctic 
islands.

The ice-free areas, utilized extensively for breeding in coastal 
regions, are also the habitats of the terrestrial flora and fauna.  In 
contrast to the abundance of life in the Southern Ocean, the terrestrial 
life is sparse and exists under marginal survival conditions.  Plants, 
except for two endemic vascular species and a few introduced species 
in the Antarctic Peninsula, are all lower forms such as lichens, mosses, 
fungi and algae.  A number of invertebrates mainly protozoa, worms, 
insects and mites, most of which are microscopic in size, inhabit the 
soils.  The terrestrial ecosystems are simple.

-3-
In many of these ice-free areas a variety of primitive soils have
developed on the bedrock and surficial materials.  Like the Arctic,
permafrost conditions prevail, however the extreme dryness of the
climate inhibits the development of ice-rich permafrost and dry perma-
frost appears to be dominant. Dry permafrost lacks the abundant ice
found in the permafrost of the Alaskan North Slope and therefore compar-
able engineering problems have been encountered in Antarctica at only a
few places.

A number of unusual ice-free valleys with internal drainage occur
in East Antarctica, the best known being the "Dry Valleys" of Victoria
Land.  Some of the valleys contain unique saline lakes. These ice-free
valleys are the only places in the continental interior where in the
summer water flows at the surface. Movement of water at or near the
surface during the thaw season is widespread in coastal areas.

2. Mineral resources

The broad outline of the geology of Antarctica is well known despite
the limited exposure of rock. The geology shows clear relationships to
the other southern hemisphere continents, and on that basis the occurrence
of mineral deposits must be presumed. However, known mineral deposits
are very few in number and none of them can be regarded as economically
exploitable at this time.

The known mineral deposits that would be investigated further in a
more temperate climate are restricted to coal and iron ore. Coal beds
occur mainly in the Transantarctic Mountains and near the Amery Ice Shelf.
Data on the extent and quality of the coal are rather limited.  The coal
beds are probably comparable with coals of similar age in Southern Africa
that support an economic industry, however they are not comparable with
the coals of the Appalachians and central interior of the United States.
Iron ore occurs in rather small veins and pods of magnetite-bearing
rock and in a banded iron formation in the Prince Charles Mountains
300 miles inland from the coast.  The banded iron formation is the same
type of iron ore deposit as occurs in the Lake Superior region and in
numerous other parts of the world.

-4-
In addition to the mineral deposits there are a number of mineral 
occurrences, that is minerals normally occurring in mineable deposits 
but in such small quantities as to be only guides to where further 
exploration might be undertaken.  These include a number of non-metallic 
minerals such as phlogopite (magnesium mica), beryl and graphite. 
Traces of copper mineralization occur along the length of the Antarctic 
Peninsula.  The copper mineralization would be investigated further in 
a less hostile environment because of the known geologic analogies with 
the Andes.

Finally, the rock body known as the Dufek Massif is similar to types 
elsewhere in the world that contain magnetite and chromite, and in one 
case platinum minerals.  Magnetite-bearing layers occur in the Dufek 
but neither chromite layers nor platinum-bearing rocks are known although 
they might be present at depth below ice level.

The continental shelves might be expected to contain hydrocarbons, 
however evaluation of the resource potential is beset by lack of data. 
Suitable sedimentary basins can be postualted to exist in a number of 
areas: adjacent to the Antarctic Peninsula, the head of the Weddell Sea 
and the Ross Sea.  That to the east of the Antarctic Peninsula is inferr-
ed from rock exposures in the northern part of the Peninsula and by 
analogy with southernmost South America; geophysical data for the shelf 
lying to the east is entirely lacking, not the least because of the 
severe ice conditions.  The basin at the head of the Weddell Sea is 
inferred from a reconnaissance geophysical traverse across the Ronne 
and Filchner ice shelves.  The Ross Sea area is the best known of all 
Antarctic continental shelves, however only reconnaissance geophysical 
surveys have been conducted.  These surveys have delineated the probable 
extent of basins and possible sediment thicknesses.  Drilling by the 
Deep Sea Drilling Project was conducted with basic research objectives 
and all possible steps were taken to avoid encountering any possible 
hydrocarbon traps; therefore the information gained was not the type of 
data that would be sought in an effort to evaluate hydrocarbon recources. 
Although natural gas was present in some cores taken in the Ross Sea, 
most was methane which has no significance in terms of hydrocarbon

- 5 -
evaluation. One core contained ethane which suggests derivation by 
thermal cracking of organic matter, however its presence does not 
necessarily infer the presence of either natural gas or crude petroleum 
reservoirs at depth. The geophysical surveys conducted so far have been 
basic research reconnaissance surveys and do not constitute the sort of 
survey that would be undertaken for investigating the hydrocarbon 
potential of an OCS lease. The lack of data means that at least one if 
not two orders of magnitude uncertainty should be attached to all reports 
of the crude oil and natural gas potential of the continental shelves of 
Antarctica.

3. Framework for resource and impact evaluation

    The absence of known economically exploitable mineral resources led 
to the consideration and evaluation of some hypothetical resources which 
were chosen to represent a range of activities and impacts.  The hypothet-
ical cases chosen were: a porphyry copper deposit in a coastal location 
in the Antarctic Peninsula; a chromite and platinum group metals mine at 
an inland locality, and a hydrocarbon field located on the continental 
shelf. Evaluation of the economics of the metal mining showed that the 
costs of production might range anywhere from one and a half to ten 
times that of the return for the product on the open market.  Costs of 
crude oil production are more difficult to assess, however the geographic 
location combined with the severity of the environment make it extremely 
unlikely that they would be less than those for the North Sea or those 
jected for the Labrador Sea.

4. Potential impacts

    Hypothetical examples of resource development can provide only a 
general guide to potential impacts on the environment, and therefore 
impacts are treated first from the point of view of that part of the 
environment being affected rather than the activity that causes the 
impact. Furthermore impacts should be viewed in two levels, one is 
the local scale and the other is in terms of maintaining the integrity 
of the environment as a whole.

-6-
a. The environment

Terrestrial ecosystems exist under marginal survival conditions and are therefore very sensitive to impacts.  The plants and soil flora and fauna will be adversely affected, and in many cases destroyed, by terrain modification, changes in drainage patterns, hydrocarbon and other chemical spills, and by gases such as sulfur dioxide that impact on lichens and other cryptograms.

The soils of Antarctica are very primitive and some may be unique, having no counterpart in Arctic regions.  Soils will be adversely affected by terrain modification, but later restoration of the land surface may not lead to regeneration of the soils because of their very long development times.  Permafrost conditions are not well documented; ice-rich permafrost like that on the north slope of Alaska is known only from a few localities in the northern Antarctic Peninsula.  Hydrocarbon and other chemical spills will alter the physical characteristics of both soils and permafrost.  Light hydrocarbons will enter the subsurface rapidly, but will evaporate leaving behind a tarry residue, whereas heavy hydrocarbons will enter the subsurface only slowly and by evaporative loss of light fractions again give a tarry residue that is very resistant to biodegradation.

Impacts on local glaciers are most unlikely to be significant in terms of the whole Antarctic ice sheet.  Emission of particulates or rock dust from mining may change local snowfall patterns.  The long-term effects of adding particulates to the atmosphere are uncertain.  Should particulate levels rise to the point when the radiation budget is altered, there might be unforseeable long-term climatic changes; this is not considered very likely but needs to be evaluated further.

The atmosphere is most unlikely to suffer significant impact, although loading with particulates and snow-forming nuclei may induce local changes in precipitation.

The strong horizontal and vertical circulation of the Southern Ocean suggests that there is considerable capacity for diluting pollutants to presently acceptable levels.  The interaction of the Southern Ocean with other oceans means that trace amounts of pollutants would be spread

-7-
worldwide; whether the residence time of the abyssal waters is sufficient 
to allow complete cleaning is uncertain.

The annual pack ice of the Southern Ocean is most unlikely to suffer 
more than local impact; the natural variation in the pack ice during its 
annual growth and decay are beyond the levels of likely impact.

The marine ecosystem will suffer impact from a number of sources.
Dumping of waste rock will cause severe local impact as a result of 
smothering of benthic communities. Trace elements (possibly both heavy 
metals such as mercury and non-metals such as arsenic) in the wastes may 
be toxic, or may undergo bioconcentration and attain sublethal levels.
Fine particulate matter in the water may kill surface and gill breathing 
organisms. Hydrocarbon spills will coat and kill most organisms at the 
rface and coming to the surface intermittently. Phytoplankton and 
zooplankton, mainly krill, would be affected directly and thus the impacts 
could be transmitted to all higher levels of the ecosystem. Sublethal 
contamination with attendant unknown long-term effects could affect a much 
larger area. Microbial degradation of the hydrocarbons would proceed at 
a much slower rate than in temperate regions. Fish and invertebrates 
would also be affected by hydrocarbon coating and ingestion. Heavy hydro-
carbon compounds sinking to the sea floor would be damaging to benthic 
communities.

It appears that marine mammals, except for the fur seal, would be 
affected mainly through impacts on their food source. The fur seal would 
lose its insulation as a result of oil coating. The fur seal and elephant 
s 1 would also suffer impact if breeding grounds were used in the course 
n resource extraction. Long-term effects, if any, of hydrocarbons and 
trace elements are unknown.

Birds would suffer most impact through use of rookeries for resource 
development and through oiling of feathers. Long-term effects of hydro-
carbons and trace elements are again largely uncertain.

b. Summary

Local impacts on the continental environment are likely to be severe, 
and in many cases could cause irreversible changes. The sum total of 
local impacts across the continent could be important because of the 
limited extent of ice-free areas available for development of

-8-
terrestrial ecosystems and for rookeries and breeding grounds.

Local impacts on the marine environment are likely to be severe.
The size and high productivity of the Southern Ocean cannot be taken as
reason for presuming that the ocean and marine ecosystem have a limit-
less capacity for diluting and absorbing hydrocarbons and chemical
pollutants.

The biological productivity of the Southern Ocean is unusually high,
and it constitutes one of the world's most productive areas.  Any inter-
ference in the ecosystem that reduces the reproductive capacity of
organisms or renders them toxic to higher levels of the ecosystem
could very effectively damage the potential for harvesting the food
resources of the Southern Ocean.

The greatest concern must be for ensuring that there is no permanent
intervention in the natural physical and biological processes of
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.

c.  Exploration

The impact of exploration will, with few exceptions, be of the same
order as the levels of impact of current basic research programs.
Exceptions to the impact levels include large scale rock drilling programs
to prove an ore body, or blowouts during exploratory offshore drilling.

d. Exploitation-onshore

The principal impact of mining will be in terrain modification,
through accumulation of waste rock or development of open pits.  Further
terrain modification will accompany preparation of the ground for asso-
ciated structures such as housing, maintenance facilities, power generating
stations and dock facilities.  The terrain modification will directly
affect the local terrestrial ecosystem, and local rookeries and seal breed-
ing colonies.

Ore concentration yields large amounts of waste rock, or tailings,
that would accumulate on land or be discharged into the oceans.  Chemicals
used in the concentrating plant, along with trace amounts of low grade
ore, are discharged with the tailings.  Some of these may be leached and
enter the terrestrial or marine ecosystems.

-9-
Refining also produces waste material, or slag, which is generally
inert.  However chemicals used in the process may be discharged with the
slag and enter the ecosystems by leaching.

Use of gasoline or diesel powered machines will probably lead to
accidental small scale hydrocarbon spills.  Coal or fuel oil-fired
generators will discharge particulates and gases such as sulfur dioxide
to the atmosphere.  Nuclear power plants will generate radioactive wastes.
Sewage disposal will cause local impacts.  Accidents to shipping could
also cause severe local impacts on the marine environment.

e. Exploitation-offshore

Development of an offshore hydrocarbon reservoir will have little
impact on the sea bed, considerable local impact on the terrestrial
environment should shore-based storage and transfer facilities be built,
and considerable local impact should there be accidental loss of a
storage tank or fully laden tanker.

One aspect of the Antarctic environment that is most important in
considering potential impacts is the occurrence of pack ice and icebergs.
The pack ice, although extensive, does not in most places consist of
multi-year ice and in this respect is different to the Arctic.  Another
difference lies in the size and number of large tabular icebergs in
Antarctic waters.  These icebergs are derived from ice shelves and may
reach depths of 1,500 feet below the surface.  The icebergs do not
cessarily move in the same direction as the pack ice.

Drilling programs can probably be conducted by conventional ship-
board techniques in certain areas where open water occurs in summer
months; development of re-entry capabilities allows the drilling vessel
to move off site when threatened by ice.  However permanent installations
would have to be placed on the sea floor or buried if the sea floor
depths are less than about 1,500 feet.

Benthic communities would be disturbed in the general vicinity of
any drilling structures, and during construction of buried sea bed
pipelines and other facilities.  Severe damage is most unlikely except
in the case of a blowout.

-10-
Shore-based storage and transfer facilities would involve consider-
able terrain modification as a result of dock construction, tank farm 
construction, power generating plants, living facilities for personnel,
and maintenance facilities. Terrain modification would lead to impacts
on the terrestrial ecosystems, soils and permafrost as for mining 
activities.

Of greatest concern in hydrocarbon development would be the cumula-
tive effects of routine operational discharges from tanker operations,
and the results of accidental loss of a fully laden tanker.  On the 
presumption that ice-strengthened tankers with double hulls would be 
built specially for transporting Antarctic crude, it should be possible 
to include suitable holding facilities for ballast washings and bilge 
wastes; reception facilities would be required at the ports for handling 
these wastes.  Despite the best design and operational procedures,
accidental spills will probably still occur during routine loading be-
cause of the severe working conditions in Antarctica.

Statistics on discharges of hydrocarbon into the marine environment 
suggest that the routine operational discharges are the single most 
important source of pollution.  Losses from drilling, production, and 
transportation are a relatively small proportion of the total dis-
charges.  Drilling and production techniques and procedures for U.S. 
controlled ocs development have improved considerably in the last six 
years.  Although this suggests that oilfield development and production 
should not be any more hazardous than in more temperate regions, the 
severity of the environment may offset any of these technological and 
procedural improvements.

Icebergs can be tracked by satellite and radar, but there remains 
the possibility of ice floes and small bergs that are too small to be 
located by remote sensing.  Detection is greatly hindered by waves, and 
the minimum size that can be detected becomes larger as waves increase 
in amplitude.  Weather forecasting in the Southern Ocean is difficult 
because of the lack of stations, and the accurate forecasting of condi-
tions more than 24 hours ahead is uncertain.  Together with the rapidity 
with which storms can develop, the probability of a loss of a tanker 
would appear to be significant.

-11-
Release of crude oil, whether by blowout, production failures, or
tanker accident, would have severe local impact on the marine environ-
ment. Oil floating on the surface wculd coat and kill most phyto- and
zooplankton at the surface, and thus affect the principal food source
of much of the remainder of the marine ecosystem.  Sublethal contamin-
ation could affect a much wider area. The long-term effects of hydro-
carbons on the marine ecosystem are, by and large, unknown.

The marine mammals would probably be affected mainly through their
food source, though the insulation of fur seals would be lost by oil
coating.  Similarly birds would be directly affected by oiling of
feathers and indirectly through their food.

Massive releases of hydrocarbons on land due to rupture of storage
tanks would cause severe local impact on the environment; this has
already been discussed.

5. Data deficiencies

Systematic surveys of most of Antarctica started about 20 years
ago, so that although a considerable body of information is available,
there are still important data gaps.

    In terms of resource exploitation, the important data deficiencies
for soils and permafrost are the lack of knowledge of their distribution
and characteristics, in particular those properties that would be impor-
tant for proper engineering design. Landform and vegetation maps that
would allow rational land use planning do not exist. Information on the
rate of dispersal of hydrocarbons and their biodegradation is lacking.
All these are necessary for predicting the fate of materials loaded on
the surface and introduced into the subsurface.

    The effects, particu.larly long term, of hydrocarbon and trace
elements on the terrestrial ecosystem are largely unknown.

    The major concern in meteorology is lack of data on the effects of
loading the atmosphere with microparticles and thus possibly altering
the radiation budget; this might have quite unforseen long-term conse-
quences on Southern Hemisphere climatic conditions.

    Little is known of sea ice and iceberg dynamics; such data would
be needed for development of forecasting capabilities.

    -12-
Data on oceanic currents in general and coastal currents in particu-
lar are rather meagre, and prevent  evaluation of the residence time and
ultimate fate of introduced pollutants.

In the marine environment the greatest concern in the short term
would be the effects of major spills of hydrocarbons or other toxic sub-
stances, whereas in the long term it would be the chronic effects of such
substances.  Little is known of the thermal tolerance of phytoplankton, and
the toxicity to phytoplankton of metals and hydrocarbons.  Similarly for
the zooplankton, in particular the krill, the long-term toxicity of sub-
lethal amounts of trace metals and hydrocarbons are unknown.  Toxicity
studies related to age of the organisms, season of year, reproductive
cycle and other aspects are needed in order to predict effects of specific
pollutants.  Such studies are essential if the integrity of the marine
ecosystem is to be maintained.

Information about the long-term effects of sublethal amounts of
chemical pollutants on marine mammals and birds is lacking.

6. Unavoidable impacts

All resource exploitation will have impact on the environment, but
the scale of the impact will depend on the nature of the resource being
extracted, the degree of processing undertaken, and the location of the
activity.  All exploitation is likely to be accompanied by some severe
local impacts.

Unavoidable adverse impacts associated with extraction of resources
on land would include: terrain modification; alterations to the sub-
surface environment resulting from terrain modification, addition of
liquid wastes including hydrocarbon spills, and changing drainage and
permafrost patterns; changes in the terrestrial ecosystem and the alter-
ations to the soils for the same reasons; release of stack emissions,
principally sulfur dioxide; accidental loss of hydrocarbons in the marine
environment; discharge of tailings.

In the exploitation of continental shelf resources, the impacts
other than hydrocarbon losses, on the ocean and sea floor are likely to
be minor.  Associated shore-based facilities will have impacts on the
terrain much like that of mining activity.  The principal source of

-13-
pollution, which in all probability is unavoidable, would be accidental 
losses of hydrocarbons during routine tanker operations. The cumula-
tive effects of such losses could be severe.

The loss of large volumes of crude through storage tank or pipeline 
failure, or tanker accident at sea, is a possibility that would have very 
severe local impact.

7. Alternatives

The alternatives for arrangements governing possible resource 
exploration and exploitation in Antarctica range from total regulation 
of all activities to unregulated development, with various combinations 
'n between. Each alternative leads to certain effects on the environ-
ment, and even the most regulated activity will still be attended by 
some risks.

The costs of exploration and exploitation in Antarctica would be 
so high that it seems reasonable to suppose that only the best techniques 
and operational procedures would be used, and therefore impacts on the 
environment might be lessened. However, there would be no economic 
incentive to be concerned about matters such as small scale hydrocarbon 
spills, chemicals in wastes that would be dumped, routine cleaning of 
the sites of operation.

Regulated exploration would probably have the same levels of impact 
as current scientific activities, except where rock drilling programs 
re necessary to prove orebodies or where blowouts occur during explora-
tory drilling in oilfields. Lack of regulation would increase local 
impacts.

Regulations governing exploitation of hydrocarbon resources could 
establish optimum safety procedures for protection of the environment 
but even under these conditions there are risks, the most likely serious 
risk being loss of tankers as a result of combinations of weather and 
ice conditions. Unregulated exploitation could, but would not necessarily, 
lead to unrestrained routine operational discharge of hydrocarbons from 
tankers and the cumulative effects might in the long run be more damaging 
than a single major spill.

-14-
Unregulated mining activity would probably lead to uncontrolled 
release of chemicals to the environment in both tailings and stack 
emissions, uncontrolled disposal of radioactive wastes, uncontrolled 
dumping of rock waste and tailings on indigenous living floral and 
faunal communities. Regulation could bring impacts down to presently 
acceptable levels.

8.  Special provisions and recommendations

    At least three categories of sites require some form of special 
protection:  historic sites, biological sites, and unique non-biological 
scientific sites.  In the event of exploitation, those sites already 
specially protected are unlikely to be sufficient.

    Review and evaluation of sites should be undertaken by a group 
such as SCAR.  The sites should be categorized in various levels of 
importance and recommendations made for the designation of additional 
sites.  A range of levels of protection might be designated.

    Biological species should be reviewed in the same manner.  
Consideration should also be given to protecting areas of out-
standing scenic value.

    Recommendations should be made for the establishment of monitoring 
stations as far in advance of exploitation as possible so that background 
levels can be determined.  Monitoring should continue at those stations 
and at the sites of resource development should exploration and exploita-
tion be initiated.

-15-
