ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                   LONDON

Provisional Agenda Item 8

                                                   ANT/IX/INF. 1
                                                   Date: 14 September 1977
                                                   Previously: ANT/EPM/8
                                                   Date: 17 March 1977
                                                   Original: English

CO-OPERATION IN TRANSPORT

(Information document presented by the Argentine Delegation)

The Argentine Government would be willing to participate in 
the Airbus system, provided it is generally and expressly accepted 
by all interested Consultative Parties that its base "Vicecomodoro 
Marambio" and its facilities are the contribution of the Republic 
of Argentina to the system, without thereby relinquishing the 
control of its operations or any of those facilities and in the 
understanding that they will be available on the basis of an agreed 
amount paid as compensation for services rendered.

Linked to the system, as a main logistic base, the one at 
"Rio Gallegos" in the mainland Argentine province of Santa Cruz 
would also be available.

The Argentine Government further understands that the Airbus 
system will not have international characteristics; that it will 
support only scientific and technical activities and eventually 
satisfy rescue as well as sanitary evacuation requirements; that 
flight support and navigational aids should be those contemplated 
by ICAO regulations; that the system would be set up for the use 
of and benefit of those consultative parties interested in implementing 
it and on a reciprocity basis, excluding from its use or membership 
any third countries; and that, within the area of responsibility 
of [?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?][?]
regular air service fulfilling normal standards of safe and 
efficient air operations.

Note:

Attached for information is part of Appendix I of the SCAR Report 
on Co-operation in Transport that concerns Argentina.
CO-OPERATION IN TRANSPORT

Part of the Appendix I of the SCAR Report concerning
Argentina, presented by the Argentine Delegation.

The airfield at Marambio Station (Seymour Is) is already an
intercontinental terminal for C-130 aircraft operated by the
Argentine Air Force. Air missions from Argentina are flown
approximately once a month winter and summer.  Each mission could be
several, usually six, individual sorties.  Each sortie from Rio
Gallegos can normally deliver 20 tons.

The Marambio Base possesses the following at present:

- 1 200 m air-strip
- 1 VOR and 1 NDB
- VHF and HF communications (SSB in higher and lower bands and AM)
- Plotting and weather forecast station
- APT for reception from meteorological satellites
- Fuel in drums to service the permanently stationed Twin Otter
and the helicopters operating in summer.

On account of the comparatively short distance separating
Marambio from Rio Gallegos (357 nautical miles) the C-130 planes
operate easily with all their available payload, without any need
of refuelling in Antarctica, not even in the case of having to
overfly the place for up to a four-hour period waiting for
favourable landing conditions.

Marambio has a power station of about 200 KW, and a hangar
to shelter both a helicopter and a Twin Otter.  There is an emergency
note and a fuel tank with a storage capacity of 100.000 litres
Arctic gasoil.

Flights by ski equipped Argentine Air Force Twin Otter aircraft
one of which is permanently stationed at Marambio rely personnel
and light cargo to other locations in the Penisula area.

The ski/wheel Twin Otter normally makes trips during the
colder months to the stations at Brown, Esperanza, San Martin,
Matienzo and Petrel.  But when the circumstances warrant such as
in an emergency or a special request from another station the
Argentine Air Force Twin Otter will visit other locations such as
Palmer or Adelaide if the conditions of the snow surface and
weather permit.

///
- 2 -

At Marambio the airfield is under construction.  By 1977 it 
is planned to have completed an aluminium matting runway 1200 x 30 
metres.  There is no refuelling for the C-130 at the present time. 
Twin Otter refuelling is by drummed fuel delivered by helicopter 
from the icebreaker.  All aviation fuel at Marambio is JP-1.      

The Antarctic air transport capabilities of Argentina also 
include two helicopters of the Bell or Sikorsky S-61R Type that 
operate from the icebreaker.  These helicopters are based on shore 
at Marambio during the summer and support science and logistics 
projects from the station.

Future developments at Marambio include completion of the 
aluminium matting runway to 2200 x 41.25 meters by 1981, and 
hydrographic surveys in the surrounding water to select a site for 
ship delivery of bulk fuel.

With regard to future plans  it is estimated that within 
about 5 years the following facilities will also be available:
Aeronautical Ground Facilities:
- Aluminium matting landing strip 2.200 m. long 41.25 m wide 
  with runway and platform of approximately 10.000 sq. m.
- Medium intensity beaconing and Calvert approach beaconing 
- Fog dispersers
- Hangar for Twin Otters
- Loading and passenger terminal
- Jet fuel type JP-1  1.5 million litre fuel deposits.  At a 
  later stage 5 million could be attained.

General Facilities
- 16 bed hospital
- Lodgings for from 80 to 100 men.

Radio Service and Aid to Navigation
- 1 VOR
- 1 NDB
- 1 Plessey type surveillance radar
- Support to communication and meteorology
- ICAO Central Station for forecasts and broadcasting 
- Service in VHF and HF in AM and SSB depending on Comodoro 
  Rivadavia FIR and Ezeiza UIR

///
-///                                       - 3 -

Other Facilities

- Search and Rescue Subcenter
- Snowploughs for runway and platform maintenance
- High power broadcasting with fixed-time emission
- First-rate maintenance service for Twin Otters
