ANTARCTIC TREATY           
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           

                                  LONDON           

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           

TRATADO ANTARTICO           
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA           

Agenda Item 6                                  
ANT/IX/INF 18           
Date: 30 September 1977           
Original: English           

REPORT OF THE EXPERT GROUP ON MINERAL EXPLORATION           
AND EXPLOITATION           

Text of statement to Plenary by the Chairman of           
the Expert Group, Dr M W Holdgate, on 30 September 1977           

1. The Expert Group on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation           
met first on 20 September and held its final formal session on           
29 September. It adopted an agenda closely based on the Guidelines           
drawn up at the Special Preparatory Meeting held in Paris in June           
1976.           

2. In its discussions the Expert Group devoted special           
attention to the review of the present state of technology for           
mineral exploration and exploitation in the Antarctic (Report,           
Part II, Section A, paras 1-35). The principal conclusions are           
set out below.           

(i) There is no proof that commercially significant           
hydrocarbon or other mineral deposits occur on           
land or on the continental margins of Antarctica:           
present estimates are based on indications from           
geological research and extrapolation from           
geologically-similar areas of other southern           
continents.           

(ii) Commercial exploration for minerals is foreseeable           
on land in the Antarctic, and especially for hydro-           
carbons at sea on the continental margins.           

(iii) The first stage in such exploration is extensive           
geophysical investigation using techniques now           
available, many of which are employed in current           
scientific research.           

/(iv)
(iv) This investigation might indicate areas that were attractive for more intensive study. 
Not only would detailed geological and geophysical investigations be needed in such areas, but studies of environmental factors like sea-floor composition and stability, sea conditions, weather and (most important in the Antarctic) sea ice and iceberg frequencies, sizes and directions of movement, since these govern the safety and practicability of exploratory drilling and any later exploitation. 
It would need to be accompanied by other studies to describe the ecology of the areas being investigated, since this information would be needed in order to evaluate the likely environ- mental impact of later stages in mineral exploration and exploitation.

(v) Exploratory drilling for hydrocarbons at sea must await these preliminary investigations.  Our ignorance of much of Antarctica is such as to make it likely that at least 5 and most probably 10 years will elapse before exploratory drilling is considered.  However, present technology would allow exploratory drilling in those limited and small areas on the Antarctic margins where the water is less than 1000 metres deep and where ice is absent for 3 summer months.

(vi) Technology is being developed in the Arctic that might allow exploratory drilling in deeper waters and in areas with more extensive pack ice cover. 
Ice conditions and especially the larger size of icebergs impose a much more severe constraint in the Antarctic and the methods used in the Arctic for changing the direction of drift of icebergs by towing them are likely to be less useful.

/(vii)
(vii) Any drilling vessel or structure would have to be 
able to stop work and move away from time to time 
and while in an emergency this can be done very 
quickly without risk of pollution, it is much 
easier to recover the well and resume drilling 
afterwards if several hours are available for shut-
down: hence an early warning system of storms or 
approaching icebergs would be needed.

(viii) No technology exists at present for commercial 
exploitation of oil at sea on the Antarctic 
continental margins, although a number of concept 
for new systems are being developed.  Systems are 
being designed for drilling and well control from 
installations placed on or below the sea bed and 
these might allow both exploration and exploitation 
in areas where ice cover is heavy and prolonged. 
Unless buried sufficiently in the sea bed, such 
structures would need to be located below the depth 
of iceberg scour.

(ix) It is impossible to estimate when (or if) commercial 
oil production might start in the Antarctic, but in 
the easier conditions of the North Sea there was a 
ten year gap between exploratory drilling and 
production, and a longer period might well elapse 
in the Antarctic;  the difficulties are also likely 
to mean that only very large oilfields would be 
commercially attractive in the Antarctic.

(x) Sub-sea systems which would allow the separation 
and safe disposal of gas and water from oil, and 
the storage of oil prior to its removal from the 
Antarctic are also being designed.

(xi) Specially designed ships would be required to remove 
any oil, and these might in fact be submarines:  they 
would need to conform to stringent standards of 
pollution control.  The concepts for the design of 
such vessels are being worked out.

/(xii)
(xii) Mineral exploration and exploitation appear technically feasible on land using current technology but the Expert Group considered these activities unlikely while more accessible deposits of hard rock minerals and coal were available elsewhere. They cannot, however, be completely ruled out.

3. This stage of the Group's discussion may be summarized therefore as concluding that while exploratory drilling for oil on the continental margins of Antarctica is foreseeable, it would need to be preceded by a number of years of extensive and intensive scientific surveys. Although in some areas exploratory drilling could be conducted using existing methods, or those now in active development, in most places new technology would be needed, and even more technological development would be required before commercial exploitation could take place. However these developments cannot be ruled out given sufficient incentive.

4. The Expert Group then turned to the question of environmental impact (Part II, Section B, paragraphs 36-45). It had before it the report of the SCAR Group of Specialists on the Environmental Impact Assessment of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation in Antarctica (EAMREA) and other papers including two tabled at the Special Preparatory Meeting in Paris by the Soviet and Australian delegates. Time, and the composition of the group, made a thorough examination of the environmental impact of mineral exploration and exploitation impossible. It was agreed that the EAMREA Report was a most useful starting point, but that (as its authors recognized) it was preliminary. More needed to be done and it would be best for a group of technical experts on mineral exploration and exploitation to work together with specialists in Antarctic geology and ecology and with others concerned with possible regimes for managing mineral exploration and exploitation since dialogue between all these interests was needed. Possibly the Consultative Meeting might consider an inter-sessional work-shop as one means of conducting such an interactive discussion.

/5.
5. More research will undoubtedly be needed to provide the firm evidence on which environmental impact assessments must be based. This research must embrace basic geological and geochemical studies (already noted as required in order to define what minerals may be found where), studies of bathymetry, seabed structure, sea currents, weather and ice and iceberg distributions and dimensions (already recognised as essential in defining operating conditions for drilling) and studies of the structure and functioning of Antarctic ecosystems and their likely response to pollutants that might be emitted in the course of mineral exploration or exploitation (defining the possible impacts). In addition technical studies are needed on methods of containing or recovering spilled oil under sea conditions in the Antarctic, and on the dispersion and degradation of oil in the very cold Antarctic seas. Should exploration or exploitation occur, organisational machinery would also be needed for monitoring its impact, and especially for recording the consequences of accidents.

6. The third section of the discussion was concerned with the prevention of pollution and the rehabilitation of damaged sites (Part C, paragraphs 43-58). Numerous measures for preventing oil pollution were discussed including:

    (a) very thorough surveys prior to drilling;

    (b) ensuring that there is at all times the equipment and materials to control unexpected pressures, for example from gas;

    (c) deliberate over-design of wells, for example to ensure that oil cannot escape laterally through their casings;

    (d) careful procedures for maintenance of wells and equipment;

    (e) on land, measures to avoid damage to permafrost soil and limit contamination with chemicals and introduced bacteria.

/7.
7. It was noted that human error is the commonest cause of 
accidents on oil rigs, and hence that training (and re-training)
was essential: because of the exceptionally demanding environment
only experienced people should take part in exploratory drilling
in the Antarctic.

8. The design of oil storage systems and of ships for use in 
the Antarctic would need very careful attention, and stringent
standards would be needed for any processing plant.

9. Mineral exploitation on land was recognized as a potential
cause of severe local pollution and this problem is more acute
because there are very limited possibilities for rehabilitation
of damaged areas of land in the Antarctic. It is likely not to 
be possible to revegetate disturbed areas in the fashion used in 
the Arctic, and the best that can be done is remove all possible 
imported debris and so shape the land surface that the very slow 
natural recovery processes are facilitated. Similarly, only slow 
natural processes are likely to accomplish rehabilitation of 
disturbed sites on ice or sea bed. Finally, there are no methods 
at present available for the containment or recovery of oil spilled 
at sea under Antarctic conditions, and this makes it the more vital 
to take every precaution to prevent spillage.

10. The Expert Group has set out the more action-orientated of 
its conclusions as Guidelines, in Part I of its Report (paras 1-23). 
These, to a degree, recapitulate parts of the discussion and can 
be used as a partial summary. The most important points to 
highlight are:
- guidelines should be developed covering the conduct 
of scientific baseline studies, environmental impact 
assessment, and the technical details of many 
operations; these may include special rules needed 
because of the exacting conditions of the Antarctic;
- while most established geophysical and geological 
methods can safely be used for exploration in the 
Antarctic, seismic methods using explosives should 
only be used when essential, and the scale of 
exploratory activities, especially involving
/increased
increased pressure from overland transport, should 
be watched;

-   exploratory drilling at sea should not be under-
taken until after there has been a thorough 
programme of scientific study, and then subject 
to stringent pollution prevention procedures that 
embrace both design operational and training 
requirements.  Installations for use at sea in 
the Antarctic should wherever possible be built 
outside the region and towed to the place where they 
are used;

-   guidelines are also needed for the design of installations 
for use in any exploitation of hydrocarbons, and 
standards adopted for processing, the treatment of 
gas and process water, storage systems and ships, 
the latter will presumably include, but because of 
the special circumstances in the Antarctic may go 
beyond those incorporated in existing international 
conventions;

-   any exploratory drilling or mineral exploitation 
on land should be preceded by careful site survey 
and impact assessment and subject to stringent 
pollution control procedures, some of which are 
indicated in detail;

-   methods for environmental impact assessment in the 
Antarctic need to be developed urgently through the 
dialogue between technologists, environmental 
scientists and those concerned with framing regulatory 
measures already mentioned.  A substantial research 
programme, also already described, will be needed if 
these assessments are to be made more reliable, and 
this is desirable before the stage of exploratory 
drilling is reached.

11. Finally, the Expert Group would emphasise that the implementation of the guidelines in its report would

/demand
demand substantial effort and expenditure in the period 
before exploration or exploitation began.  It also stresses 
that its Report and Guidelines are far from final and will need 
regular review as technology and scientific understanding advance. 
At present there is far too much conjecture about the whole 
possibility of mineral occurrences, environmental limitations, 
technological possibilities and environmental sensitivities in 
the Antarctic.  The scale of the problems and of the potential 
impacts need to be put on a quantitative basis.

12.  In conclusion, the Expert Group urges most strongly that 
its report, after essential editing to put it in an appropriate 
form, should be published.  The world outside this Meeting knows 
that we are gathered here and we cannot avoid speculation as to 
our conclusions.  Even with the greatest of care, some of these 
conclusions are likely eventually to become more widely known. 
Our report is conceived as a whole:  we believe that much more 
damage could be done by the emergence of parts of it than by the 
open release of the whole.  Non-publication could convey the 
impression that we had made no progress or were reluctant to 
encounter the criticisms of others.  As Chairman, I would gladly 
offer my services for such final editing as the Plenary may 
require.

13.  Last of all, may I thank my colleagues for the energy, 
consideration, wisdom and humour they have displayed throughout 
a demanding week - and those behind the scenes who have translated, 
interpreted and reproduced our words.  Our report is the product 
of a team, and should be recognised as such.  I am most grateful 
for the honour you have done me in electing me Chairman, and I 
feel, with all due modesty, that we can all take satisfaction in 
our work.
