ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ               NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                        LONDON

ANT/IX/INF 11
Date: 26 September 1977
Original: English

EXCERPT FROM THE FAO REPORT OF THE 11th SESSION
OF THE COMMITTEE ON FISHERIES APRIL 1977
- Use of the resources of the Southern Oceans

39. The Committee had before it the restricted paper entitled "Outline Proposals for an 
Information and Coordination Programme for the Utilization of the Living Resources of the 
Southern Oceans" (dated April 1977) and the paper COFI/77/5, Sup.2 "Review of the State 
of Exploitation of the World Fish Resources: Living Resources of the Southern Oceans" which 
contained information on the resources of the southern oceans and on the present state of 
their exploitation and utilization and a description of FAO's activities in this field, 
particularly the current preparatory phase of a possible future FAO programme. These papers 
were supplementend by a presentation on the part of the Secretariat referring to the outline 
proposals which had been prepared by FAO, to be used as an aid in carrying out further 
consultations and holding discussions on a possible future programme regarding the living 
resources of the southern oceans. These consultations were part of the preparatory phase 
mentioned above.

40. The Committee was informed of the discussion on this subject at the FAO Conference in 
November 1975 which had noted the competence of the Antarctic Treaty countries in all matters 
concerning the ecosystem of Antarctica and had agreed that FAO should keep the Treaty 
countries informed of its own activities in the area and coordinate such activities with 
those of the Treaty countries. The Committee was invited to comment on the proposals put 
before it regarding a proposed programme, its possible financing, and any machinery which 
might be needed.

41. After a thorough discussion, the Committee was in general agreement that FAO had an 
important role to play within its competence, with regard to the living resources of the 
southern oceans. This was considered to be a proper and legitimate FAO activity in view 
both of its technical responsibilities and its special duty towards the developing world. 
The Committee noted the estimates that had been made of the potential harvest from the 
unexploited living marine resources of the southern oceans of possibly tens of millions 
of tons and endorsed the view that their future exploitation might represent an element in 
meeting world food needs.

42. Detailed planning of a possible future programme, and final decisions thereon, should 
be based on the results of the work carried out in the preparatory phase which would continue 
to the end of 1977. Such planning and subsequent execution should moreover be undertaken 
in close cooperation with the coastal states in the area, the appropriate scientific bodies 
and, as regards the area covered by the Antarctic Treaty, in close cooperative working 
relations with the Parties to the Treaty. Future work and studies should include the 
collection, compilation and dissemination of information; the assessment of the biological 
and nutritional potential of the resources; the promotion of necessary scientific and 
technological investigations and experiments; encouragement of cooperation in the technology 
of harvesting and processing of these living resources and assessment of their potential for 
economic development; and also promotion of the development of products suitable for 
consumption especially to bring benefit to developing countries.

43. The Committee agreed that these future activities should relate to the living resources 
in the southern oceans south of 45oS latitude and emphasized that in keeping with international 
practice no activity should take place within the area of jurisdiction of any State without 
that State's express consent. While the Committee recognized the general rights of all 
nations to share in the development of the living resources beyond national jurisdiction, it 
was stated by some delegations that there must be respect for the special interests and 
rights of certain countries in particular areas. Development activities should always be 
planned and carried out with due regard to the need for conservation in relation to the 
ecosystem of Antarctica as a whole and the southern oceans. Some delegations pointed out that 
the Antarctic Treaty did not affect the rights or the exercise of the rights of any state 
under international law on the high seas within the Treaty area.
44. As regards guidance for the activities proposed, the Committee considered that it was not necessary to set up any new machinery. Existing machinery, including the Fisheries Department and the Committee itself, should continue to be used for this purpose.

45. The Committee noted the useful collaboration that had already taken place between FAO and the various scientific bodies and groups working on Antarctic prot?ems, in particular with the SCAR1/ SCOR2/ BIOMASS3/ programme to be carried out in cooperation with the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, and suggested that ACMRR4/ should also be involved in this work. This collaboration should ensure that FAO's programme did not duplicate but indeed supported the work of the scientific community.

46. Early in the debate certain delegations expressed serious reservations about some matters contained in the papers and proposals under discussion. The proposals defined the area of activities in the southern oceans as covering the living resources in the waters south of 450S. These delegations pointed out that this area included substantial areas which were subject to national sovereignty, and that the papers did not recognize this fact. The Antarctic Treaty, the area of competence of which started at 600S, had been entered into by the signatory powers in order to ensure that the area of Antarctica should be used only for peaceful activities and should be reserved as an area of unique importance for scientific study and research. These delegations said that the papers submitted to the Committee did not adequately recognize these principles, and in encouraging the commercialization of the living resources were in contravention to the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. These delegations suggested that there was a need for more careful definition of the area of the proposed FAO programme and for observance of the rights of the coastal states which would necessarily apply to the programme's activities. They also suggested the need for a clarification of the terminology applied to the area.

47. Another delegation questioned the role of the Antarctic Treaty in relation to the use of the living resources of that area. This delegation contended that the original signatories to the Treaty wished to maintain the area as a scientific preserve instead of opening it up and accelerating the use of its vast resources for the benefit of the developing countries. Some delegations expressed the view that the opening of the area could make a great contribution to the implementation of the New International Economic Order proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly and this should be taken into account.

48. Several delegations described their research activities in the southern ocean. There was some difference of view as to the speed with which any substantial and economic utilization of the living marine resources could be affected due to the very difficult operating conditions in the area and because of problems in the preservation and processing of the catches.

49. Several delegations suggested that FAO should consider carefully how to distribute its resources as between various parts of its fishery programmes. They felt that in view of the long period that would probably be required to solve the technical problems connected with development of the resources of the southern oceans, high priority should meanwhile be given to programmes of more immediate and obvious benefit to developing countries. In particular, the Committee recognized that developing countries would need a great deal of assistance if they were to take the maximum advantage of the opportunities for full and rational utilization of the living resources within their expanded economic zones and to discharge their responsibilities in that respect.

1/ SCAR - Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
2/ SCOR - Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research
3/ BIOMASS - Biological Investigation of Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks
4/ ACMRR - Advisory Committee on Marine Resources Research
