ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
                                                    
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                            TRATADO ANTARTICO
девятое консультативное совещание               NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                    
                                                    ANT/IX/INF 4
                                                    Date: 20 September 1977
                                                    Original:  English
Agenda Item 10
                                                    
                                                    
EXTRACTS FROM THE ENVIRONMENTAL APPRAISAL FOR THE DRY VALLEY
DRILLING PROJECT : PHASE V 1975-1976
(Paper submitted by New Zealand)

INTRODUCTION

The Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP) was a project undertaken jointly by the United States, New Zealand and
Japan from 1972-1976.  An environmental impact appraisal for each phase of the operations was provided by the DVDP Committee
on Environmental Impact.

IMPACT AND EFFECTS

It is commonly recognized that the Antarctic does not possess a large human population, (nor any past endemic
population), and it cannot be envisioned in the foreseeable future as an industrial region, although transient tourism
is expected to increase. Antarctica is truly an underdeveloped continent, and its main use is in the realm of diverse
scientific investigations undertaken in an atmosphere of international cooperation. Scientific information is the
only presently exploitable resource of the continent. It is agreed that the Antarctic must not be endangered in regard
to future scientific endeavours.

Drilling operations can perturb both the surface and subsurface environments in the immediate vicinity of the
concentrated activities of man and machines;  the subsurface 
environment may be impacted by migrating fluids in the 
borchole itself, or in water, by mixing stratified layers or 
contaminating them chemically and micro-biologically.

Remedial measures designed wholly to protect one environment 
may be inapplicable or undesirable for others.

The Antarctic soils and the unique microbial 
communities they support are especially delicate and subject 
to alteration by human activities, drilling materials, and 
subsurface materials (mostly fluids where encountered). 
Some of these soils are especially vulnerable when, as in 
some cases, they have either no biotic phase or a single 
population as a simple community of microorganisms, both in 
number and in kind.  Any alteration of the abiotic (physical 
and chemical) characteristics can subsequently have adverse 
or irreversible effects on the soil ecosystem, especially on 
the biotic phase.  Human activities at a given site can be 
expected to have some effect on the soil microbial ecosystems, 
either through possible elimination of some populations, 
enhancement of other indigeneous groups, or introduction and 
adaptation of exogeneous groups as has been well-documented 
for other areas of man's activities, such as the "populous" 
and highly perturbed McMurdo Station, or other stations where 
general housekeeping measures have been lax or lacking.

Previous aerobiological monitoring has confirmed that 
activities at drilling sites greatly increase the numbers of 
aerial microorganisms, especially bacteria and molds.  Many of 
these are non-indigenous forms, such as from skin and mucus 
membranes, food, and more rapidly and at lower temperatures 
than the non-indigenous microbiota.  Studies are too recent 
to determine the longevity and adaptability of non-indigenous
forms associated with man's transient activities, such as at 
drill sites, but obvious changes in microbial populations, 
population shifts and numbers have occurred in areas of obvious 
contamination.

    Drilling operations and camp activities will constitut 
major sources of perturbations, with transient activities 
associated with helicopter activities serving as secondary 
sources of perturbations.  Human wastes, cooking slops, 
camp debris, daily personnel activities, and associated 
drilling activities, for example, fuel and drilling materials, 
will have impacts on soil microbial ecosystems.  The extent 
and import of the impacts will vary from site to site but 
are likely to be of greater consequence in previously, 
relatively non-contaminated sites or in areas which would 
favour growth and reproduction of indigenous or non-indigenous 
microorganisms because of an environment already "favourable" 
in terms of "available" moisture and food supply - especially 
organic substrates such as algae, in or along the borders of 
streams, ponds and lakes.

    The use of drilling muds and other drilling 
materials will introduce foreign physical and chemical 
substances as well as microorganisms to the soil, and fuels 
and lubricants, both through accidental spillage or airborne 
exhaust products, can introduce undesirable carbon products 
to the ecosystem, and thereby disturb natural microbial 
populations. Certain drilling muds or chemicals may result 
in "toxic" conditions for microorganisms, such as salt 
imbalance, high osmotic pressures, and unfavourable pH and eH. 
However, the introduction of certain muds, particularly clays,
will enhance the soil environment for microorganisms through 
an emelioration of the generally coarse texture of soil 
materials, increase an ion holding and exchange capacity, 
and provide a more favourable areal environment for 
microor[?]anisms. The introduction of clays, in consideration 
of the low degree of chemical weathering and resultant 
paucity of clay minerals, may be detrimental to clay 
mineralogical studies by future pedologists and related 
disciplines.

From the viewpoint of microbiology, none of the 
chemicals for drilling are advisable. The use of most 
materials would produce a salt imbalance and a generally 
unfavourable local chemical environment for microorganisms. 
Chemicals toxic to microorganisms whether organic or inorganic, 
are not recommended. Materials containing cellulose, 
vegetable fibre, fatty acids, starch and clays generally will 
not be toxic, but may be expected to enhance or enrich the 
natural soil environment and provide for increase in growth, 
reproduction or adaptation of microorganisms.

Surface modification for foundations will be minor, 
although any unsightly scars would be restricted to the 
immediate vicinity of the drilling site and campsite. A 
possible long-term effect is not erosion in the classical 
sense, but rather the exposure of salt minerals to subaerial 
solution, and the resultant salt imbalance. Scars of the 
landscape can be returned to normal, but a disturbed soil 
will take time to reestablish.

The subsurface environment is not well known, and 
knowledge of this environment is one of the primary goals of 
DVDP. To successfully accomplish deep drilling operations, 
the drilling products (soil, rock chips, cores and so forth)
must be removed from the hole.  The hole must also be 
stabilized in friable and weak zones, and native fluids 
encountered must not be allowed to migrate between permeable 
zones or to the land surface.

Two types of drilling operating methods are 
contemplated in this phase of DVDP:

        (1) Water circulation:  This method removes drill 
cuttings from the hole by circulating liquids, generally 
salt water.  Because of the relatively low viscosity of water, 
problems of lifting rock chips increase as the hole deepens.  
In addition, drilling fluids will enter any highly permeable 
zone with lower formation pressure than the fluid level 
maintained during drilling;  conversely permeable formations 
with greater artesian pressures will fill the hole, causing 
formation and drilling water to spill over the land surface.

        (2) Diesel fuel circulation:  This method removes 
drill cuttings from the hole by circulating diesel fuel 
arctic (DFA) with or without additives.  At permafrost 
temperatures, DFA is a suitable circulation medium, however, 
its generally low viscosity and low density limits it use 
to holes generally less than 300 m in depth.  Dangers from 
fires and explosions must also be considered.

        As with water, DFA can enter permeable zones, and 
hence contaminate the ground water.  In ice-cemented permafrost 
regions of the hole, this problem does not occur.

        Mud circulation is the standard drilling method 
in which the drilling cuttings are brought to the surface 
by a viscous mud solution.  The mud, usually a treated 
bentonite, may be mixed with fresh water (impractical in the 
cold Antarctic environment), salt water, or oil (generally 
diesel fuel).  In addition to removing cuttings from the drill
6.
hole, mud is used to control the hole itself;  it forms
a barrier to prevent drilling fluid from excessive invasion
of the permeable zones encountered; it prevents caving of
the weak or friable zones;  it can be weighted to control
high formation pressures;  it even affords some control over
gases if encountered.  In DVDP, mud will almost certainly be
necessary for the deep basement drilling and where potentially
unfrozen, highly permeable zones may be encountered.  All sites
will use a mud system.

All holes, when completed, must be adequately
plugged to prevent migration of fluids to the land surface
or between permeable zones, if encountered.

PRECAUTIONS AND GUIDELINES

The surface and subsurface environmental problems
cannot all be anticipated in advance of each individual field
set up, and each site is an individual situation. It has,
therefore, been proposed that an environmental scientist
be available during the entire drilling process, and that
all drilling personnel at the site (drillers, scientists,
and visitors) adhere to constraints imposed by the National
Science Foundation. Representative at McMurdo Station in
consultation with the DVDP project scientists, drilling
superintendent, and environmental impact officer concerning
living, drilling operations, logistics, or any other field
activity associated with DVDP.

The following monitoring and procedure scheme
has been used without consideration of priority or importance,
in order to minimize the environmental impact of the drilling
program:
7.

(1) The drilling supervisor and drilling crew 
have not been permitted to select the precise spot to drill 
based on the ease of drill operation, but rather that 
selection has been made following on-the-spot inspection by 
a Project Coordinator, drilling superintendent and USARP 
representative in consultation with Advisory Panels.  It 
follows, therefore, that the final sites were within a 
particular area of DVDP scientific interest and which would 
suffer least environmental impact from the drilling operations.

(2) Drilling was not undertaken in any area where 
major adverse environmental consequences were probable.

(3) The number of personnel operating the rig, 
and on-site investigators were kept to a minimum.  The 
number of non-scientific visitors was restricted, especially 
during monitoring operations so as to reduce bias of drilling 
operations.

(4) The drilling team was instructed of necessary 
precautions in regard to operations so as to minimize 
environmental impacts.

(5) The area of operations and the movements of 
all personnel, whether by foot or in vehicles, was restricted 
in the project area.

(6) Effective controls were established on the 
kinds and amounts of materials and stores taken into the 
project areas.

(7) Effective methods were used to collect, contain, 
transport, and dispose of all wastes to sites removed from 
the dry valleys.
8. 
(8) Burning of materials was prohibited at the 
sites and in the dry valleys.

(9) General tidiness was maintained at and around 
the sites, including both rigs and camps. All stores and 
material were secured to preclude dislodgement and scattering 
by wind and helicopters, especially in the dry valleys.

(10) Camp and drilling activities were minimized 
with regard to surface impact. Environmental perturbations, 
such as excavations, levelling, forming of foundations, and 
so forth, were rectified where possible.

(11) All lakes, ponds, streams, and ground water 
in the dry valleys received special protection from 
perturbation. Pollution, either biotic or abiotic, was 
avoided. Drainage was not impeded, nor was normal flow 
obstructed. Lake or pond stratifications, that is, 
thermoclines, chemoclines, or bioclines were not disrupted. 
Pumping of lake muds or water, to be used as a drilling 
medium, was generally prohibited, except as defined in some 
special instances.

(12) Drilling fluids were contained, both at the 
surface and sub-surface, by barrels and tanks.

(13) Composition of fuels, amount, and consumption, 
were known, and special care was taken in the transportation, 
storage and handling of fuels. Care was taken to avoid seeps 
or spills, especially near water surfaces.

(14) Monitoring was undertaken for biotic and 
abiotic perturbations due to drilling and associated site 
activities. Monitoring included microorganisms, organics, 
combusion products, trace metals, and any other substances 
which may perturb the environment, for example, drilling
9.

(15) A photographic record was made of drilling 
and other site activitics for future reference.

(16) Authority was assigned to a monitoring team,
and a reporting responsibility was also established. This 
authority was directed through appropriate channels as 
outlined in the various Field Operations Plans.

(17) All drill holes were plugged when abandoned 
to prevent migration of fluid between permeable zones and 
between the surface and subsurface.

(18) A monitoring system was initiated for 
post-drilling observance at all given sites.

(19) All personnel in the camp were expected 
to participate in remedial clean-up procedures as needed.
