





Creating Awareness: the Role of the Antarctic Legacy of South Africa (ALSA)








Creating Awareness: the Role of the Antarctic Legacy of South Africa (ALSA)

Information Paper submitted by South Africa

Summary
At the 38th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) held in Sofia, Bulgaria in 2015, South Africa presented ATCM XXXVIII / IP 124 “South Africa’s Antarctic Education and Outreach Activities” at the Workshop on Education and Outreach. This paper made reference to the South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP) funding of an Antarctic Legacy of South Africa (ALSA) project. This paper provides an update on the ALSA project, its establishment, further development and evolvement into South Africa’s foremost Antarctic and sub-Antarctic heritage depository and its education and awareness initiatives.
Introduction

The ALSA is a project of the SANAP, funded by the National Research Foundation over a three-year project from 2015 to 2017. ALSA is based in the Department of Botany and Zoology, at Stellenbosch University in South Africa.

The overall aim of the ALSA is to preserve photographic, written, oral and other published and unpublished records in a publically-accessible digital archive to ensure that South Africa’s involvement in Antarctica, at the Prince Edward Islands, at Gough Island and at sea in the Southern Ocean is archived for both national and international posterity, but especially for future generations in South Africa.

ALSA also aims to stimulate interest in South Africa’s Antarctic and sub-Antarctic legacy by way of outreach activities, concentrating on learners from primary to tertiary levels, as well as on the informed and interested public using social media as well as more traditional methods of communication, as highlighted in this paper.

Promoting South Africa’s Involvement in the Antarctic Region

ALSA creates and utilises awareness-creating opportunities via a project website (www.antarcticlegacy.org) and via social/news media (Facebook Pages and “Friends” groups for each SANAP base and Antarctic ship, Instagram and Twitter). It gives talks and lectures both within the country and elsewhere at international conferences and workshops, attends university open days and makes school visits to advertise the existence of the project and its database. A particular goal is to create awareness among the youth. A selection of activities undertaken by ALSA to enhance awareness of South Africa’s Antarctic legacy follows.

The ALSA Publication Series

In what is thought to be an original initiative for a SANAP project, ALSA has commenced publishing books under its own name. The first ALSA publication, launched at a well-attended reception held on the Stellenbosch University in May 2016, is entitled “Exploring a Sub-Antarctic Wilderness: a Personal Narrative of the First Biological and Geological Expedition to Marion and Prince Edward Islands 1965/1966” by Brian Huntley. The edited diary, comprehensively annotated by the author, aims to celebrate 50 years of research on Marion Island.

ALSA’s facilitated the publication of its second book, also written by a previous SANAP team member. The Afrikaans novel “Die Katjagter - ‘n Marion-eiland Storie” by Erika Nortje was launched at a reception in January 2017. The fictional account should help in communicating the human stories behind the research conducted on the island to the public in an informal way.

The third book published in the ALSA series, entitled “Pain forms the Character: Doc Bester, Cat hunters & Sealers” and compiled and edited by Nico de Bruyn & Chris Oosthuizen and launched in March 2017 is a journey through decades of extraordinary sub-Antarctic wilderness adventure.  Through first-hand accounts, it captures the nostalgia, blood, sweat and tears of the “cat hunters” and “sealers” of Marion Island – the stories of those who worked within the sphere of influence of the colourful and enormously influential “Doc” Marthán Bester – cat hunter, sealer and now retired Professor at the University of Pretoria.

Several more books are expected to be produced in the ALSA series within the life of the project; two are currently being actively edited for publication in the second half of 2017. Copies of three books published earlier by SUN PReSS on the Prince Edward and Gough Islands by past and present SANAP scientists have been made available to ALSA for donation to selected tertiary educational libraries in the country, along with ALSA’s own publications, in the course of 2017.

In addition to its own publication series an ALSA collection of donated popular and scientific books on Antarctic and sub-Antarctic themes in Stellenbosch University’s J.S. Gericke Library has the potential of becoming a lasting legacy of the project. To date three private collections totalling roughly 250 volumes have been donated and are being accessioned by the library during the course of 2017.

Attendance at scholarly conferences and workshops

Members of the ALSA team have regularly attended conferences and workshops in the last two years, both nationally and internationally. Oral and poster presentations at the meetings have helped spread the name of the project both within and outside South Africa. Some examples of meetings attended during 2016 follow.

    • The biennial SANAP Symposium 2016, University of Pretoria, July 2016. ALSA presented two talks and a poster.
    • Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Open Science Conference 2016, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, August 2016. Four talks and a poster given by ALSA.
    • SCAR Humanities and Social Science Expert Group Meeting & Workshop, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, August 2016. ALSA attended and contributed to discussions.
    • Historical Antarctic Sealing Industry Conference, Cambridge, UK, September 2016. One oral presentation made by ALSA, later submitted for the conference proceedings.
    • Inaugural Conference of the Polar Museum Network, Oslo, Norway, October 2016. ALSA attended and presented at this inaugural conference.
    • SANAP planning workshop, Cape Town, October 2016. ALSA attended, made a presentation and subsequently contributed to a multi-authored paper emanating from the workshop’s deliberations entitled “Exploring South Africa’s southern frontier: A 20-year vision for polar research through the SANAP”, now in press with the South African Journal of Science.

Website, social media, talks and school visits

Over a hundred articles have been posted to the ALSA website, ranging from current matters as well as on subjects with a historical interest, including a “This day in history” section. Recent developments with the website include the addition of overwintering team photographs and details of current SANAP projects with links to their dedicated websites and social media pages. A full run of all 24 volumes of the discontinued South African Journal of Antarctic Research will be added to the website as searchable PDFs during the second half of 2017. This journal is currently available on line and therefore its contents are otherwise running the risk of becoming “lost science”.

Illustrated talks on South Africa’s involvement in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic have been given to several primary and secondary schools in the Western Cape during 2016. The focus of these talks is to communicate in an understandable way the science being conducted in these regions by the country as well as covering the human aspects behind the science. Antarctic Activity Booklets, ALSA posters and flyers and branded sun visors were handed out to learners after these talks.  Talks have also been given to a few cultural groups and societies.

At the tertiary level ALSA has attended and/or provided flyers and marketing material for Open Days at four South African universities during 2016.  During 2016 several radio interviews were undertaken to promote ALSA.

SANAP voyages

ALSA has attended annual sailings of South Africa’s Antarctic research and supply ship, the S.A. Agulhas II on relief voyages to and from the three SANAP bases in Antarctica and at Gough and Marion Islands. The opportunity is then taken to present departing overwintering teams with ALSA-branded items, such as coffee mugs and books. Volunteers on voyages have been sought to take photographs for archiving by ALSA as a historical record of the reliefs.

The departure ceremony of the Antarctic Circumnavigation Cruise (ACE) expedition (with several SANAP scientists aboard) which commenced from Cape Town in December 2016 was also attended, with books and mugs again being handed out to participants and invitees. A book on the Prince Edward Islands was given to all Marion Island overwintering team members by an ex-SANAP scientist aboard when the cruise visited that island later that month.

Antarctica Day

ALSA marked Antarctica Day during December 2016 by launching an ALSA Antarctic colouring competition for primary schoolchildren in one of South Africa’s premier tourist localities, the V&A Waterfront in Cape Town, one of five Antarctic Gateway cities. In addition, an ALSA Antarctica Month Activity Booklet (16 pages with activities and informational detail regarding Antarctica and sub-Antarctic animals along with an infographic of Antarctica Day) and ALSA-branded bottles, caps and stickers were handed out to children and adults.

The Way Forward

In the current absence of an Antarctic society or equivalent in South Africa with an open membership, ALSA through its use of social media and is other activities described here serves as a de facto association where persons previously or currently involved with SANAP, as well as other interested members of the South African public, can contribute photographs and stories, share information and “meet” electronically. In this way South Africa’s Antarctic legacy is kept alive.

The ALSA archival database has achieved its aim of becoming an open-access source of information on past and present activities within SANAP. There continues to be much donated material, notably photographic collections, becoming available for archiving. For ALSA to achieve its full potential it needs to become an on-going project within a structured programme of the South African Government as outlined in the draft South African Antarctic and Southern Ocean Strategy. Such will ensure that all South Africans will be kept informed about South Africa’s participation in the Antarctic Treaty and associated conventions within the Southern Ocean. 

More information can be obtained from John Cooper, Anché Louw or Ria Olivier at antarcticlegacy@sun.ac.za.

