





Finland´s international collaboration in the Antarctic field work with different stations and other actors








Finland´s international collaboration in the Antarctic field work with different stations and other actors
Information Paper submitted by Finland

Finland established a research station in the Queen Maud Land during 1988 and became a consultative party of the Antarctic treaty in the following year (1989). The Finnish research station Aboa has since then served as the Finnish scientific center in Antarctica, as well as supported international projects from various countries. However, Finland’s contribution to Antarctic science extends far beyond the surroundings of Aboa. In the past 30 years, Finnish scientists have contributed in several projects around the continent. International collaboration will further enhance during the Year of Polar Prediction from austral winter 2017 to austral winter 2019.  
30-years of collaboration on ozone, UV and atmospheric composition studies in Marambio
The Finnish Meteorological Institute (FMI) and Servicio Meteorológico Nacional Argentina (SMN) run a joint Antarctic scientific programme in the Argentinean station Marambio. This programme started in 1988 with its weekly ozone soundings providing one of the first observations of ozone loss above the Antarctic. Towards the end of the 90's, columnar ozone and UV observations were started in a Finnish-Spanish-Argentinean collaborative network. When new scientific questions arose, this collaboration was extended to topics of atmospheric composition and climate change. Aerosol columnar measurements began in 2005 and they contribute to the global GAW-PFR AOD network. Atmospheric composition measurements were upgraded as part of the ACPANT project in 2013 to cover all the major climate forcing parameters: aerosols, clouds, and greenhouse gases. 
Aerosol and cloud research at the coastal Neumayer station
Atmospheric aerosols have also been measured at the German Neumayer station in collaboration between Alfred-Wegener Institute (AWI) and FMI since 2010. The Neumayer station’s proximity to the Finnish Aboa station has enabled aerosol transport studies. The Southern Ocean's impact on aerosol chemistry and on Antarctic particle and cloud formation was studied in collaboration with Neumayer during 2015-2016. Further experimental collaboration has been initiated by the University of Helsinki (UHEL) on the topic of solving mechanisms of secondary particle formation.
From cosmic rays to ions and aerosols on the high plateau at Dome C
Cosmic rays passing through the Earth atmosphere have been measured since early 2014 in the French-Italian Concordia station at Dome C using a detector designed at the Oulu University, in a project led by the Sodankylä Geophysical Observatory. The isolated location at high altitude provides an excellent study environment to observe fluctuations in cosmic ray fluxes, and to study the hypothesis that atmospheric ionization may facilitate secondary aerosol particle formation via ion-induced processes. Aerosol particles have been measured at Concordia since 2006 with instruments provided by the FMI and UHEL and operated by Italian scientists. Ion and aerosol number size distributions measurements discovered that secondary particle production can take place even during the darkest winter but the role of cosmic rays in this process is yet to be studied. 
Antarctic meteorology and snow and ice research on R/V Aranda and on German R/V Polarstern
Finnish research on Antarctic meteorology started during the R/V Aranda expedition in 1989/1990. The research has addressed large-scale atmospheric circulation, circumpolar moisture budget, cyclones and their interaction with sea ice, katabatic winds, atmospheric boundary-layer processes over the ice sheet, sea ice, and open ocean, as well as gravity waves generated by nunataks. The meteorological research has been closely coupled with research on snow and ice. In the recent AMICO project and the ongoing ASPIRE project the FMI has collaborated with scientists from 15 different countries. Finnish scientists have taken part in international field expeditions, such as cruises of the German R/V Polarstern in summer 2004/2005 and winter 2013 focusing on atmosphere – sea ice interactions, boundary-layer meteorology and clouds. 
A British-German-Finnish aircraft campaign at British Rothera station
International collaboration has also been essential in the development of observation methods related to research aircraft, unmanned aerial vehicles, controlled meteorological balloons, sea ice mass-balance buoys, and spectrometers for albedo measurements. As an example of this, Finnish scientists took part in a large research aircraft campaign at the Rothera station in summer-autumn 2010. 
Navigation and sea-ice research with South-African S.A. Agulhas II 
Long-term collaboration between the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA) and University of Stellenbosch (South Africa), the Finnish Meteorological Institute and Aalto University (Finland) includes onboard measurement systems development, ice-ocean modelling and remote sensing. The South African logistics vessel S.A. Agulhas II was permanently instrumented for sea ice load measurements when it was built in Finland and load data has been collected during all annual 3-month DEA relief voyages from 2012 on.  The main outcome of these expeditions is a dataset, covering thus far five years and combining ship response to ice, measured ice thickness variation, and satellite and ice-ocean model retrieved thickness fields. It is used to assess ship ice performance, inter-annual variation of ice conditions in the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean, as well as the skill of models and satellite based methods.
Geodetic and geodynamics research around the Dronning Maud Land (DML)
Gravity measurements, absolute gravity measurements in particular, are important for understanding Antarctic cryosphere-lithosphere interactions, terrestrial and ice-sheet movements and the Antarctic glacier contributions to the global sea level rise. The Finnish Geospatial Research Institute (FGI) of the National Land Survey has since early 90's performed absolute gravity measurements in various locations around the DML, such as the Finnish Aboa, Russian Novolazarevskaya, Norwegian Troll, South-African Sanae IV, and Indian Maitri. These constitute a large portion of all of the Antarctic absolute gravity measurements.  In addition to gravity studies the FGI has, in collaboration with the Finnish Antarctic Research Program (FINNARP), operated a permanent GPS station at Aboa since 2003. 

