





Polar Scientific and Outreach Cooperation Between Bulgaria and Turkey








Polar Scientific and Outreach Cooperation Between  
Bulgaria and Turkey 
Information Paper Submitted by Bulgaria and Turkey


Memorandum of Understanding regarding the academic and scientific cooperation between Bulgarian Antarctic Institute and Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center was signed in October 2016 during the First APECS Balkan Meeting in Kardjali, Bulgaria. 
The forum was attended by representatives of APECS Bulgaria, APECS Turkey, APECS Romania (via Skype), APECS International (via Skype), Bulgarian Antarctic Institute, Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center, National Polar Research Center of Sofia University, Committee for Foreign Affairs – National Assembly of the Republic of Bulgaria and Municipality of Kardjali.
The event was officially opened by the Mayor of Kardjali, the Director of Bulgarian Antarctic Institute (BAI), the Head of the Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center (ITU PolReC) and the Deputy-Chairman of The Committee for Foreign Affairs in the Bulgarian Parliament. 
The panellists shared their professional experience and scientific results from various research projects and fields in Antarctica and Southern Ocean. General information on the activities of APECS Bulgaria and APECS Turkey was presented to audiences and scientists. APECS Romania and the International Secretariat also participated via video conference line. Best practices and experience were shared between the Bulgarian and the Turkish polar programs, including different educational activities, social awareness on the polar issues, work with students and media. Special attention was paid on the legal aspects of the Antarctic cooperation and the legal framework of the human activities on the Southern Continent.
Taking into consideration the Memorandum of Understanding between two institutions, exchange of scientists was arranged between the Bulgarian and the Turkish programs. Accordingly, it was  agreed that 2 scientists from Turkey will visit the Bulgarian Antarctic Base during the 2016-2017 Antarctic season. 
Moreover, parties agreed for  scholars from both States to visit each other and participate in APECS events in schools, universities and scientific institutions. Ultimately, parties reached an agreement on Bulgarian scientists to visit APECS - Turkey and ITU PolReC’s scientific and social activities to be held in Turkey. “Unknown Southern Land” exhibition prepared by Bulgarian Antarctic Institute; whose purpose was to collect and make available all the currently known maps depicting Antarctic.The maps traced the development of maps from antiquity through modern day maps. The  exhibition presented in Istanbul during Turkish Polar Science Program Workshop in 12-13 April 2017 included topographical, geological, satellite images, maps of the ice surface and under ice surface of the continent, maps of various research bases; exhibited in Istanbul during Turkish Polar Science Program Workshop in 12-13 April 2017.

