Towards establishing of values of critical loads and thresholds for
the Antarctic environment
English version provided by the author
Towards establishing of values of critical loads and thresholds for
the Antarctic environment
Information paper submitted by the Republic of Belarus
Introduction
The Antarctic is the largest natural reserve, which is under the
protection of the world community. Unique ecosystems of the
Antarctic are particularly sensitive to anthropogenic impact.
Although the level of anthropogenic impact on the continent is
significantly lower than in other parts of the Earth, the loads are
very high in the locations of scientific stations, especially in oases
with intensive scientific activity and a large number of stations
which used year round for a several decades. All components of the
natural environment (vegetation, fauna, soils, water, and ice cover)
are impacted.
Significant efforts within the framework of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty have being made
to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment.
However, quantitative criteria that allow to regulate impacts on the
Antarctic ecosystems have not been developed yet. This information
document is prepared to draw attention to the urgent need of such
criteria, primarily with regard to the polluting substances loads, and
to define approaches for their development.
Critical loads and levels of impacts onto ecosystems
Determination of the threshold values of the impacts above which
irreversible changes in ecosystems is occurred is an important factor
in studying the sensitivity / sustainability of ecosystems. Knowledge
of such values is critical to predict changes in ecosystems under the
influence of human activities in the Antarctic, limitation of impacts
as well as for the establishment of protection status.
Revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica (ATCM XXXIX Resolution 1) can be noted, which state
(p.3.6), that performing monitoring ‘it may be useful to set
environmental thresholds or standards for an activity that
monitoring results are assessed against. If these thresholds are
exceeded, then a review or re-analysis would be required of
assumptions made regarding the environmental impacts or of
management systems related to the activity’. But analysis have
shown, that terms ‘load’, ‘limit’, ‘threshold’ and similar are rarely
occur in the CEP documents, and practically not used with
numerical criteria of their values.
A number of documents indicate the need to define threshold values
in application to touristic activity, for instance WP6 ATCM XXX
(2007).
In the IP66 (ATCM XXXVI, 2013) the nutrient load from ships’
treated sewage is shown that is currently not regulated except
Special Areas (MARPOL Annex IV) and to date only the Baltic Sea
has been designated as a Special Area for the purposes of Annex IV.
As a result sewage discharges from vessels contribute to increased
nutrient loads in the marine environment.
In general, it can be concluded that there is yet no base for
application of quantitative indicators of impact limits related to
resilience of ecosystems (landscapes, soils, ecosystems,
phytocenoses, biotopes, etc.) in the Antarctic, in particular, to
chemical impacts.
In recognition of the need to understand comprehensively the
biodiversity of the Antarctic continent and its surrounding oceans,
SCAR has recently approved two new Scientific Research
Programmes: State of the Antarctic Ecosystem (AntEco) and
Antarctic Thresholds – Ecosystem Resilience and Adaptation (AnT-
ERA). These programmes will deepen current understanding of the
biodiversity of Antarctic ecosystems, and its response to current and
future impacts, including the effects of human activities (ATCM
XXXVI WP39).
In the framework of AnT-ERA tolerance limits, as well as
thresholds, resistance and resilience to environmental change will
be determined.
According to AnT-ERA (http://scar.org/antera), ecological
threshold is a situation in which changes in external conditions
cause rapid, non-linear change in ecosystems and their health.
When an ecosystem flips from one state to another the term tipping
point can also be used.
However, given the scale and complexity of the solution of the
tasks, it seems that the concept of critical loads / levels and
experience in its implementation under the Convention on Long-
range Transboundary Air Pollution in Europe would be very useful
in developing approaches to limitation loads on the ecosystems of
Antarctica and establishing thresholds for impacts.
The Parties to this Convention agreed that the concept of critical
loads and the approach based on the effects assessment (effects-
based approach) create a framework for regulating impacts on
ecosystems, developing strategies and measures to their reduction
(Protocol to the 1979 Convention…, 1988; 1999 Protocol to
Abate…, 2012). The concept behind critical loads is based upon a
dose-response relationship where the threshold of harmful response
(within the ecosystem) is triggered by a certain load of pollutant -
the critical load.
In practical terms, this concept is most thoroughly applied to the
deposition of acidifying and eutrophying substances, to a lesser
extent - heavy metals and POPs. For almost twenty years of
elaboration of this concept in which many scientific centers of
Europe have been participated, methodology and supplementing
tools for its application were prepared including guidelines,
manuals, software, databases for parameterization of models and
other (CLRTAR, 2004; Manual Methodological…, 2015).
Assessment of critical loads includes both carrying out soil /
ecosystem full-scale studies, and modeling and mapping work.
Based on the established levels of critical loads in combination with
the predicted activity (emissions) and abatement measures the
projection of changes in ecosystems for different scenarios and
selection optimal cost-effective mitigation strategies is possible.
Taking into account the oligotrophic nature of the Antarctic
ecosystems represented predominantly by lichens and mosses, it
seems that the regulation of the input of nutrients, primarily
nitrogen, with atmospheric deposition and other fluxes and,
accordingly, the development of approaches to the assessment of
critical loads of this substance is vital.
The results of studies of soils and ecosystems carried out by the
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty (including the preparation of the
CEE) and related information on the properties of soils and
phytocenoses can be used in modeling of critical loads (http://
nsidc.org/data/ggd221.html; http://www.landcareresearch.co.nz/
databases; Antarctic Ecosystems…, 2005; The soil of Antarctica…,
2015, etc.). Monitoring data of atmospheric precipitation and
atmospheric air, as well as data of snow cores chemistry by ITASE
(Snow Chemistry…, 2005, etc.) can serve as a basis for estimating
atmospheric deposition levels of pollutants and comparing them
with threshold values.
The development of a methodological background as well as the
preparation of an information basis for the assessment of critical
loads and levels can be one of the tasks of the CEP in the
framework of improving of the methodological support for the
preparation of Comprehensive environmental evaluations of the
planned activity and monitoring its consequences.
References
1999 Protocol to Abate Acidification, Eutrophication and Ground-
level Ozone to the Convention on Long- range Transboundary Air
Pollution, as amended on 4 May 2012/ ECE/EB.AIR/114
Antarctic Ecosystems: Environmental Contamination, Climate
Change, and Human Impact. Ecological Studies/ Bargagli R. –
Springer, 2005.
Antarctic Thresholds - Ecosystem Resilience and Adaptation (AnT-
ERA) // http://scar.org/antera/ antera-about
ATCM XXX WP6 Approaches to Tourism Policy – Next Steps. XXX
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, 2007.
ATCM XXXIX Resolution 1 Revised Guidelines for Environmental
Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Annex), 2016
ATCM XXXVI IP66 Discharge of sewage and grey water from vessels
in Antarctic Treaty waters. XXXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting, Brussels, 2013
ATCM XXXVI WP39 Human footprint in Antarctica and the long-
term conservation of terrestrial microbial habitats, 2013.
CLRTAR, 2004. Manual on Methodologies and Criteria for
Modelling and Mapping Critical Loads and Levels and Air Pollution
Effects, Risks and Trends. Umweltbundesamt, Berlin.
Manual on Methodologies and Criteria for Modelling and Mapping
Critical Loads and Levels and Air Pollution Effects, Risks and
Trends. Updated: April 2015.
Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution Concerning the Control of Emissions of Nitrogen Oxides or
Their Transboundary Fluxes // http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/
DAM/env/lrtap/full%20text/1988.NOX.e.pdf
Snow Chemistry Across Antarctica/ N.Bertler et al// Annals of
Glaciology, Vol.41 2005. P.167-179// http://www2.umaine.edu/
itase/content/syngroups/snowchem.html
The soil of Antarctica /Bockheim, J.G. (Ed.). 2015. XV, 322 p. //
http://www.springer.com/978-3-319-05496-4.
