





Gateway Access: Transit Visa Developments in South Africa








Gateway Access: Transit Visa Developments in South Africa 
Information Paper submitted by South Africa


Summary


The Russian Federation in its ATCM XXXIX WP39 On “Openness” of the Gateway to the Antarctic in 2016, in Santiago, Chile, reported that in previous years, difficulties had been experienced by foreign nationals, in obtaining transit visas when travelling to and from Antarctica via Cape Town. South Africa in its response indicated that it had taken note of the content of Working Paper WP39 and was aware of these challenges related to the application of strict port entry controls in South Africa.  South Africa further highlighted that it was in constant contact with relevant authorities at that time in the process of addressing these issues related to foreign national’s transiting through South Africa to and from Antarctica.


Developments 


South Africa confirms that, following extensive negotiations with all the relevant national authorities, government through the Department of Home Affairs (DHA) has issued a “special dispensation” for "RESEARCHERS, SPECIALISTS AND EXPEDITION TEAMS USING CAPE TOWN AS A CORRIDOR TO AND FROM ANTARCTICA". The validity of Transit Visas for this category has, as a result, increased from three months to a period of two to three years for multiple entry purposes.

A copy of the new DHA instruction was issued to all South African Missions and Consular Services abroad. The Ministry of International Relations and Cooperation has also circulated this information directly to the affected and other relevant Embassies in South Africa. Copies of the new special dispensation may also be requested from the South African Competent Authority.

During the past 2016/7 Antarctic summer season representatives of the Russian Antarctic Programme, as well as other parties utilising Cape Town as a Gateway to and from Antarctica, have benefited from this “special dispensation” and have not reported any challenges during the transit process. 

South Africa sincerely hopes that the matter has now been resolved satisfactorily and remain firmly committed to facilitating access to Antarctica for scientific purposes.
