Cooperation of Romania with Argentina in Antarctica – Romanian
RONARE 2017 Expedition in cooperation with Argentina
Cooperation of Romania with Argentina in Antarctica - Romanian
RONARE 2017 Expedition in cooperation with Argentina
Information Paper submitted by Romania
Summary
The Romanian Academy, through the Romanian National Antarctic
Operator – the National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR),
expressed its interest in a bilateral cooperation between Romania
and Argentina in Antarctica. Following the preliminary discussions
within ATCM 2015 and ATCM 2016 and subsequent negotiation, a
Romanian-Argentine scientific cooperation was established and
materialized in an expedition with logistics support from Argentina,
in March 2017.
Romanian RONARE 2017 Expedition in cooperation with Argentina
In view of this bilateral cooperation, discussions between the two
parties were held at the ATCM 2015 and 2016, materializing in the
ATCM XXXIX Information Paper IP 124 rev.1 entitled “Proposal for
a Cooperation of Romania with Argentina and Australia in
Antarctica” (ATCM XXXIX, Agenda item 15, 2016) and delivered on
paper support to the Argentine delegation.
The Romanian RONARE 2017 Expedition is the result of negotiation
between National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of the
Romanian Academy, and the Argentine Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Culture – The National Direction of Foreign Policy for
Antarctica, by means of the Romanian Embassy in Buenos Aires and
with the logistics support from the Argentine Antarctic Reunited
Force.
The expedition objective was the Scientific cooperation of
Romanian Team with the Argentine Team in Antarctic Summer of
2016 - 2017 in East Antarctica, and the Romanian activity consisted
in two Romanian Team projects at the Argentine Research Stations
in Antarctic Peninsula, West Antarctica.
The two Romanian projects for the expeditionary cooperation in the
Antarctic summer season 2016-2017 have been proposed, on behalf
of NCAR to Argentine Antarctic Institute, by Andreea Radu, a
member of NCAR as an engineer – Faculty of Environmental
Science and Engineering and Master Student specializing in “Risk
assessment and environment security” within Babes-Bolyai
University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. The two projects, entitled in IP
124 rev.1 “Transboundary pollution: Rising nitrate level in the
Southern Ocean” and “Water quality determination and monitoring
in Antarctic lake ecosystems”, are consistent with the Antarctic
Scientific Strategic Plan 2013-2020 of NCAR. The second project
title finally was “Water quality determination and investigations in
the Antarctic regions”.
The first referred project includes a cooperation with the “Stefan S.
Nicolau” Virology Institute of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest,
consisting in two sub-projects, i.e. Study of virus-like particles (VLP)
in Antarctic ecosystems, also including a medical research
component. This project would promote a cooperation in the field
of Antarctic viruses as key elements in the carbon cycle – a
relatively new research field in Antarctica.
In both projects, the Romanian Party will share the obtained data
and results of the conducted studies and would be pleased if the
Argentine researchers will work with the Romanian team. The two
Romanian expeditioners are Eng. Andreea Radu and Captain Marian
Savulescu, a Marine logistics specialist.
The site activities consisted in: Detection of toxic vapor at ultra-
trace levels, on site and in real time; Characterization of the ocean
water (physical and chemical parameters); Water sampling and
preliminary sample treatment. Physical and chemical parameters
measurement (temperature, pH, conductivity);
Processing of the water samples to conserve the nitrates to their
international transport in small volumes. Samples of sea and lake
water, soil, sediments have been collected, processed and packed
according to the preservation protocols and observing the specific
Antarctic environmental protection norms. The expedition itinerary
(on board of Bahia San Blas vessel) included the bases Carlini, Frei,
Artigas, Camara, Caillet Bois, Deception.
RONARE 2017 expedition in cooperation with Argentina was
presented in Romania in a conference at the Virology Institute of
Romanian Academy, in a paper in Adevarul national journal and
within a Broadcast interview by Radio Romania News (May 3,
2017).
Acknowledgements
Romania acknowledges the scientific and logistics support from
Argentine Antarctic Institute, Argentine Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Culture – The National Direction of Foreign Policy for
Antarctica, and the Argentine Antarctic Reunited Force.
Romanian Contact Point for RONARE Expedition: Captain Marian
Savulescu, NCAR, Romanian Naval Forces Staff,
Email: mariansavulescu@yahoo.com
