





Malaysia’s Activities and Achievements in Antarctic Research and Diplomacy








Malaysia’s Activities and Achievements in Antarctic Research and Diplomacy

Introduction
Malaysia is extremely honoured to be part of the 40th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Beijing, China. This meeting marks the sixth time which Malaysia makes its presence at this prestigious meeting, since being a member of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) in 2011. Malaysia is also pleased to share progress of activities and achievements in Antarctic research and diplomacy.
Progress
    1. Malaysian polar scientists continue to undertake research in Antarctic in areas including remote sensing, polar microbiology, biodiversity, atmospheric sciences, physical sciences, and policy. These include flagship programmes being funded by the Ministry of Sciences, Technology and Innovation entitled;

        a. An Integrated Approach: Microbes and Respond to Climate Change
        b. Diversity and Adaptation of Microbes: Across Latitudinal Study
        c. Connectivity between Equatorial and Polar Regions: From Global Warming to Environmental and Microbial Community Changes.

    2. To- date, the Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation, which was established in July 2012 has disbursed and awarded:

            i. 10 Research Grants to Malaysian scientists
            ii. 10 Fellowship to young Malaysian scientists                                            
            iii. 8 Antarctic Berth Support to Malaysian scientists

This is in line with the Foundation’s objective to promote scientific research programmes in the Polar regions; and to provide and manage funding for research grants, post graduates studies and fellowship in scientific research in the Polar regions among Malaysian scientists.

    3. Other than providing research grants, fellowship and berth support, the Foundation continues to undertake awareness programmes to promote the importance of the Antarctic region among school children and Malaysian public in general. The programmes included Antarctica exhibitions and sharing sessions with polar scientists.

    4. Malaysia also participated in the Annual General Meeting (AGM) of AFOPS (Asian Forum on Polar Sciences) which was held in South Korea from 12th - 13th October, 2016. The meeting deliberated on several items including expedition and operational plan, research highlights, cooperation with other international organizations and AFOPS, cooperative projects and research collaboration. Malaysia representative also attended AFOPS Special Meeting which was held in Prague, Czech Republic in conjunction with the Arctic Science Summit Week (ASSW) 2017 on 31st March, 2017 .Through AFOPS, two (2) Malaysian scientists benefited from Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) Asian Polar Science Fellowship program in 2016 under the Field Research Program category. 

    5. During the 2016/2017 summer season, five (5) Malaysian scientists carried out field works in Antarctic as part of their research activities. They can be grouped into 3 namely:

    i. Field research at the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) facilities in Antarctica;                                                                                                                                          
    ii. Field research at the Instituto Antarctico Argentino (IAA) facilities in Antarctica; 
    iii. KOPRI Asian Polar Science Fellowship - Field Research Program

    i. Field Research at the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) Facilities in Antarctica

2 researchers from Malaysia visited and collected field samples at Rothera and Signy research stations respectively. Their visits to BAS research facilities were made possible through the MOU signed between the Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation and BAS. Malaysia would like to thank BAS for the opportunity given to Malaysian researchers to do work at BAS facilities in Antarctica. The two collaborative projects with BAS that they work on are:

Researcher
Research Title
Date
Station


Shoba Mary Thomas

Analysis of the effects of global warming on the diversity and survival of microorganism in the Antarctic, Arctic and Tropics using metagenomic and metatranscriptomic approaches

  
30 Nov 2016 -
    14 Mar 2017
Rothera

Dr. Siti Aqlima Ahmad

Biodegradation of Phenol by Isolated Antarctic Bacteria


31 Dec 2016 -
    20 Mar 2017

Signy
                                                                                                                               

    ii. Field research at the Instituto Antarctico Argentino (IAA) facilities in Antarctica

A researcher from National University of Malaysia visited and carried out field works at the Carlini Base Station in Antarctica. His visit was made possible through the MOU signed between the National University of Malaysia and the Instituto Antarctico Argentino (IAA). Malaysia would like to thank IAA for the opportunity given to this researcher to work at IAA facilities in Antarctica. The collaborative project with IAA that our researcher work on is:
Researcher
Research Title
Date
Base

Dr. Wayan Suparta
Estimation of global lightning activity and observations of atmospheric electric field for sun-earth coupling prediction
12 Jan - 17 Feb 2017
Carlini Base

    iii. KOPRI Asian Polar Science Fellowship - Field Research Program

Two researchers from Malaysia visited and carried out field works at the Jang Bogo Base in Antarctica. Their visit were made possible under the KOPRI Asian Polar Science Fellowship under the category of Field Research Program.
Researcher
Research Title
Date
Base

Dr. Sheeba Nettukandy Chenoli
Teleconnection between equatorial and polar climatic variabilities
20 Nov - 10 Dec 2016
Jang Bogo
Malcolm Tang Siong Yii
Teleconnection between equatorial and polar climatic variabilities
20 Nov - 10 Dec 2016
Jang Bogo
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                4

    6. Malaysia has the pleasure and honour to inform that the 34th SCAR Biennial Meetings including 2016 Open Science Conference, held from 20th till 30th August 2016 in Kuala Lumpur was successfully organised. The meetings and conference recorded 835 participants from 42 countries. 780 papers were presented of which 431 were oral and 349 were posters. Malaysia would like to thank SCAR and Antarctic Scientific community from ATCM member countries participated in the events. 

It is also worth mentioning that during the opening of the events on the 22nd August 2016, the H. E. Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation Malaysia announced Malaysia’s ratification to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 1998 (Madrid Protocol). The 20th Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) Meeting marks our first present as member of the Committee.
    7. Malaysia is developing the National Polar Roadmap and has completed the drafting of a national legislation in the form of an Antarctica Bill to implement our obligations under the 1959 Treaty and the 1998 Madrid Protocol. This Bill is currently undergoing the legal scrubbing process and will subsequently be tabled in the Parliament. 

Conclusion

Malaysia looks forward to actively engage in the Antarctic Treaty development process.

