Chair’s Summary of the Special Meeting “Our Antarctica: Protection
and Utilisation”
Chair’s Summary of the Special Meeting
“Our Antarctica: Protection and Utilisation”
The Special Meeting was initiated by China as the Host Country for
the 40th Antarctic Consultative Meeting (ATCM XL) and took place
on 23 May 2017 after the opening of the ATCM XL at Beijing Hotel
International Convention Centre. Although the special meeting is
not an agenda item of the ATCM, all delegates for the ATCM and
CEP were invited to attend. His Excellency Mr. Liu Zhenmin, Vice
Foreign Minister of China, chaired the meeting. His Excellency Mr.
Zhang Yesui, First Vice Foreign Minister of China, delivered a
keynote speech and other eight speakers, including governmental
representatives and scientists from the Russian Federation, Poland,
Argentina, United States, China, United Kingdom, Chile and
Australia, addressed the meeting.
His Excellency Mr. Liu Zhenmin opened the meeting and extended
his warm welcome to all participants. Mr. Liu pointed out that the
very purpose of the special meeting was to provide a platform for
exchange of views on issues concerning Antarctic governance,
especially on the question of how to govern more effectively to
better protect and utilise the Antarctica, and to promote the
objectives and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty in a new context.
In his keynote speech, His Excellency Mr. Zhang Yesui recalled the
signing of the Antarctic Treaty in 1959 as forming a framework of
stable and peaceful governance over the continent. Climate change
and marine pollution were cited as being amongst the challenges
placing pressure on the modern Antarctic Treaty System. He
elaborated his observation of the relationship between the
protection and utilisation of the Antarctica in three aspects: 1)
enhanced protection is the prerequisite for peaceful utilization of
the Antarctica; 2) rational utilisation is a natural part of harnessing
the value of the Antarctica; 3) a balanced approach should be the
basic idea of the international governance of the Antarctica. Mr.
Zhang suggested that consideration should be taken of both the
utilisation of Antarctica through activities such as scientific
investigation, research, navigation and development of biological
resources, and the protection of the Antarctica. He believed the
balance could be achieved in three ways. First, by adhering to the
Antarctic Treaty System and improving the system by responding to
the new issues and challenges such as tourism and bio-prospecting.
Second, by strengthening countries’ research planning, capacity
building and enhanced cooperation in Antarctic investigation and
research, so as to cement the scientific foundation for Antarctic
protection and utilization. Third, by developing cooperative
governance and enhancing coordination to ensure the peace,
stability and cooperation in Antarctica. He urged Parties to view the
challenges faced by the Antarctic Treaty System as opportunities,
and to write a new chapter in Antarctic protection and utilisation.
His Excellency Amb. Andrey Denisov, from the Russian Federation,
addressed the current status of the Antarctic Treaty System, having
praised it as an excellent example of peace and stability that had
laid a solid political and legal basis for broad and fruitful
cooperation, mutual assistance and inclusive decision-making
process in the Antarctic. He also highlighted that the focus of the
discussion taking place within
the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System in recent years had
been shifted to address mostly environmental issues thus
diminishing the significance of other fundamental aspects and new
developments of the ATS. Speaking on the latter the Russian
Ambassador mentioned, in particular, the elaboration of new global
regimes which might affect or even undermine the Antarctic Treaty
System and the absence of unified approaches in the national legal
regulation of non-governmental activities in the Antarctic. He called
upon the Parties of the Antarctic Treaty to pay due attention to the
vital problems of the ATS in order to preserve the Antarctic as a
continent of peace, security, science and mutually beneficial
cooperation as it had always been in the past decades.
His Excellency Professor Lukasz Szumowski, from Poland, referred
to Polish activities as an example of what a single country could
bring about in raising awareness of the importance of Antarctica. In
celebrating the 40th anniversary of the Polish Antarctic Station
Arctowski, he recognised the potential of Poland and other
countries to explore niches of international scientific excellence and
prestige. In addressing some of the challenges faced by Antarctica,
he emphasised the selection of Polish research priorities, which
included cryosphere and ecosystems research, as well as a better
understanding of human presence and social impact of that
presence in Antarctica. Such an understanding was fostered through
educational programmes, including direct video-transmissions from
Polish station in Antarctica to more than 1500 schools in Poland. In
concluding, he emphasised the importance of ATCM in furthering
the freedom of scientific investigation and preserving its natural
resources, and invited the scientific community to collaborate and
cooperate with the Polish polar scientific community.
Her Excellency, Amb. Maria Teresa Kralikas, from Argentina,
reflected on areas of growing interest for countries involved in
Antarctica. In noting the various phases of Antarctic history,
including the achievements of the negotiations for the Antarctic
Treaty, she highlighted the flexibility of the unique legal system in
addressing modern challenges, while retaining fidelity to its
principles and objectives. The dynamic regime and continued
recognition of the Treaty’s original principles has allowed Parties to
address issues such as tourism, bio-prospecting, climate change and
ocean acidification. An example of the Antarctic Treaty System’s
dynamism in cooperation and coordination was CCAMLR
Conservation Measure 24-04 Establishing time-limited Special Areas
for Scientific Study in newly exposed marine areas following ice-
shelf retreat or collapse in Statistical Subareas 48.1, 48.5 and 88.3.
This Conservation Measure was facilitated by expert scientific
assistance from ATCM and enabled special areas of scientific study
to be developed in response to ice-shelf retreat and collapse. In
reporting on Argentina’s strategic science plan for the medium and
long-term, the Ambassador highlighted the use of the SCAR Horizon
Scan as a strategic document to enhance Argentina’s science
programme, further developing specific scientific research towards
addressing emerging issues and increasing international
cooperation. In conclusion, she emphasized Argentina’s perception
that the Antarctic Treaty System was a relevant and valid
framework within which to continue working together and to
maintain loyalty with which to achieve the principles and objectives
of the Antarctic Treaty.
Mr. David Rank, from the United States, recalled the 25th
anniversary of the Environment Protocol in 2016. In emphasising
the United States’ commitment to the protection of the Antarctic
environment and its status as a natural reserve, he noted that the
Treaty envisages use for scientific research. He highlighted
important research conducted in Antarctica that has provided
climate data as well as
CCAMLR’s role in conserving Antarctic marine living resources. In
managing emerging challenges such as increasing tourist activities,
non-native species, and climate change, he highlighted that a
balance between protection and use must always include
considerations of the highest standards of environmental protection,
which would include implementation of the Polar Code, designation
of marine protected areas, and regulation of tourism. While noting
past successes in achieving this balance, he concluded by stating
that the balance between use and protection must be for the benefit
of all.
Professor Qin Dahe, from China, remarked that China was a relative
latecomer to Antarctic exploration. China organised its first
Antarctic expedition in 1984 and became a Consultative Party the
following year. Following the construction of Great Wall Station in
1984, China established three more Antarctic research stations,
with a fifth currently being built. This year, China also operated its
first fixed wing air operation at Dome A. He considered that China’s
achievements over the past 33 years had not been achieved alone
but with the help and support of many Antarctic colleagues.
Professor Qin commented on the uniqueness of the Antarctic
environment, in particular the ice sheet, which stored much of the
world’s ice and fresh water reserves. Noting the significant role of
the cryosphere in global atmospheric and oceanic processes, as well
as the new challenges facing Antarctica, he emphasised the need to
continue producing high quality scientific research for the benefit of
humankind. In order to achieve this, Professor Qin encouraged
Parties to: uphold the Antarctic Treaty System; work to minimise
human impacts to the Antarctic environment; enhance public
engagement and outreach on Antarctica; and commit to continued
scientific research including through increased financial support
and information exchange among scientists.
Professor Dame Jane Francis, from the United Kingdom, gave a
presentation titled ‘Antarctica: A Continent for Science’. She
commented that Antarctic science has global impact, and that
changes to the Antarctic environment were likely to affect the rest
of the world. Professor Francis gave an overview of major Antarctic
scientific research themes including ice shelves, ice cores, the
Southern Ocean, space weather and marine ecosystems. She
explained that ice shelves served as buttresses to ice flow, and that
their collapse could result in glacial surge and rapid sea level rise.
She highlighted a United Kingdom project that aimed to understand
the dynamics of water movement beneath the Ronne-Filner Ice
Shelf, as well as a major multinational ice core drilling project soon
to be launched at Dome C in the search for the oldest ice to
reconstruct historical climate patterns. Professor Francis spoke
about the importance of the Southern Ocean as a sink for carbon
dioxide and heat, and noted the use of new, innovative technologies
as critical tools in our understanding of ocean dynamics. She also
highlighted that the emergence of new areas of ice-free land in
Antarctica presented scientists with new research questions,
including consideration of which species might colonise these areas.
Professor Francis concluded by stating that these research themes
presented Antarctic scientists with big, ambitious questions, which
called for international collaboration and were important not only
for Antarctica but the planet as a whole.
Dr. José Retamales, of Chile, identified science, cooperation and the
balance between protection and use as important guiding principles
in Antarctic decision-making. He highlighted the significant value
of science as a tool for decision-making, given that it was
measurable and therefore its conclusions were amenable to review.
Reflecting on the decades that have passed since the signing of the
Antarctic Treaty, Dr. Retamales remarked that perceptions of
Antarctica had changed
markedly over that time, with scientists and the international
community becoming increasingly aware of Antarctica’s role in
global climate processes, as well as its rich biodiversity and its
vulnerability to environmental change. He encouraged Parties to
uphold their commitment to delivering high quality science that
was relevant to Antarctic management needs, and conducted in a
way that was sensitive to the Antarctic environment. He also
commented on the importance of maintaining the Antarctic Treaty
System’s principle of international cooperation, noting that Parties
should respect and value each other’s differences. Considering the
growth and diversification of human activities in Antarctica over
recent decades, including science, fishing, tourism and bio
prospecting, Dr. Retamales suggested that there was a need to
develop new mechanisms to meet these challenges and to strike a
balance between the protection and utilisation of Antarctica.
Mr. Charlton Clark, of Australia, commented that Australia viewed
this Special Meeting as an opportunity to highlight the strength and
stability of the Antarctic Treaty System. Mr. Clark remarked that
the Antarctic Treaty had demonstrated its ability to manage change
in its existing form, and was as applicable today as when it entered
into force. As an original signatory to the Antarctic Treaty, he noted
Australia’s view that expanded participation was a strength of the
Antarctic Treaty System. He also noted that the Environment
Protocol created a comprehensive protection regime for Antarctica,
and recalled that the Santiago Declaration reaffirmed Parties’
commitment to the permanent ban on mining. Mr. Clark also gave
an overview of the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20-year Action
Plan, which provides a blueprint for Australia’s future engagement
in Antarctica. He outlined the major themes of the Plan, which
included: supporting the Antarctic Treaty System; revitalising the
Australian Antarctic science program and the importance of
international collaboration; developing modern and flexible
infrastructure; and promoting Tasmania as a leading East Antarctic
gateway and research hub. Highlights of the Plan included: the
construction of a new icebreaker; improvement of Australia’s
Antarctic aviation capability; rebuilding its overland traverse
capability; and a commitment to maintaining excellence in science
and the establishment of a new Antarctic Foundation.
The Chair thanked all the speakers for their thought-provoking
presentations. He summed up with four basic points of view. First,
the sheer size and complexity of the global challenges facing
Antarctica demonstrates that no country can tackle these alone. And
no country can manage new Antarctic activities such as tourism and
bio-prospecting alone. Parties needed to adopt a coordinated and
integrated approach to living up to their common responsibility to
protect Antarctica. Second, environmental protection really must be
at the forefront of planning and execution of all activities in
Antarctica. Speakers outlined the uniqueness and fragility of
Antarctic ecological environment, as well as risks driven by human
and natural factors. The protection of Antarctica is our commitment
to future generations. A minimisation of impact of our activities is
needed, both through the application of new technologies and
through strengthened environmental impact assessments. Third, the
principle of science primacy and freedom of scientific investigation
should be upheld. Fourth, Parties need to continue their
unwavering commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Antarctic Treaty System, including the principles of “freezing of
territorial sovereignty claims” and “freezing of mineral resources
development”. They also have to consider effective ways in which
to regulate tourism, bio-prospecting, and any other new activities to
meet their stewardship responsibilities. In undertaking this they
need to be aware of the way in which Antarctic Treaty instruments
relate to global governance, and be attentive to the
relationship between protection and utilisation which is very subtle
and requires further consideration.
The Chair encouraged the Parties to have further discussions to
enhance mutual understanding and cooperation, and contribute to
enhanced Antarctic governance.
