





Commemoration of the 25th Anniversary of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty – Presentation of Postage Stamps



English version provided by the author





Commemoration of the 25th Anniversary 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
 to the Antarctic Treaty
Presentation of postage stamps
Introduction
On the occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the signing of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty, Argentina introduced two commemorative postage stamps on October 4th, 2016, at Palacio San Martín, seat of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship.
Commemoration of the 25th Anniversary of the Environmental Protocol

In order to commemorate the 25 years since the signing of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (Environmental Protocol), on October 4th 2016, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship and Correo Argentino (Argentine Post Office) presented two postage stamps depicting two protected areas in Antarctica, established on the basis of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol.

Representatives of Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and members of the Committee for Environmental Protection, the Executive Secretary of the Antarctic Treaty, members and officials of the Argentine Antarctic Programme, and Correo Argentino officials, participated in the event. Guests witnessed the stamps postmarking and received their commemorative first day cover issues, together with a brochure explaining the Protocol’s origin, contents and importance, both in Spanish and English languages.

During the ceremony, the Santiago Declaration was recalled and it was also stressed that, by adopting the Declaration at the XXXIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, the Parties to the Environmental Protocol reaffirmed their collective commitment to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment. Furthermore, it was emphasized that due to the proximity of Antarctica to South America and the close interrelation of both Continents’ ecosystems, the preservation of the Antarctic environment was of great significance.

The postage stamps

The postage stamps were jointly designed by the Argentine Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship and the Argentine Post Office, and they are accompanied by a first day cover sheet, which on the bottom left side reads "Antártida: reserva natural consagrada a la paz y a la ciencia" (‘Antarctica: natural reserve devoted to peace and science’). It also includes the listing of the Annexes to the Protocol, the official logo of the Antarctic Treaty and, in the background, a map detail of the Antarctic Peninsula pointing out the location of the protected areas in which the Antarctic stations depicted in the stamps are located.

The photographs included in the stamps were selected in order to represent protected areas established on the basis of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, with the aim of highlighting the importance of the Protocol in Antarctic territory management. Additionally, the inclusion of the of two Argentine stations allows to underscore Argentina’s commitment to the protection of the Antarctic environment. Thus, the first stamp shows a photograph of Deception Island, Antarctic Specially Managed Area Nº 4, where the Argentine Station Decepción is located. The second stamp includes an image of Punta Cierva, Antarctic Specially Protected Area Nº 134, showing Argentine Station Primavera.
 
The philatelic brochure

The stamps are accompanied by a philatelic brochure, in Spanish and English, with the aim of promoting the 25th Anniversary of the signing of the Environmental Protocol, as well as its contents and relevance for the preservation of Antarctica’s pristine and sensitive environment.






The brochure includes the historical background of the Environmental Protocol and its Annexes, emphasizing on their focus on conservation, the prohibition of activities related to mineral resources, with the exception of scientific research, and the creation of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP).




Outreach
Both the ceremony and the presentation of the postage stamps and brochure were appropriately publicized though the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship’s website and social media profiles. These activities ratify Argentina’s firm commitment with the Environmental Protocol and the necessary promotion of its provisions.
 

