





Prevention of the Introduction of 
Non-native Species to the Antarctic Continent
 
Argentine Antarctic Program
Operations Manual



English version provided by the author





Prevention of the Introduction of Non-native Species to the Antarctic Continent 
Argentine Antarctic Program Operations Manual
Information Paper presented by Argentina
Summary
In order to facilitate the implementation of measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species within the framework of the Argentine Antarctic Program’s large array of infrastructure and logistic and scientific operations, a specific Manual was designed to attend the specificities of these operations and activities. Argentina offers this material to Parties and suggests its incorporation to the CEP’s Non-native Species Manual, in the Guidelines and Resources section.  
Introduction

In order to protect biodiversity and Antarctic intrinsic values, preventing unintentional introduction into the Antarctic region of non-native species and the transfer of species from one bio-geographical region to another within Antarctica, the CEP developed the Non-native Species Manual; the first edition of this manual was adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Resolution 6 (2011), after work carried out by a CEP Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) between 2009 and 2011. The second edition of the Manual was developed by a CEP ICG between 2015 and 2016.

In this context, the Argentine Antarctic Program assessed its own activities and the challenges involved in ensuring the prevention of introduction of non-native species to the Antarctic continent. Thus, actions needed to implement the measures included in the CEP’s Non-native Species Manual were analyzed in relation to the following specificities of the Argentine Antarctic Program’s operations: 

    • The wide range of permanent and temporary stations, shelters and campsites that Argentina maintains and that represents a big challenge and effort, but could also imply a risk of dispersion of non-native species if necessary precautions are not taken.

    • In connection to the above, each summer's logistic deployment aimed at providing support for program activities. The use of different types of vessels and aircrafts was included in the assessment. The particulars of the operations and the locations in the different cities from which transport towards Antarctica is carried out were also considered, with special emphasis placed on Buenos Aires, as it is the main center from where annual logistics are organized, and on the Patagonian cities of Rio Gallegos and Ushuaia, due to their location at high latitudes. 

    • The preparation of cargo and the loading of materials that are carried out in different cities and the management of associated storage depots, aimed at minimizing the risk of presence of non-native species in containers and general cargo.

    • Scientific activities carried out by some of the Argentine Antarctic Institute investigators, mainly in Patagonian areas that are of interest for the development of comparative and/or complementary studies. Geological, geomorphological and glaciological research carried out at high latitudes and high altitude was specially taken into account, considering species that could later adapt to Antarctic conditions.

The assessment clearly showed the need to adjust orientation measures contained in the CEP Manual, in relation to the above described specificities and to design instructions and procedures, written in a clear language aimed at the different stakeholders intervening in the several stages of each Antarctic season, as well as to the place and type of work that is carried out in each location. As a conclusion, it was decided to develop a document titled “Prevention of the Introduction of Non-native Species to the Antarctic Continent. Argentine Antarctic Program Operations Manual.”
Design and initial implementation of the Manual
Based on precedents and regulations established by the Antarctic Treaty, but applied to the specific reality of our operators, the Dirección Nacional del Antártico (DNA) began development of the Manual. To this effect, it collected data, analyses and consulted specialists on the subject, including other related National entities, such as agro food health and quality sectors. Additionally, but not less important, the Armed Forces (AF), in charge of the Antarctic activities' logistic support, were also consulted in order to ensure that the proposed measures were applicable to their operations. 

As to the Manual’s format, specific fact-sheets were developed. Each one includes various biosecurity measures aimed at minimizing the risk of unintentional introduction and specifies the objective of each measure, its intended recipient(s), the procedure itself and the frequency with which it should be applied. The sheets are organized in relation to logistic means (cargo storage depots, aircrafts and vessels) and in relation to the assigned personnel (logistic and scientific), and their compact format is very user friendly. It was agreed that these sheets would be widely visible in all convenient sectors/areas, such as offices, cargo storage areas, exit ports and airports and in the interior of aircrafts and vessels, as well as in key sectors within Antarctic stations and shelters.

A sheet type format was created in order to make the Manual a live document; each sheet can be updated, modified and replaced, if necessary.

Thanks to this preliminary work, a draft copy of the Manual was finished in September 2015 and an agreement was reached with the AFs so that during the 2015-2016 Antarctic Summer Campaign each operator would carry out on-site implementation trials. Once the Campaign was finalized, the results would be informed to the DNA, so as to later work on the final version. After this was done, in mid 2016, all stakeholders got together to assess the trial implementation and to analyze difficulties and strengths, with the objective to agree upon the Manual’s definitive version.

In its final version, which is attached as an Annex to this Information Paper, the Manual has an introduction that sets out the general objective, guideline's scope, specific objectives, precedents and legal context, and ends with the situational framework that refers to the problem of non-native species in the Antarctic continent. The second section contains the procedures for minimizing the risk of unintentional introduction of native species in a fact sheet type format. Sections on implementation and a log for procedures and incidents were later included.

Lastly, the Manual was officially distributed to all stakeholders involved and the Manual's implementation measures were included in the training courses given during the planning and preparation stages of the 2016/17 Antarctic Summer Campaign.

Its implementation has been considered in a progressive manner with short-term evaluation instances.
Final considerations.
The specificities of the procedures allow each Antarctic stakeholder to quickly identify his/her role and the actions that must be implemented, and to use those Manual fact sheets and measures that apply to his/her tasks. Because the Manual includes the generation of logs and the obligation to periodically report to the DNA, a follow-up of the application and effectiveness of the measures can be performed. 

Being the first material of this kind that covers all work instances and locations, written and developed in Spanish, and presented to the Committee as the original version in that language, we believe it may constitute a contribution for consultation by other Spanish speaking National Programs that may wish to use and/or adapt it, as they deem appropriate.

In this sense, Argentina suggests that the CEP consider the contents of the Manual for its inclusion in the Committee’s Non-native Species Manual, in the Guidelines and Resources section. 


