





Maintenance of Aids to Navigation in Antarctica, Summer Season 2016 - 2017



English version provided by the author





Maintenance of Aids to Navigation in Antarctica, Summer Season 2016 - 2017

Introduction:

The International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) in its Regulation 13, Chapter V, states that “…Each Contracting Government undertakes to provide, as it deems practical and necessary either individually or in co-operation with other Contracting Governments, such aids to navigation as the volume of traffic justifies and the degree of risk requires”. At the same time, the International Association of Lighthouse Authorities (IALA), recommends “…the planning, operation, management and implementation of aids to navigation, so authorities that have responsibility can improve the services provided to mariners”.

Currently Chile manages and maintains a network of 70 aids to navigation, mainly concentrated in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula. 

The importance that Chile gives to the aids of navigation installed in the Antarctic area is consistent with these international instruments, since these make navigation safer for all vessels that circulate in those waters, and, indirectly, contributes to the conservation of the marine living resources and with international cooperation.
























Activities:

During the recent summer season, 3 units of the Chilean Navy, ATF-67 Lautaro, AP-41 Aquiles and AP-46 Almirante Oscar Viel, performed the maintenance of 19 aids to navigation, which corresponds to the 27% of the signals installed by Chile. Likewise, in the framework of its among the modernization process, the Aids to Navigation Service of the Chilean Navy is studying ways to increase the efficiency in the maintenance of the aids to navigation in Antarctica.

Maintenance activities included tasks related to the recovery of the structural capacities, painting, and the checking of power sources.


















These activities took place in Nelson Island, Covadonga Cove, Marguerite Bay, Fildes Bay, Roberts Island, Deception Island, Gerlache Strait, Chile Bay, Yunque Bay and McFarlane Strait.





Conclusions:

    1. The Aids to Navigation Network implemented by Chile over time, provides safety to the navigation of all vessels that visit the area of the Antarctic Peninsula, in this way facilitating the connectivity among bases, stations and shelters. 

    2. It is requested that any anomaly regarding the operability of the aids to navigation maintained by the Chilean State, registered in SHOA 3007-A (List of unlighted aids to navigation of the Chilean coast – continental, insular and Antarctica) and SHOA 3007 (List of lighthouses of the Chilean coast)  publications, are notified by e-mail to faroapagado@directemar.cl.
