Austral Mid-Winter Medical Evacuation from Amundsen-Scott South
Pole Station, Antarctica
Austral Mid-Winter Medical Evacuation from Amundsen-Scott South
Pole Station, Antarctica, by the United States
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
On June 22, 2016, the United States successfully completed the air
evacuation of two seriously ill program participants from
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, Antarctica. The patients were
winter-over contract employees of the U.S. Antarctic Program
(USAP). First request for an emergency medical evacuation was
received from the station’s doctor on June 9, 2016. USAP managers
immediately contacted the likely aircraft operator, Kenn Borek Air,
Ltd. (KBA) and the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) in an effort to
start mission planning. BAS indicated that Rothera Station would be
able to assist the rescue aircraft and KBA agreed to attempt the
mission. The primary plan would fly the patient to Punta Arenas
and a contingency plan was developed to take the patient to
Christchurch, New Zealand. Two KBA operated Twin Otter aircraft
arrived at Rothera Station on June, 20, 2016. A single aircraft
arrived at the South Pole on June 21, 2016, and the primary
critically ill patient and a less seriously ill patient were flown to
Rothera Station and on to Punta Arenas, Chile, on June 22, 2016.
Both patients received medical care in Punta Arenas and flew to the
United States for continued treatment. Both patients recovered from
their illnesses. The smooth execution of this medical evacuation was
only possible through the close coordination and support from
several other National Antarctic Programs.
Operations
The initial notification of the medical emergency came to the
National Science Foundation (NSF), the manager of the USAP, from
the South Pole Station’s doctor. The contracted Chief Medical
Director and NSF’s Chief Medical Officer reviewed the patient’s
condition and prognosis, ultimately concurring that a medevac was
necessary to save the life of the primary patient. Based on the
medical assessment of the patient’s condition, NSF immediately
directed its prime contractor, Antarctic Support Contract (ASC), to
open a twenty-four hour operations center and begin contracting
support for the medevac. NSF, through its established relationship
with the U.S. Department of Interior, requested immediate contact
with KBA to seek a contract for two aircraft for the medevac. The
time needed to identify an available aircraft, prepare it for Antarctic
winter conditions, and mobilize it to the Antarctic was known to be
significant. Consequently, NSF directed that preparation of the
aircraft begin immediately, along with a full assessment of risks, in
parallel with initial planning. The company only accepted the
mission after their completion of a thorough risk assessment that
was reviewed and approved by DOI and NSF.
NSF contacted the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) to request support
at Rothera Station. Rothera would be the main base of operation for
aircraft configuration to skis and wheels, refuel, and search and
rescue support. BAS immediately affirmed their ability to support.
The Argentinian (IAA), Australian (AAD), Chilean (INACH), and
New Zealand (Ant NZ) Antarctic Programs, the Council of Managers
of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), the Chilean and New
Zealand Rescue Coordination Centers (RCC) and relevant embassies
were quickly contacted by NSF for situational awareness or for
potential requests for support. Updates were regularly provided to
these groups as the mission evolved.
During the planning and aircraft mobilization, the primary patient’s
condition created a medical concern that the patient might only
tolerate a single flight in an unpressurized aircraft. A contingency
plan was developed to fly the patient from the South Pole to
McMurdo Station on an unpressurized Twin Otter aircraft and
transfer to an aircraft that could maintain a sea level cabin altitude
for a flight to New Zealand. NSF requested and received support
from AAD for their program’s contracted Airbus 319 and a medical
support team. Ant NZ was asked to query the Royal New Zealand
Air Force (RNZAF) for C-130 emergency backup support and the
RNZAF promptly offered support. The U.S. Air Force monitored the
situation and was
ready to respond with their C-17 aircraft. The Royal Australian Air
Force also offered assistance with their C-17 aircraft, if needed.
Daily meetings began on 11 June via teleconference. All
participating managers from the national Antarctic programs and
contract support organizations coordinated urgent activities,
contingency options, and logistics support. Weather and
temperature forecasts were vital to the medevac’s safe execution as
this mid-winter evacuation was nearing the safe operating limits of
the Twin Otter. SPAWAR (the U.S. Navy’s Space and Naval Warfare
Systems Command), which provides year round support to the
USAP for air traffic control and meteorology, developed an interface
with the BAS weather forecasters for an enhanced weather outlook
for the medevac. SPAWAR also stood up their remote operations
facility for 24x7 support to the enroute aircraft. Search and Rescue
plans were developed throughout the period and alternate landing
sites on the Antarctic Peninsula were alerted to the pending
mission.
Development of comprehensive communications plans (for the
mission and in case of an aircraft emergency) was vital to the
success of the operation, as was a clear designation of authority for
operational decisions.
By 17 June, the primary patient’s condition improved slightly and
the contingency plan to evacuate through McMurdo Station was
deemed unnecessary. AAD agreed to launch the A-319 aircraft to
McMurdo within 72 hours if the patient’s situation deteriorated.
While off-continent planning and preparation ensued, the South
Pole staff also began preparing for the arrival and support of the
rescue aircraft. This included runway maintenance, preparation/
testing of fire barrels to mark the runway and guide the aircraft,
maintenance checks on ground heaters and the heating of fuel for
the aircraft’s return flight.
On 18 June (nine days after initial notification of the medical
emergency), the KBA Twin Otters arrived in Punta Arenas, Chile
and delayed for two days until Rothera weather improved. Both
aircraft arrived at Rothera on 20 June, and the medevac aircraft
flew to the South Pole on 21 June. The second aircraft maintained a
Search and Rescue posture at Rothera until the primary aircraft
returned to Rothera from the South Pole on 22 June. At that point,
the standby aircraft flew to Punta Arenas with the patients and
medical support.
Medical Assistance
The South Pole Station doctor consulted with the contractor’s Chief
Medical Director who accessed the extensive network of University
of Texas Medical Branch. NSF’s Chief Medical Officer provided an
independent assessment as well. Treatment strategies, within the
Station’s equipment and pharmaceutical capabilities, were
attempted in response to the results of several suggested tests. ASC
contracted a medical technician for patient support on the medevac
aircraft and a paramedic/mountaineer for the support aircraft, both
of whom had previous USAP experience. Both of these U.S. based
medical support personnel joined the Twin Otters in Punta Arenas.
Appropriate communications were also coordinated between
medical experts in the USAP and Rothera Station as well as with the
patients’ employer and families.
Upon return to Punta Arenas, the patients were transferred to the
local hospital for assessment. By 23 June, both patients returned to
the U.S. on commercial aircraft for further treatment and
monitoring.
Observation and Lessons Learned
The USAP had previously executed South Pole medevacs in April
2001 and Aug 2002. The well-documented reports and lessons
learned from those missions were vital to the preparation and safe
execution of this medevac, as were the experiences of NSF and
contractor staff who had been involved in those events.
The internet and social media platforms (Facebook, Twitter, etc.)
provided new opportunities to share information but also raised the
risk that sensitive medical information might become public. NSF
was pleased with respect shown by the South Pole Station’s staff
and all mission participants in respecting the patients’ privacy
throughout this event. NSF was able to provide timely updates via
Twitter and Facebook, which helped to supply factual information
to the considerable media interest in the event around the world.
And as for official media efforts, besides being covered by standard
news outlets, the activity on the NSF
Polar Programs Facebook account grew 500% from previous weeks.
(https://www.facebook.com/Division-of-Polar-Programs-National-
Science-Foundation-1392901317615113/)
The smooth execution of this medical evacuation was only possible
through the close coordination of organizations within the USAP as
well as the close coordination with and support from several other
National Antarctic Programs. Program to program support during
emergencies is facilitated through ready availability of contact
information and personal familiarity with counterparts. COMNAP
serves an important role in promoting the development and
sustaining of strong relationships among national Antarctic
programs.
