Antarctic cooperation between Romania and Korea 2015-2017
Antarctic cooperation between Romania and Korea 2015-2017
Information Paper is submitted by Romania under agenda item 15,
“Science Issues, Scientific Cooperation and Facilitation”.
Summary
Romania, through this IP, presents the development of the
Cooperation between Romania and the Republic of Korea,
represented by the National Institute of Research and Development
for Biological Sciences (NIRDBS) and the Korea Polar Research
Institute (KOPRI). This cooperation started in 2015 and was
strengthened in 2016, when KOPRI Antarctic Station King Sejong
hosted the Romanian Research Scientific Expeditions (ROICE) with
Governmental support, in Antarctica.
ROICE 2015 and ROICE 2016 were conducted with the purpose to
investigate the Antarctic ecosystems by studying the microbial
communities from different habitats, in order to identify and
characterize their specific microcosms. Equally, they aim to study
the effects and adaptations of organisms in extreme environments.
Additionally, during the 2016 fieldwork season, the isotopic
composition of waters in the southern peninsulas of the King
George Island was analyzed.
Introduction
The National Institute of Research and Development for Biological
Sciences is an important research life science institute in Romania,
which promotes fundamental and applied research. Its mission is to
excel in life sciences research, through integrated research
approaches in Biological Sciences and, in collaboration with
Romanian and international partners, to understand the life
processes and solve various issues regarding health, food, society
and environment.
The Arctic and Antarctic Research Department was established with
the mission to strengthen the research area of the Environment and
Biodiversity pillar from NIRDBS and to contribute to the
development of polar research through a specialized domain.
The authorized representative of the National Institute of Research
and Development for Biological Science is involved in national and
international Antarctic bodies. Dr. Manuela Elisabeta Sidoroff, as
Vice-President of the National Commission for Antarctic Research
(NCAR) established within Romanian Academy, the representative
scientific organism of Romania in the Antarctic Treaty System, is
now the Romanian ATCM Contact Point responsible by the deal
with scientific data. Also, the leader of ROICE teams, Dr. Cristina
Purcarea, is the Scientific Secretary of NCAR, and she is the
Romanian delegate to SCAR.
During previous Antarctic Treaty System Meetings attendance,
NIRDBS identify partners to collaborate on scientific and logistic
grounds. Thereby, NIRDBS initiated and developed a partnership
with KOPRI, based on the Scientific Priorities of SCAR and the
ATCM/CEP Recommendations, especially the recommendation of
the clauses in the 73rd paragraph ACTM XXIX final report.
Executive Summary
The National Institute of Research and Development for Biological
Sciences and the Korea Polar Research Institute signed the
Framework Agreement for a 5 (five) years period that allowed
researchers from our institute to benefit of the KOPRI facilities. The
Framework Agreement aims to develop close cooperative
relationships in Polar sciences, between the two parties, in both
scientific and logistic directions, in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty
and that of the Madrid Protocol.
Based on scientific partnership between the National Institute of
Research and Development for Biological Sciences, Arctic and
Antarctic Research Department, and Korea Polar Research Institute
for the period 2015-
2020, there were organized two scientific expeditions ROICE 2015 -
ROICE 2016, in King George Island, West Antarctica.
These expeditions took place during 03 – 23 February 2015/2016.
The members of the ROICE - Romanian Scientific Expeditions in
Antarctica are scientific researchers specialized in molecular
microbiology of extremophiles, human biology and also in geology.
The team of the first expedition was formed of three researchers.
They initiated a direction of Antarctic research in partnership with
Korean researchers during ROICE 2015 expedition, which was
complemented with two other research directions (human biology
and geology) during the following year expedition (ROICE 2016),
with the participation of five Romanian researchers.
In this cooperation, both the KOPRI Division of Polar Life Sciences
and Division of Polar Logistic assured the scientific and logistical
assistance for the research team of NIRDBS.
The initiation and development of the partnership between NIRDBS
and KOPRI were possible due to the direct involvement of Dr.
Yeadong Kim, former President of KOPRI, Dr. Ho-Il Yoon, current
President of KOPRI, and Dr. Hyoung Chul Shin, Head of the
Department of International Cooperation.
Scientific Cooperation
Considering the recognized vulnerability of Antarctic environments
to climate change and pollution, and the increased interest in
psychrophilic and psychrotolerant microorganisms due to their
important biotechnological potential, our research team was
interested in continuing the research directions started in the ROICE
2015 expedition. For a comprehensive evaluation of the effect of
climate change on the glacier retreat and the transfer of airborne
microorganisms in Antarctic habitats, a multiannual investigation is
essential. Also it was studied the climate effects on the expedition
members. These studies were started in the first ROICE expedition,
ROICE 2015 and continued and improved for the ROICE 2016 team.
The ROICE 2016 continued the major objectives described in the
ROICE 2015 expedition, namely:
Investigating the impact of glacier retreat on perennial ice-
embedded microbial communities.
Investigating the snow microbial diversity as a possible indicator of
an air transfer of microorganisms and pollutant agents.
Isolation and characterization of cold-adapted enzymes.
Study of the effects and adaptation of the human body to extreme
conditions.
In addition, isotopic investigation of the various water reservoirs in
the southern peninsulas of the King George Island was initiated in
order to determine the timing of groundwater and lake recharge
and streamflow generation.
The research activity focused on:
Spatial and temporal variation of microcosms from glacier ice and
forefield from King George Island in relation with their
physicochemical parameters. Re-sampling perennial ice and glacier
forefield for a comparative analysis of microbial diversity and
metabolism. A SSU rDNA metabarcoding approach will be used.
Resilience of subglacial water flow microcosms from King George
Island: spatial and temporal variations of the structural and
functional microbial diversity of underglacier streams. Re-sampling
subglacial water flowpaths at the interface permafrost/glacier on
King George Island for structural and functional diversity analyses
based on SSU rRNA and functional genes. Stable isotope (O and H)
investigation in order to identify its origin and flow history.
Dynamics of snow-embedded microcosm on King George Island. Re-
sampling snow from previously studied areas. A Next Generation
Sequencing approach will be undertaken, together with in silico
predictions of metabolic activity and quantification of target
functional genes.
Identification of novel sampling points for projects 1-3.
Screening of the permafrost and ice microbiota from King George
Island for cold-adapted enzymes for biotechnological applications.
Structure-function relationship in pyrimidine and arginine
biosynthetic extremozymes from KOPRI microbial library isolated
from King George Island.
Investigating the adaptation of the human body to extreme
environmental conditions, where these weather parameters (wind
speed, air pressure, air temperature, relative humidity, solar
radiation) influence the human red blood cells viability.
Collaborative study with the KOPRI research team. Comparative
flow cytometry studies with new criteria of haematolgcial
parameters (the study was conducted on human erytrocytes). The
human erythrocytes were studied before and after the two
expeditions, and the results were compared. We analyzed the shape,
size and number of erythrocytes and their viability by measuring
the intracellular esterase activity with Calcein-AM.
Stable isotope (O and H) analyses of the snow, ice, permafrost, lake
and river waters in King George Island.
The scientific support was provided by the KOPRI research team
from King Sejong Station, King George Island, NW Antarctica, with
field trip and laboratory logistics for sampling and preliminary
analyses, and by organizing scientific seminars to identify areas of
joint research. NIRDSB expresses all the gratitude to Dr. Soon Gyu
Hong, Principal Investigator at King Sejong Station and to Dr. Ok-
Sun Kim, Senior Research Scientist at KOPRI. Personal at
Bellingshausen and Carlini Stations helped with water sampling.
Results
Identification and morphological description of cyanobacteria and
algae in the microbial communities developed on snow.
Until now, 14 taxa were identified: 2 cyanobacteria (Aphanothece
sp. and Phormidium autumnale) and 12 green algae. The taxa were
identified in live or fixed samples. The algal communitites are
dominated by green algae: Chlamydomonas nivalis, Chloromonas
sp., Raphidonema nivalis, Koliella sp., Stichococcus bacillaris and
Klebshormidium sp. The identification and morphological
description will be continued by repeated examinations of
enrichment cultures performed on different growth media.
For most of the taxa that are identified or in the course of
identification a good iconography was obtained (approx. 1400
digital photographs).
An elemental analysis (EDX) was also performed that showed two
main types of particles: aluminosilicates and mixed particles
(aluminosilicates with organic residues).
Isolation of cryophilic and cryotolerant bacterial strains for future
biotechnological applications.
Isolation of different bacterial strains from snow and soil were
carried out on solid R2A medium. From each sample, 100 µl were
spread onto the surface of the plate. Pure strains were isolated
based on distinctive colony morphology (shape, size pigmentation).
A total of 35 pure strains were obtained: 3 from soil and 32 from
filtered snow.
Bacterial colonies from the ice, subglacial water and soil samples
cultivated on R2A medium at different temperatures were isolated
and identified by 16S rRNA gene PCR amplification and sequencing.
Morphological characterization of isolates was carried out by
optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
Investigation of microbial diversity from glacier ice, snow and
underglacier streams, by 16S rDNA and ITS MiSEq Illumina
sequencing
The microbial biodiversity from snow samples was investigated by a
metagenomic approach using the Next Generation Sequencing
method in collaboration with the Microbial Diversity laboratory
from the Norwegian University of Life Sciences.
DNA from samples of ice and subglacial water, the structural
diversity of prokaryotic microbial communities (bacteria and
archaea) and eukaryotes (fungi) is being determined by the
metagenomic analysis trough sequencing using Illumina MiSeq
(Next-Generation Sequencing) of the gene 16S rRNA, respectively
ITS2 of 93 samples, in cooperation with Korean partners (Dr. Soon
Gyu Hong - Kopriva).
Geochemical analyses of subglacial ice and water samples was
carried out in order to correlate the diversity of the microbiomes
habitats corresponding to the composition of the carbon / nitrogen
and trace element substrate.
Investigation of the influence of ecological conditions from
Antarctica on human erythrocytes viability provided preliminary
results on understanding adaptation mechanisms at cellular level
under extreme conditions, with possible future applications to
improve the life and health in general.
The adaptation to living conditions in Antarctica and the impact of
stress conditions on hematology parameters, particularly on the
biology of the human erythrocyte, at morphological, physiological
and molecular level, is under investigation, for practical
applications in blood storage by cryopreservation, cold storage at
4°C, pressure, etc.
Interactions between surface waters in King George Island,
Antarctica – a stable isotope perspective
It was the first study of the isotopic composition of surface waters
in the southern peninsulas (Barton, Fildes, Weaver and Potter) of
King George Island, Antarctica. It has collected > 200 samples of
snow and snowmelt, water (lake, river and spring), ice (glacier ice
and permafrost) from the four peninsulas in February 2016 and
analysed them for their oxygen and hydrogen stable isotopic
composition.
Conferences
European Geosciences Union General Assembly, Vienna, April
23-28, 2017, “Interactions between surface waters in King George
Island, Antarctica – a stable isotope perspective”, Perșoiu, A.,
Bădăluță, C.
First APECS Balkan Meeting, Kardzhali, Bulgaria, 1-2 October 2016,
”Microbial diversity of glacial habitats from King George Island
(NW Antarctica)” Corina Itcus
SCAR Open Science Conference 2016 – Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
21-31 August
“Microbial community structure in different snow types from King
George Island, Antarctica”, Cecilia Chiriac, Corina Ițcuș, Cristina
Purcărea, Nicolae Dragoș, Knut Rudi, Sorin Marius Avramescu, Irina
Fierascu, Lucian Barbu-Tudoran, Iris Tusa, Manuela E. Sidoroff,
Cristian Coman
“Spatial Diversity of Glacier Ice Bacteria from King George Island
(NW Antarctica)”, Corina Itcus, Cristian Coman, Constantin Marin,
Tue Kjærgaard Nielsen, Lars Hansen, Iris Tusa, Manuela E. Sidoroff,
Cristina Purcarea
“Influence of ecological conditions from Antarctica on human
erythrocytes viability. Preliminary report” Iris Tusa, Manuela
Sidoroff, Daniela Bratosin
IUBMB “STANDARD” - Modern Biotechnologies in Sustainable
Development of the Danube Delta, Murighiol, Tulcea, Romania
“Bacterial diversity in glaciers from King George Island, Antarctica”
31 May – 2 June, 2016, Iţcuş C, Marin C, Coman C, Tuşa IM,
Sidoroff ME, Purcărea C
International Symposium of the “Young Researchers in
BioSciences”, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 22-26 July 2015 “Screening of
bacterial diversity on glaciers from King George Island, Antarctica”,
Itcus C., Coman, C.,Tusa, I.M., Sidoroff, E.M., Purcarea, C.
APECS World Summit 2015 “The Future of Polar Research” Sofia,
Bulgaria, June 6-8, Itcus, C.
The article "ROICE 2015 Romanians reconquered Antarctica" - The
science and technology magazine - number 45, April 2015 -
interview with Dr. Manuela Sidoroff
Dr. Cristina Purcarea, the scientific leader of ROICE expeditions,
was elected member of the board of the group SCAR Antarctic
Peninsula Linking Science (LAPES) created in 2016 and coordinated
by Dr. Soon Gyu Hong (KOPRI) and Dr. Angelica Casanova - Katny
(INACH). Both Dr. Purcarea and Dr. Cristian Coman are members of
this SCAR work group.
The two Romanian researchers are also members of another SCAR
workgroup created in 2016 that is focused on studying The stability
and reconstruction of ecological ecosystems Antarctic following the
action factors, coordinated by Charles Lee (U of Waikato, NZ), Chun
Wie Chong (International Medical U, Malaysia) Jeff Bowman - Earth
Observatory, USA,.
Based on their Antarctic research expertise, two of the ROICE team
members, Dr. Cristina Purcarea, and Dr. Cristian Coman, recently
obtained financing from the Romanian Ministry of Research and
Innovation for coordinating research projects, as follows:
Experimental Demonstration Project PN-III-P2-2.1-PED-2016-0116
"Novel aldehyde dehydrogenase from Antarctic bacterium as highly
efficient catalyst for low temperature biosensing and
biotechnologies - COLDSENSOR" (2017-2018) – Project director -
Dr. Cristina Purcarea
Experimental Demonstration Project PN-III-P2-2.1-PED-2016-1170
“Antarctic bacteria against human pathogens: a quest for new
antimicrobial compounds - AntarcticPharma” (2017-2018) – Project
director – Dr. Cristian Coman
Logistic Cooperation
Logistics cooperation refers at:
Logistic assistance in preparing the expeditions in accordance with
the KOPRI procedures.
Logistic support in the preparation phase of the expedition
regarding the transport of the Romanian team and the equipment to
be transported for field trips and sampling.
Transfer of the Romanian expedition team members from Punta
Arenas, Chile to Antarctica and return through the travel agency
responsible for the KOPRI scientists and foreign visitors.
Providing accommodation and daily meals for the Romanian
researchers in King Sejong Station.
Providing a laboratory infrastructure at KOPRI’s station for
sampling and partial processing of biological material.
Provide logistical support for field sampling from various locations
and habitats of King George Island, Antarctica (e.g., boat
transportation to the neighboring peninsulas).
Logistic support on environmental protection in ASPA No. 171, in 6
ASPAs and 1 ASMA.
Logistic support for the health and safety of the Romanian team
assured by the presence of a medical doctor in the King Sejong
Station that monitored the team members’ vital functions.
NIRDBS ensures the research facilities for processing the samples
from Antarctica and for realising subsequent research and
publishing the results.
Conclusion
Cooperation between the Romanian National Institute of Research&
Development for Biological Science and the Korea Polar Research
Institute contributes to the participation of Romanian scientists to
Antarctic research, promoting interactions with international
working groups focused on Polar science, in view of answering
highly sensitive questions on the dynamics of Antarctic ecosystems.
Also strong ties between Romanian and Korean researchers leading
to high lever joint researches which will contribute to knowledge of
the development of the mechanisms polar, as well as increasing
visibility of the researchers and ours institute.
