





Clean-up of Scientific Equipment and Infrastructure from Mt. Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica








Clean-up of Scientific Equipment and Infrastructure from Mt. Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Introduction
Mount Erebus is the most active volcano in Antarctica.  It features a unique lava lake that occasionally ejects volcanic bombs to heights of over 500 m.  The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) has been conducting research on Mt. Erebus since the 1970’s.  Studies included the petrology and geophysics of the volcano; its eruptive history; and activity of the lava lake.  The Mt. Erebus Volcano Observatory (MEVO), supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF), was established in the early 1990’s to allow coordinated study and continuous surveillance of the volcano.  The MEVO project included geophysical, geodetic, and geochemical observations; measurements of seismicity, infrasound, and gas emissions; and deformation using GPS observations of the volcano. 
To facilitate work on the volcano, the USAP built and maintained two field camps, Lower Erebus Hut (LEH) at 3400 m and Upper Erebus Hut (UEH) at 3612 m, as well as an acclimatization camp on Fang Glacier.  Over the course of the MEVO project, a significant number of instrumented monitoring stations were established on the flanks and summit of the volcano along with associated cabling, batteries, and solar panels. 
Anticipating the final field season for the current MEVO project, USAP staff worked with the principal investigator to establish a plan to remove unnecessary scientific infrastructure from the flanks of the volcano in accordance with the requirements of Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  The MEVO retrograde plan included coordination with NSF-funded seismic and geodetic research support organizations.  The NSF decided to transfer ownership of some of the MEVO equipment that was in good working order to these organizations, in order to continue some of the long-term volcano data collection efforts.  In addition, a storm destroyed the UEH in late 2015, necessitating an effort to collect and remove the debris.
Summary of Removal Activities
Clean-up efforts on Mt. Erebus during the 2016/2017 season focused on the removal of cabling and batteries associated with monitoring stations from the flanks of the volcano by MEVO project personnel.  A large, Kevlar-reinforced cable that encircles the crater rim, buried under rocks and ice, was left in place.  The cable was inspected, determined to be of good integrity, and could be of use to future science projects.  Additionally, an Automated Weather Station (AWS) tower remains in place, in anticipation of future use, and has been recorded in the USAP remotely deployed equipment database.  All MEVO equipment not transferred to new owners and science projects was removed and transported by helicopter sling load back to McMurdo Station.  USAP environmental engineering staff visited the MEVO sites after the month-long retrograde effort to ensure that all infrastructure was removed and that sites were properly remediated (Figure 1).
Following the storm that destroyed the UEH, USAP personnel collected the associated debris and created two wood debris piles during the 2015/2016 season.  This debris was removed by helicopter sling load back to McMurdo Station for processing in 2016/2017.  USAP staff conducted a final clean-up effort at the UEH site, removing a nearby survival cache, as well as remaining bamboo poles, stakes, cabling, and wood.  A total of approximately 1700 lbs. of material was removed from the UEH site. The USAP will continue to monitor the area and remove additional debris as it is identified.
All retrograded material was processed in McMurdo Station for reuse or transport back to the United States for recycling or disposal.  Of the 203 batteries removed from Mt. Erebus, 102 were still in good condition and will be reused to store solar power generated at USAP field sites around the continent (Figure 2).  The remaining 101 batteries will be properly disposed of in the United States.
In total, 23 sling loads of science equipment and retrograde were removed from Mt. Erebus, including three sling loads of debris from the UEH.  The equipment and debris removed included 3.5 km of cable, 700 lbs. of ferrous metal, 800 lbs. of non-ferrous metal, and 1,100 lbs. of wood (Figure 3).
Lessons Learned
A number of lessons were learned through the clean-up of these sites on Mt. Erebus which can lead to improved clean-up and remediation efforts in the future.  These include:
    1. Retrograde and remediation of long-term, large-scale research project work well when planned in advance for the project’s final field season.  The principal investigator was able to formulate a field team that included those whose primary responsibility was clean-up while a small team collected final data points.
    2. While checking all batteries and retrograde material for reuse suitability is a time consuming effort, overall the processing results in savings through reuse of equipment and reduced waste shipment and handling costs.
    3. For field-deployed instrumentation involved in long-term monitoring that is slated for removal, it can be useful, and in some cases scientifically critical, to identify appropriate parties to assume ownership of the equipment and responsibility for its continuing data collection, maintenance and ultimate retrograde.   

Figure 1 – Before (a) and after (b) removal of the seismic monitoring station at Abbott Peak on Mt. Erebus.  Minimal monitoring equipment remained at the site (b).
a 
b 

Figure 2 – Batteries and solar panels removed from Mt. Erebus packaged for storage and reuse at other USAP field sites.


Figure 3 – Some of the 3.5 km of cable and wire removed from Mt. Erebus.


