





The International Oil Pollution Compensation Funds








The International Oil Pollution Compensation Funds
Aim of document:  To provide an overview of the functioning of the IOPC Funds to facilitate a comparison with the mechanism envisaged under Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: ‘Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies’.


    1. Background information

        1.1 The International Oil Pollution Compensation Funds (IOPC Funds) provide financial compensation for oil pollution damage that occurs in its Member States, resulting from spills of persistent oil from tankers.

        1.2 During the late 1960s, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) adopted two international treaties that organised the sharing of the cost of oil spill incidents at sea between the shipowner and the oil receivers and established the first International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund.   This international liability and compensation regime evolved over time and the current IOPC Funds were established through the entry into force of:

    • The 1992 Civil Liability Convention (1992 CLC) - This provides a first tier of compensation which is paid by the owner of a ship which causes pollution damage.
    • The 1992 Fund Convention - provides a second tier of compensation which is financed by receivers of oil in 1992 Fund Member States after sea transport (see below); and
    • The 2003 Supplementary Fund Protocol - Provides an extra layer of compensation to Supplementary Fund Member States. 

        1.3 Today, safer shipping means fewer incidents, however the risk of a major spill remains with some 1 800 million tonnes of oil transported by sea every year.  This risk has led to some 114 States opting to join the 1992 Fund and 31 of those opting to join the Supplementary Fund also.  A full list of Member States is set out at Annex I.

        1.4 Since their establishment, the 1992 Fund and the preceding 1971 Fund have been involved in 150 incidents of varying sizes all over the world. No incidents have occurred so far which have involved or are likely to involve the Supplementary Fund. 

    2. Functioning of the IOPC Funds – How does the system work?

        2.1 The 1992 Civil Liability Convention provides a first tier of compensation which is paid by the owner of a ship which causes pollution damage. 

        2.2 Under the 1992 Civil Liability Convention, the shipowner has strict liability for any pollution damage caused by the oil, i.e. the owner is liable even if there was no fault on the part of the ship or its crew.  However, the shipowner can normally limit its financial liability to an amount that is determined by the tonnage of the ship.  This amount is guaranteed by the shipowner’s liability insurer.

        2.3 The 1992 Fund Convention provides a second tier of compensation which is financed by receivers of oil in 1992 Fund Member States after sea transport.  An extra layer of compensation is available to Supplementary Fund Member States. 

        2.4 The IOPC Funds are funded by the oil industry and managed by Governments.  The governing bodies of the organisations, consisting of each Fund’s Member States, meet twice per year to make decisions on compensation payments, policy matters and budgetary matters, including the amounts to levy in contributions.  The Secretariat is based in London and comprises 26 staff members of various nationalities and expertise. Further details regarding the different areas of the Funds’ structure and its functioning are set out in section 5 below.

    3. Geographical coverage

        3.1 As at 22 April 2017, the 1992 Fund has 114 Member States and the Supplementary Fund has 31 Member States.

        3.2 Article 3 of the 1992 Fund Convention states that:
This Convention shall apply exclusively:

(a)	to pollution damage caused:

(i)	in the territory, including the territorial sea, of a Contracting State, and 

(ii)	in the exclusive economic zone of a Contracting State, established in accordance with international law, or, if a Contracting State has not established such a zone, in an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea of that State determined by that State in accordance with international law and extending not more than 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of its territorial sea is measured;

(b)	to preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or minimize such damage.

    4. Mission of the IOPC Funds: Compensation and Claims Management

        4.1 To be entitled to compensation from the IOPC Funds, the pollution damage must result in an actual and quantifiable economic loss. The claimant must be able to show the amount of their loss or damage by producing accounting records or other appropriate evidence. 

        4.2 An oil pollution incident can generally give rise to claims for five types of pollution damage:
    • Property damage
    • Costs of clean-up operations at sea and on shore 
    • Economic losses by fishermen or those engaged in mariculture 
    • Economic losses in the tourism sector 
    • Costs for reinstatement of the environment 
        4.3 Articles I.6 and I.7 of the 1992 CLC state that:

    6 “Pollution damage” means: 
        (a) loss or damage caused outside the ship by contamination resulting from the escape or discharge of oil from the ship, wherever such escape or discharge may occur, provided that compensation for impairment of the environment other than loss of profit from such impairment shall be limited to costs of reasonable measures of reinstatement actually undertaken or to be undertaken; 

        (b) the costs of preventive measures and further loss or damage caused by preventive measures. 

    7 “Preventive measures” means any reasonable measures taken by any person after an incident has occurred to prevent or minimize pollution damage. 

        4.4 ‘Preventive Measures’ usually applies to measures taken in responding to a spill and clean-up operations but may include salvage operations undertaken with the specific purpose of preventing or minimising the loss of oil from a damaged tanker. The costs of repairing damage caused by clean-up operations may also be eligible for compensation, for example, roads or other access points damaged by traffic engaged in clean-up operations. Expenses for preventive measures may be recoverable even if no spill occurs provided that there was a grave and imminent threat of pollution damage.

        4.5 Compensation is also payable for the costs of reasonable reinstatement measures aimed at accelerating natural recovery of environmental damage.  Contributions may be made to the costs of post-spill studies provided that they relate to damage which falls within the definition of pollution damage under the Conventions, including studies to establish the nature and extent of environmental damage caused by an oil spill and to determine whether or not reinstatement measures are necessary and feasible.

        4.6 Compensation is paid for reasonable measures taken to restore the environment following pollution damage.  Compensation is not however paid for damages of a punitive nature on the basis of the degree of fault of the wrong-doer.

        4.7 Claims are assessed according to criteria established by the Governments of Member States. These criteria, which also apply to claims against the Supplementary Fund, are set out in the 1992 Fund’s Claims Manual, which is a practical guide on how to present claims for compensation. 

        4.8 The Funds, normally in cooperation with the shipowner’s insurer, usually appoint experts to monitor clean-up operations, to investigate the technical merits of claims and to make independent assessments of the losses. 

        4.9 The Secretariat strives to provide prompt payment of compensation to victims of oil pollution damage. In the great majority of cases, claims are settled out of court. The Director has the authority to settle claims and pay compensation up to predetermined levels. However, in the event of a 1992 Fund incident occurring involving larger claims or where a specific claim were to give rise to a question of principle which had not previously been decided by the 1992 Fund Member States, the Director would need approval from the 1992 Fund Executive Committee. In addition, the legal proceedings which arise from such cases where it has not been possible to reach an out of court settlement, can take several years to resolve. The daily work of the Secretariat therefore focuses both on processing claims relating to recent incidents and also finding resolutions to claims or outstanding issues relating to incidents which may have occurred several years before.

        4.10 Under the 1992 Conventions, the Funds are obliged to ensure that all claimants are given equal treatment so if the total amount of the established losses exceeds the total amount of compensation available under the Civil Liability and Fund Conventions, each claimant will receive the same proportion of the loss. When there is a risk that this situation will arise, the Funds may have to restrict compensation payments to a percentage of the losses to ensure that all claimants are given equal treatment. The payment level may increase at a later stage if the uncertainty about the total amount of the established losses is reduced. One important effect of the establishment of the Supplementary Fund is that, in practically all cases, it should be possible from the outset to pay compensation for pollution damage in Supplementary Fund Member States at 100% of the amount of damage agreed between the Fund and the claimant.

    5. Administration of the IOPC Funds

Financial administration
        5.1 The General Funds cover the administration expenses of the respective Funds, including the costs of running the Secretariat and, in respect of the 1992 Fund, for compensation payments and claims-related expenditure, up to a maximum amount of 4 million SDR per incident.  Separate Major Claims Funds are established for incidents for which the total amounts payable exceed those amounts. A Claims Fund is established for any incident for which the Supplementary Fund has to pay compensation. Since there have been no incidents involving the Supplementary Fund, no Claims Funds have been established. 

Oil reporting and contributions
        5.2 The IOPC Funds are financed by contributions levied on any entity that received in the relevant calendar year more than 150 000 tonnes of contributing oil in ports or terminal installations in a Member State, after carriage by sea. Contributions are paid by those entities (known as ‘contributors’) directly to the Funds.  The list of contributing oil is set out at Annex II.

        5.3 Governments of Member States are obliged to report annually to the Secretariat the quantities of oil received by individual contributors. These quantities are used as the basis of the levy, calculated to provide monies to administer the Funds and to pay claims approved by the governing bodies.  Member States do not have to pay contributions to the Funds.

        5.4 Contributions are calculated on the basis of the quantities of contributing oil received in the year preceding that in which the incident occurred, if the State was a Member of the relevant IOPC Fund at the time of the incident.


Secretariat
        5.5 The 1992 Fund and the Supplementary Fund share a joint Secretariat, based in London. As at 31 December 2016, the Secretariat had 26 staff members. The Director is the chief administrative officer and is responsible for the overall management of the Funds, including maintaining a sound system of internal control that supports the achievement of the Funds’ policies, aims and objectives and safeguards its assets. The system of internal control is based on procedures designed to ensure conformity with the Funds’ Financial Regulations, Internal Regulations and decisions of the respective governing bodies.

        5.6 For the strategic running of the Secretariat, the Director is assisted by a Management Team.  In addition to the staff of the Secretariat, the Funds use external consultants to provide advice on legal and technical matters, as well as on other matters, where necessary. In connection with a number of major incidents, the Funds and the shipowner’s third-party liability insurer jointly establish local claims offices to provide more efficient handling of claims and to assist claimants.

    6. Services to stakeholders 

        6.1 The aim of the Secretariat is primarily to ensure that prompt and equitable payment of compensation to victims of oil pollution damage can be achieved as set out in section 4. However, it also has a responsibility to ensure that the International Liability and Compensation Regime generally functions as intended and endeavours to do so through various means, providing additional services to stakeholders such as:

        ◦ Assistance with the correct implementation of the Conventions;
        ◦ the delivery of national and regional workshops on the international liability and compensation regime, including claims and oil reporting; 
        ◦ the delivery of an annual Short Course for participants nominated by Member States; and
        ◦ the delivery of lectures, presentations and papers at conferences, exhibitions and educational institutions. 

    7. Conclusions

The IOPC Funds are part of an international liability and compensation regime which has proven successful, efficient and invaluable for almost 40 years.  The IOPC Funds have been involved in 150 incidents, has paid some £600 million in compensation and has 114 Member States.  It is undoubtedly a system which works well and the Director and Secretariat of the IOPC Funds would be happy to share their experience and provide further assistance to the ATCM with regards to the establishment of the Fund referred to in Article 12. 


ANNEX I

States Parties to both the
1992 Civil Liability Convention and the
1992 Fund Convention
as at 4 April 2017
(and therefore Members of the 1992 Fund)

114 States for which 1992 Fund Convention is in force
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Australia
Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
China<1>
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Cook Islands
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador 
Estonia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guinea
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Kenya
Kiribati
Latvia
Liberia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malaysia
Maldives
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Monaco
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Niue
Norway
Oman
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Russian Federation
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Tuvalu
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United Republic of Tanzania
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela (Bolivarian     Republic of)


States Parties to the Supplementary Fund Protocol
as at 4 April 2017
(and therefore Members of the Supplementary Fund)

31 States Parties to the Supplementary Fund Protocol
Australia
Barbados
Belgium
Canada
Congo
Croatia
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany 
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Montenegro
Morocco
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Korea
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
United Kingdom



* * *

Annex II

The following list of contributing and non-contributing oil is intended as a guide for contributors.

Contributing Oil
Non-Contributing Oil
Crude Oils

•	All naturally occurring crude oils*
•	Condensate
•	Topped crudes
•	Spiked crudes
•	Reconstituted crudes

Finished Products

•	No4 fuel (ASTM)
•	Navy special fuel
•	Light fuel oil
•	No5 fuel (ASTM) – light
•	Medium fuel oil
•	No5 fuel (ASTM) – heavy
•	Bunker C fuel oil
•	Heavy fuel oil
•	No6 fuel oil (ASTM)
•	Blended fuel oils by viscosity or sulphur content
•	Bituminous emulsions and fuel oil emulsions**

Intermediate or Process Stocks

•	Fuel oil blend stocks
Crude Oils

•	Natural gas liquids
•	Condensate*
•	Casinghead naphtha
•	Natural gasoline
•	Cohasset-panuke

Finished Products

•	LNG and LPG
•	Aviation gasolines - Motor gasoline (petrol, essence)
•	White spirit
•	Kerosene
•	Aviation kerosene - Jet 1 A and No1 fuel (ASTM)
•	Gas oil
•	Heating oil
•	No2 fuel (ASTM) - Lubricating oil
•	Marine diesel

Intermediate or Process Stocks

•	Straight run naphtha
•	Light cracked naphtha
•	Heavy cracked naphtha
•	Platformate
•	Reformate
•	Steam-cracked naphtha
•	Polymers
•	Isomers
•	Alkylates
•	Catalytic cycle oil
•	Reformer feed
•	Steam cracker feed
•	Gas oil blend stocks
•	Catalytic cracker feedstock
•	Visbreaker feedstock
•	Aromatic tar
    • To be considered as ‘non-contributing oil’ if more than 50% by volume distils at a temperature of 340°C and at least 95% by volume distils at a temperature of 370°C, when tested by the ASTM Method D 86/78 or any subsequent revision thereof.
**   Quantity of emulsion received should be reported with no allowance for its water content.


