Romanian Antarctic Education and Outreach Activities during
2015‐2017
Romanian Antarctic Education and Outreach
Activities during 2015‐2017
Information Paper submitted by Romania
Summary
Romania organized and carried out, during 2004–2017, a long
series of Antarctic education and outreach activities, also
considering the Antarctic „tradition” starting with Belgica
Expedition, when the Romanian scientist Emil Racovita was the first
biologist in the world that studied life in Antarctica. Since 2013,
Romania expressed its opinions and proposals on this matter within
ATCM and CEP meetings and some dedicated Intersessional Contact
Groups (ICGs).
Romanian Antarctic Education and Outreach
Activities during 2015‐2017
Participation of Romania in the ATCM - CEP Education and
Outreach works 2013-2017
During 2012-2013, in accordance with Decision 3 (2012), Australia
and Belgium co-convened an intersessional contact group (ICG) to
coordinate the further development of the Multi-Year Strategic
Work Plan, and to collect and compile possible priority issues for
inclusion in the Plan for the ATCM. Australia and Belgium invited
contributions from Consultative Parties and other ATCM
participants. The input received is presented as an attachment to
the “Report of the open-ended intersessional contact group on
further development of a multi-year strategic work plan” (ATCM
XXXVI, WP 31, Agenda item 7).
Romania, in 2013, made some proposals within two questionaries
distributed by the ICG co-conveners in preparation of the
disscussions on the respective Plan within a Workshop on the
Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM,
Brussels, Belgium, 20-21 May 2013, preliminary to the discussions
within ATCM XXXVI, Agenda item 7. Related to the item Antarctic
Treaty System Functioning – Promotion of the Antarctic Treaty
System in the wider public, Romania proposed that, besides the
press conferences, other ways of education and promoting wider
public awareness of the importance of Antarctic issues, from the
point of view of international governance and as a world
patrimony, should be considered. Romania also expressed some
opinions within the Workshop on the Development of a Multi-Year
Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM. The co-chairs (Australia and
Belgium) introduced at ATCM XXXVI, Agenda item 7, the WP 67
“Co-chairs’ Report of the Workshop on the Development of a Multi-
Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM, Brussels, Belgium, 20-21
May 2013”.
Related to the priority theme “Education”, discussed under ATCM
XXXVI, General Matters (CEP Agenda Item 13), Romania and other
several Members supported Portugal, which had stressed the
importance of education and outreach as a potential issue for
discussion at the CEP XVII. The priority of the Education and
Outreach issue had been accordingly elevated (from four to two) in
the CEP Five-Year Work Plan. [ATCM XXXVI Final Report, General
Matters (CEP Agenda Item 13) para (166)]
Romania briefly presented at ATCM XXXVIII, 2015, Sofia, Bulgaria,
within the Workshop on Education and Outreach (May 31, 2015)
the Romanian Antarctic education and outreach activities,
promoting the scientific and environmental information at various
levels, in educational structures and for the decision factors and the
wider public.
Romania expressed at ATCM XXXIX, 2016, Santiago, Chile, Agenda
Item 11, its intent to participate in the Intersessional Contact Group
(ICG) 2016-2017 on Education and Outreach (E&O) proposed by
more Member States and aproved in the ATCM Working Group 2:
Operations, Science and Tourism, Agenda Item
11. [ATCM XXXIX Final Report, para (145) and (148)]. This ICG
continued the activity of ICG 2015-2016, and Bulgaria, Brazil,
Chile, Portugal, the United Kingdom and Spain formed the
Coordination Core-Group. The ICG operates using the online ATCM
Discussion Forum, under the topic ‘ICG on Education and Outreach’.
Participation of Romania in the ATCM ICG on Education and
Outreach, 2016-2017
Romania carried out, during 2015-2017, a series of Antarctic
education and outreach activities, considering some of the ICG E&O
terms of reference, such as: Foster collaboration at both the national
and international level, on Education and Outreach; Share results of
educational and outreach initiatives that demonstrate the work of
Antarctic Treaty Parties in managing the Antarctic Treaty area;
Promote related education and outreach activities by Experts and
Observers, and encourage cooperation with these groups; Monitor
and share information about educational and outreach activities
related to the 25th Madrid Protocol anniversary celebrations
undertaken in 2016. Among the five topics within the Forum,
Romania shared information related to: 25th anniversary of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
Antarctica Day 2016, and Association of Polar Early Career
Scientists (APECS) POLAR WEEK March 2017.
Romania posted on the ATCM Discussion Forum - ICG E&O a report
on the Romanian initiatives and events related to the 25th
anniversary of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty [ATCM 40, Agenda item 11, WP – (DRAFT) Second
report on the Intersessional Contact Group on Education and
Outreach, submitted by ICG Coordination Core-Group]. Romania
celebrated this historical moment for the Antarctic environmental
protection in various academic, institutional and school
environments and the media, as well as by the Antarctica Day
Program, emphasizing the importance of the Protocol of Madrid
and of the CEP activities to implement the Protocol provisions. Most
of this information can be found on the website of the Romanian
Antarctic Operator, the National Commission for Antarctic Research
(NCAR), (Comisia Nationala de Cercetari Antarctice), of the
Romanian Academy. This Commission includes more than 50
persons from different ministries, academies, universities, research
institutes, environmental agencies, schools, libraries, so that any
information disseminated within NCAR could reach many interested
people. For example:
NCAR Note 12.11.2015 - Information on planning the Symposium
to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Environmental Protocol at
ATCM 2016, Santiago, Chile
http://www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CN ... 2-ATCM.pdf
NCAR Note 04.10.2016/Rev.05.10.2016, Report on the 25th
Anniversary of the Protocol on Environmental Protection (updated
16.12.2016)
http://www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CN ... ni2016.pdf
România activated in this ICG by posting on the ATCM Discussion
Forum reports on the E&O activities organized during 2015-2017,
for example within the international programs Antarctica Day and
Polar Week, and by the national program „Another kind of school”,
or the educational program of the „Grigore Antipa” Natural History
Museum, Bucharest, also including interactive conferences on the
Pole areas, for kids and pupils, using theater means („Stories from
the Frozen Land – The South Pole”). Various outreach means were
used, i.e. books, papers, informative leaflets, posters, photograpy
exhibitions, CDs, documentary video and films, interviews in the
media, press conferences.
Romania ran a significant Antarctica Day Program every year, also
since Romania is the only Member State of the Antarctic Treaty that
celebrates its National Day on December 1st, the International
Antarctica Day. Antarctic environmental protection is an important
issue within this program. The 2013-2016 Agendas of these events
can be found on the site of the NCAR, the Romanian National
Antarctic Operator. 
Antarctica Day Program - Session 2016: Comprehensive
Environment Protection in Antarctica
http://www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CN ... ay2016.pdf
Antarctica Day Program - Session 2015: Know and Protect
Antarctica!
http://www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CN ... ay2015.pdf
A book (and CD) on a Romanian expedition to West Antarctica
following the Belgica Expedition route, by Professor Pompiliu
Manea was presented in this program, i.e. “Emil Racovita and his
followers – towards
the South Pole” (MEDIAMIRA Ed. 2015, ISBN
978-973-713-317-5). The same expedition enabled a Romanian
team of Visual Arts Foundation, (Fundatia Arte Vizuale) to make a
documentary film entitled “The Explorer” on the life and scientific
activity of the re-known scientist Emil Racovita, a member in
Belgica Expedition and the founder of bio-speleology. This film (in
Romanian and English) is a result of a joint Belgium-Romanian
project. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iVajWJkMhco
The dedicated Department for Antarctic and Arctic Research of the
R&D National Institute of Biological Sciences, under the Romanian
Ministry of Research and Innovation, organized in 2015 and 2016
two Antarctic expeditions in cooperation with Republic of Korea,
and disseminated the respective information in a session of
International Polar Week – March 2015, including a Press
Conference „ROICE Expedition 2015 came home”. http://
www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CN ... en2015.htm
All the relevant information can be found on the webpage of NCAR
on the Romanian Academy website:
http://www.acad.ro/academia2002/acadrom/pag_comisii.htm
http://www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CN ... i_CNCA.htm
http://www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CN ... NCA_EO.htm
Romania, by its national Antarctic operator NCAR, carried out its
Polar Week Spring 2017 program,
as posted on the NCAR website: http://www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/
Comisia-CNCA/doc-
EducationOutreach/01vProgramActivitatiCNCASaptamanaPolaraInt2017.pd
This Polar Week program, on People of the Poles: Human Use and
Appreciation of Earth's Polar Regions, included as follows:
1. APECS International Photo Contest, (two APECS Romania
members)
2. Romanian explorers and researchers in polar regions – outreach-
purpose brochure available online
3. Romanians with sports performances at the North and/or South
Pole: explorers, climbers and marathon performers - paper
distributed by e-mail within NCAR
4. RONARE – Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition
2017. Romanian-Argentine relationships in the Extreme South of
the Earth (1886-2017) - ppt presentation by RONARE participants,
at the Virology Institute of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest
5. Scientific Seminary dedicated to International Polar Week, Spring
2017, and to the 70th commemoration of the death of the re-known
Romanian scientist Emil Racoviță (including watching the
documentary film The Explorer). Faculty of Natural and
Agricultural Sciences, „Ovidius” University, Constanţa, Romania
6. The National Program „Another kind of school”, on the theme
„Discover Antarctica with RONARE 2006/2017 expeditioners: Dr.
Florica Topârceanu, Eng. Andreea Radu, Master student, and
Captain Marian Săvulescu, at the Odobleja High school, Bucharest.
Other Romanian education and outreach activities
Two syntheses (in English) of the education and outreach activities
carried out in Romania in the last ten years were communicated (as
posters) within the SCAR OSC Meetings, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
2016, Session 36 - Antarctic education, outreach and training, i.e.:
“Communicating Antarctic scientific and environmental information
to the scientific community and decision factors” and “Valorisation
of national and international polar E&O programs to disseminate
Antarctic information”.
http://www.acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CN ... SC2016.pdf
A representative of APECS Romania participated in the First APECS
Balkan Meeting in Kardjali, Bulgaria, in October 2016. The forum
was attended by representatives of APECS Bulgaria, APECS Turkey,
APECS Romania (via Skype), APECS International (via Skype),
Bulgarian Antarctic Institute, Istanbul Technical University Polar
Research Center, National Polar Research Center of Sofia
University, Committee for Foreign Affairs – National Assembly of
the Republic of Bulgaria and Municipality of Kardjali. The
participants presented their professional experience and scientific
results from various research projects and fields in Antarctica and
Southern Ocean. (ATCM 40, 2017, Agenda item 11, 15; IP 138-
Polar Scientific and Outreach Cooperation Between Bulgaria and
Turkey, submitted by by Bulgaria and Turkey).
The Romanian Embassy in Canberra organized, in 2015-2017
several events to disseminate the Romanian Antarctic tradition and
to increase the visibility of Romanian Antarctic scientific research.
These events
addressed the Romanian Community in Australia and the New
Zealand, and some important local structures which could be
interested in a cooperation with Romania in the Antarctic field.
Thus, on June 15-16, 2015, the Romanian Embassy in Canberra
organized a Workshop for discussions between important scientific
personalities in Romania and Australia, to establish some
cooperation, in the Antarctic field too.
A Seminar organized by the Belgium Embassy in Canberra, with the
participation of their Excellencies the Embasadors of Romania,
Belgium an other States in Australia, and of some important
personalities including a representative of the Australian Antarctic
Division (AAD), took place on May 3, 2017, in the context of
celebrating 120 years since the Belgica Expedition, 70 years since
the death of the re-known scientist Emil Racovita and 70 years
since the birth of Dr. Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, the „Leader of
Romanian modern Antarctic research”. The AAD representative
presented the ”Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action
Plan”.
The Romanian RONARE 2017 expedition in West Antarctica, in
March 2017, in cooperation and with logistical support from
Argentina, within two projects on environmental issues, was
reported by the two Romanian expeditioners in a conference at the
Virology Institute of the Romanian Academy, in a paper published
in the national “Adevarul” Journal (Constanta branch), and by a
Broadcast interview on May 3, 2017 (Radio Romania News). The
Romanian Antarctic activities between RONARE 1 Expedition in
Larsemann Hills, 2005 and RONARE 2017 were described by Dr.
Florica Toparceanu, a Romanian Antarctic explorer, in a paper
entitled “The adventure of a Romanian Expeditioner to the South
Pole – How could Romania access the Law-Racovita Base in
Antarctica, again?” in the same Adevarul (The Truth) Journal, on
May 15, 2017.
http://adevarul.ro/locale/constanta/aventura-unui-explorator-
roman-polul-sud-putea-romania-obtina-nou-dreptul-folosi-baza-law-
racovita-antarctica-1_5919aa895ab6550cb81f8898/index.html
Acknowledgements
Romania acknowledges the support in developing the Education
and Outreach activities from the consulting bodies of ATCM, CEP,
SCAR, APECS and the collaborating Parties. Romania appreciated
the work of the ATCM ICGs Coordinating Groups, 2015-2016 and
2016-2017.
Romanian Contact Point for ATCM ICG E&O 2016-2017: Senior
researcher Mihaela COTTA, NCAR Advisor on ATCM/CEP matters,
National Commission for Antarctic Research of Romanian Academy,
mihaelacotta@yahoo.com
