





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the twentieth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection









Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the twentieth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection
Introduction
1.	As in previous years this report focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in the first joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
2.	The Thirty-fifth Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 17-21 October, 2016. The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website https://www.ccamlr.org/en/system/files/e-sc-xxxv-v2.pdf .  A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-XXXIV is provided in Annex 1 of that report. Reports of the current information on CCAMLR fisheries are available at https://www.ccamlr.org/en/publications/fishery-reports . 
3.	The Chair of the Scientific Committee Dr M. Belchier reflected on the Committee’s work in the 2015/16 intersessional period and noted that the four subsidiary meetings held during the year had involved 161 scientists and 200 papers had been tabled, this was in addition to the 51 papers considered by the Scientific Committee itself.  In addition Dr Belchier noted that the report of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring, held in Punta Arena, Chile from 19-20 May had been considered by the Scientific Committee and its working groups.  A two day Scientific Committee symposium that was held at the CCAMLR Secretariat from 13-14 October. Dr Belchier, on behalf of the Scientific Committee, thanked the conveners of the intersessional groups and the USA and Italy for hosting meetings in 2016. He also thanked participants for developing the Scientific Committee’s work in 2015/16 and Members for supporting these activities.
4.	In reflecting on the outcomes from the Scientific Committee Symposium, the Scientific Committee agreed that a work plan with short-, medium- and long-term objectives was required and that this should be developed in the intersessional period by the Scientific Committee Chair and Vice-Chairs and the working group conveners as the foundation for a strategic work plan. The Scientific Committee considered the CEP five-year work plan and agreed that it would form a useful template for the development of an intersessional work plan.  
5.	The Scientific Committee also noted the need for broader engagement with the global scientific community. Potential joint workshops and integration of medium to long-term work priorities by organisations such as SCAR or SCOR.

SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
6.	The Scientific Committee continued to promote the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship scheme, selecting two recipients this year: Andrea Capurro (Argentina) who will be working on data analysis and spatial planning in the Antarctic Peninsula region and Yiping Ying (China) who will work on the analysis of krill fisheries acoustics data.
The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 

Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
7.	The Scientific Committee noted discussions during WG-EMM-16 on the topic of climate change and related data collection and information exchange, including the development of priority questions relating to climate change (Annex 6, paragraphs 6.8 to 6.28). The Scientific Committee and its working groups considered the report of the Joint CEP- SC-CCAMLR workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring and endorsed the recommendations in the workshop report.
8.	The Scientific Committee agreed that the workshop had been a productive and valuable opportunity to share information and consider issues of common interest. It discussed a range of topics arising from the workshop, including:

            (i) development of enhanced links with SCAR and related programs, including ICED and SOOS, to aid in the work of the Scientific Committee

            (ii) data and information exchange, including the utility of CEMP data in climate change research

            (iii) the CEP’s Climate Change Response Work Program (CCRWP), presented in Table 3 of the WG-EMM-16 report (Annex 6), which identifies relevant questions, activities and tasks. This document may be useful in development of the Scientific Committee work plan

            (iv) recommendation 2 from the workshop, which discussed the development of priority questions in relation to climate change. The Working Group identified three initial questions related to potential changes in the krill population and the accessibility of krill fishing areas over the next 2–3 decades and noted that further  information  from  SCAR,  ICED,  SOOS  and  others  would  assist  in
addressing these questions.


9. 	The Scientific Committee considered the initial results of the Intersessional Correspondence Group (ICG) which considered approaches for enhancing consideration of climate change impacts in CCAMLR. It noted that a discussion of the ICG results, drew heavily on the Joint SC-CAMLR–CEP Workshop and subsequent discussions in the CEP and in WG-EMM, would continue during the 2016/17 intersessional period.

10.	The Scientific Committee considered a revised draft Conservation Measure for the designation of special areas for scientific study in newly exposed marine areas following ice shelf retreat or collapse in the Antarctic Peninsula region (CCAMLR statistical subareas 48.1, 48.5 and 88.3). The draft conservation measure was subsequently adopted by the Commission (CM 24-04) further details of which can be found in information paper IP 011.

Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
11.	The Scientific Committee considered a range of issues pertaining to biodiversity within the spatial marine management and protected areas agenda item.  The CEP remains the lead body on the issue of non-native species 
Antarctic species requiring special protection
12.	The Scientific Committee did not consider any issues related to individual species requiring special protection.   
Spatial marine management and protected areas 
13.		The Scientific Committee noted further the progress within the various planning Domains in the Convention area, including extensive work for the spatial planning of MPAs in Domain 1 (Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc), and Domains 3 and 4 (Weddell Sea) and Domains 5 and 6 Crozet–Del Cano and Kerguelen (noting that an e-group on Indian Sub-Antarctic Spatial Planning has been created on the CCAMLR website).
14.		The Scientific Committee welcomed recent research voyages in the South Orkney Islands region in 2015/16 and noted that nine CCAMLR Members participated in these cruises, and that a significant amount of new data and analyses will be submitted to the Scientific Committee and its working groups as it becomes available which will be incorporated into an MPA Report at the time of the next review.
15.	The proponents of the Ross Sea region MPA noted that a workshop should be held in the year following adoption of the proposal in order to develop a research and monitoring plan, to include krill research. Following the agreement of the Ross Sea MPA (CM 91-05) a three day Ross Sea region MPA Research and Monitoring Plan Workshop will be held in Italy in late April 2017.
 
16.  Discussion by the Commission on the agreement of   the Ross Sea region MPA and conservation measure to promote and facilitate scientific research in newly exposed marine areas following ice-shelf retreat or collapse around the Antarctic Peninsula are included in IP 011 [Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Thirty-ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting ].

17.	The Scientific Committee agreed that it would be helpful to compile a table summarising progress and activities being undertaken on MPA planning in each of the MPA planning domains. This information is presented in Table 9 of the Scientific Committee report.

18.	Since 2008 the Secretariat has received VME-indicator notifications from longline fisheries, these have led to the declaration of 76 VME risk areas (i.e. areas now closed to fishing). In addition, there have been 46 VMEs detected and registered as a result of fishery independent research cruises. Full details of the VMEs encountered and areas closed to fishing are provided at https://www.ccamlr.org/en/data/ccamlr-vme-registry.  CCAMLR is also a partner in the FAO Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (ABNJ) Deep Seas Project which includes a global database which provide information on VMEs and VME-related measures. 

Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
19. 	The Scientific Committee noted that nine Members working at 15 sites in Areas 48, 58 and 88 contributed data for 12 CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) parameters on six species of krill-dependent predators for the 2015/16 breeding season.
20.	The Scientific Committee welcomed the development of the camera network in Subarea 48.1 for monitoring predators (Annex 6, paragraphs 2.147 to 2.149). It noted the successful collaboration of multiple Members in establishing the network to support CEMP and FBM efforts. The Scientific Committee also noted that the CEMP camera project expects data from all cameras to be available following the 2016/17 field season.
21.	The Scientific Committee welcomed SC-CAMLR-XXXV/BG/27 on the camera installation by Ukraine at the Galindez, Petermann and Yalour Islands penguin colonies, which is a CEMP Fund-supported project on establishing a CEMP camera network in Subarea 48.1, and looked forward to a presentation of the results from this project.
Future Meetings 
22.	The next regular meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 16 to 20 October 2017. 
23.	The Scientific Committee agreed to the following meetings in the 2016 intersessional period: 
    • SG-ASAM (Qingdao, People's Republic of China 15 to 19  May 2017) (Conveners: Dr X Zhao (China) and Dr C Reiss (USA))
    • WG-SAM (Buenos Aires, Argentina, 26 June to 30 June 2017) (Convener: Dr S Parker (New Zealand)
    • WS-SISO-17(Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3 to 7 July 2017) (Convener: Mr James Moir-Clark (UK)
    • WG-EMM (Buenos Aires, Argentina, 10 to 14 July 2017) (Convener: Dr Małgorzata Korczak-Abshire (Poland))
    • WG-FSA (CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, 3 to 14 October 2017) (Convener: Dr Dirk Welsford (Australia).
    • WS-RSRMPARMP (Rome, Italy, 26 to 28 April, 2017) (Conveners Dr Marino Vacchi (Italy),Dr George Watters (United States of America), Mr Alistair Dunn (New Zealand)


