





High resolution mapping of human footprint across Antarctica and its implications for the strategic conservation of bird life








High resolution mapping of human footprint across Antarctica and its implications for the strategic conservation of bird life
Information Paper submitted by Spain and the United Kingdom
Summary
This paper describes a recently developed model for high resolution mapping of human footprint across Antarctica and its potential use, in association with future validation work in the field, in the strategic protection of Antarctic bird life, including bird colonies within Important Bird Areas (IBAs).
Antarctic human footprint mapping
Antarctic ecosystems face increasing cumulative impacts from national Antarctic operator activities and the tourism industry, most of which may occur within the 0.18% of Antarctica that is comprised of ice-free ground.  The creation of tools to assess human footprint may greatly assist in strategic management of human activities within the continent, including, for example, (1) environmental impact assessment, (2) environmental monitoring, (3) assessment of the risk of wildlife disease transmission by humans, (4) non-native species management and (5) protected area designation (see Figures 1).  

Here we present the first high resolution (30 arcsec; c. 1 km) model of estimated human footprint across predominantly ice-free areas of Antarctica (Pertierra et al., 2017). To facilitate integration into global footprint models, the Antarctic model was created using methods applied elsewhere, and took into consideration land use (e.g. research stations, visitor sites) human density (e.g. number of visitors) and accessibility (e.g. distance from the coast).

Model results showed that human footprint is most intensely clustered in the Antarctic Peninsula (the South Shetland Islands, in particular), southern Victoria Land and several areas of East Antarctica (see Figures 2 and 3). 
Antarctic Important Bird Areas (IBAs)
At ATCMXXXVIII Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States presented a report describing 204 Important Bird Areas (IBAs) within Antarctica (ATCMXXXVIII WP40; ATCMXXXVIII IP27).  IBAs are defined on the basis of consistent global criteria, developed by BirdLife International, that involve global population assessments combined with available scientific data on colony populations and locations. Criteria for designation as an IBA include that the site contains globally important congregations of birds and/or a significant number of a globally threatened species.  At ATCM XXXVIII that ATCM adopted Resolution 5 (2015) that welcomed the IBA report and requested that the Committee ‘provide an update to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on the extent to which these Important Bird Areas are, or should be, represented within the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas…’.  

To demonstrate the potential for human footprint data to inform Antarctic policy, and contribute to the ATCM’s request, we used the high resolution human footprint model to assess which IBAs were potentially most vulnerable to human activities and therefore might merit further investigation on the ground and possibly a higher level of area protection. Relative footprint values were recorded for all 204 of Antarctica’s IBAs (Harris et al., 2015) (Figure 4). 

Model results indicated that formal protection of bird life under the Antarctic Treaty System has been largely unsystematic (see also ATCMXL IP YY).  Opportunities may exist for further consideration of protection of penguin and flying bird species in some of the IBAs with the highest human footprint scores identified in this study (Pertierra et al., 2017).  This information, once combined with local knowledge of specific IBAs, creates an opportunity for more comprehensive use of the Antarctic protected area system in conservation of the continent's bird life (ATCMXL WPXX).
Conclusions
The Antarctic human footprint model, described here, may help the CEP in its discussions on the use of available management tools for protection of Antarctic bird life when used in conjunction with (1) local knowledge, (2) the evaluation of species-specific risk (based on the different sensitivities of avian species) and (3) details on avian population trends.  The human footprint model may also help support ATCM consideration of other issues including: environmental impact assessment, environmental monitoring, wildlife disease transmission by humans, non-native species and broader area protection.
Supporting information
Harris, C. M., Lorenz, K., Fishpool, L. D. C, Lascelles, B., Cooper, J., Coria, N. R., et al. (2015). Important Bird Areas in Antarctica. BirdLife International and Environmental Research & Assessment Ltd. Cambridge.
(Available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/index.shtml)

Pertierra, L. R., Hughes, K. A., Vega, G. C., Olalla-Tárraga, M. Á. (2017). High resolution spatial mapping of human footprint across Antarctica and its implications for the strategic conservation of avifauna. PLoS ONE 12(1): e0168280. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0168280,  
(Available at: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0168280)
Figures




Figure 1.  Summary of information necessary to help facilitate evidence-based environmental management decisions by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.


Figures 2. Human footprint map of the Antarctic continent and offshore islands (for inset, see Figure 2). (HFP score: human footprint score)


Figure 3. Human footprint map of the South Shetland Islands and northern Antarctic Peninsula. (HFP score: human footprint score)






Figure 4.  Map of Antarctica showing the distribution of the continent’s Important Bird Area (IBAs) and the human footprint (HFP) scores (low score: low human footprint; high score: high human footprint).

