





The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report 2016 – 2017 to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XL








The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report 2016 – 2017 to the XL Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
Information Paper submitted by SCAR

Summary
This paper presents the annual report of The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. For ease of consideration, the main features of the report are presented as an infographic. 

Background
The mission of SCAR is to advance Antarctic research, including observations from Antarctica, and to promote scientific knowledge, understanding and education on any aspect of the Antarctic region. To this end, SCAR is charged with the initiation and international coordination of Antarctic and Southern Ocean research beneficial to global society. SCAR provides independent and objective scientific advice and information to the Antarctic Treaty System and other bodies, and acts as the main international exchange of Antarctic information within the scientific community.
Descriptions of SCAR’s activities and scientific outputs are available at: http://www.scar.org/. 
SCAR will celebrate its 60th anniversary in 2018.
Recent Developments
In addition to the synopsis of key outcomes and activities of SCAR presented in Figure 1, SCAR’s three science groups, six research programmes, and several specialized subsidiary groups have undertaken a wide variety of activities and produced many outputs, a suite of which are formally presented at this meeting, including in the SCAR Lecture.
At the XXXIV SCAR Meeting and Open Science Conference, held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, a new Executive Committee was elected by the Delegates: Prof Steven L. Chown (President); Prof Dr Karin Lochte (Vice-President), Prof Terry Wilson (Vice-President), Prof Dr Azizan bin Abu Samah (Vice-President), Prof Jefferson Cardia Simões (Vice-President), Prof Jerónimo López-Martínez (Immediate Past President). Dr Jenny Baeseman is SCAR’s Executive Director. Dr Aleks Terauds is SCAR’s representative to the Committee for Environmental Protection.
Selected Forthcoming Meetings
XII SCAR Biology Symposium. 10-14 July 2017, Brussels, Belgium. http://www.scarbiology2017.org/
Past Antarctic Ice Sheet Dynamics (PAIS) Conference 2017. 10-15 September 2017, Trieste, Italy. http://pais-conference-2017.inogs.it/
IX Congreso Latinoamericano de Ciencia Antártica. 4-6 October 2017, Punta Arenas, Chile. http://www.inach.cl/inach/?p=21366 
The XXXV SCAR Meetings and Open Science Conference. 15-27 June 2018, Davos, Switzerland. The Open Science Conference will cover both polar regions, being organized jointly with the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC). http://www.polar2018.org/

