





Southern Hemisphere Key Activities and Special Observing Periods during the Year of Polar Prediction








Southern Hemisphere Key Activities and Special Observing Periods during the Year of Polar Prediction


To enable a significant improvement in environmental prediction capabilities for the polar regions and beyond, by coordinating a period of intensive observing, modelling, verification, user-engagement and education activities.

    1. Introduction
While changes in the polar climate system come with a number of opportunities that will have significant impact upon maritime traffic for scientific, fisheries and tourist purposes, the rapid increase in environmental and socio-economic change also comes with significant risks. The availability of current and accurate weather and environmental information and forecasts will therefore play an increasingly important role in aiding risk reduction and management in the polar regions.

The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has established a Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) under the auspices of its World Weather Research Programme (WWRP) and its Polar Prediction Project. The YOPP has the overarching goal to significantly improve our environmental prediction capabilities for the polar regions and beyond, on time scales from hours to seasons. The connection to longer time scales is made through the World Climate Research Programme’s Polar Climate Predictability Project (see IP 115). The core period of YOPP entails intensive observation and modelling campaigns in both the Arctic and the Antarctic, scheduled from mid-2017 to mid-2019. 

Key YOPP activities include intense observation periods dedicated to routine measurements and investigations of physical phenomena, the development and improvement of numerical forecasting models (including physical linkages to lower latitudes), and the verification and enhancement of forecasting services. To access the knowledge generated a YOPP data portal will be developed to ensure the data is publicly available. Education is another important component of YOPP. For example, several Polar Prediction summer schools have been and will be planned, during which young scientists are trained in polar environmental prediction science.

The Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre of Polar and Marine Research, hosts the International Coordination Office (ICO) for Polar Prediction, which serves as a focal point for the communication and coordination among the academic community and stakeholders involved with polar prediction topics. Further details can be found on the website: http://polarprediction.net. 
    2. Special Observing Periods
YOPP will implement Special Observing Periods (SOPs) during the core period of the Year of Polar Prediction (mid 2017 to mid 2019). In particular, SOPs will act as a focus to enhance routine observations in an attempt to close the gaps in the Antarctic as well as Arctic observing system over an extended period of time (i.e. several weeks).
The Southern Ocean SOP is planned from 16 Nov 2018 to 15 Feb 2019. Two SOPs are planned in the Arctic (1 Feb – 31 Mar 2018 and 1 Jul – 30 Sep 2018) (see Fig. 1).


Fig. 1: Special Observing Periods during the Year of Polar Prediction. 
Enhanced routine observations during the YOPP SOPs will allow for forecasting system experiments aimed at optimizing observing systems in the polar regions and providing insight into the impact of better polar observations on forecast skill in lower latitudes. A first step is to ensure that all observations currently carried out are shared through the Global Telecommunication System (GTS). A second step is to enhance the current observation network by: a) more frequent observations from existing platforms e.g. an increase in radiosonde deployments and b) adding observations in regions where the observation network is not dense enough, e.g. by the deployment of additional bouys.
    3. YOPP Key activities in the Southern Hemisphere
Status of the Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH)
At the YOPP Summit at WMO Headquarters in Geneva in July 2015, it became clear extra effort was needed to make YOPP a success in the Southern Hemisphere. A committee to coordinate activities was subsequently established and a website set-up at http://polarmet.osu.edu/YOPP-SH/. A Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH) Planning Meeting was organized as part of the Polar Weather and Climate Week hosted by the Byrd Polar and Climate Research Center at The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio, US in 2016. The next Planning Meeting will be held at the 2017 in Boulder, Colorado, USA, June 28-29, 2017.

The key achievements of YOPP-SH so far are as follows: First, the Special Observing Period (SOP) for YOPP-SH has been established as November 16, 2018-February 15, 2019. Second, in order to better entrain the Southern Ocean community a joint session of the YOPP Southern Hemisphere planning committee and the CLIVAR/CliC/SCAR Southern Ocean Regional Panel will be held at the June meeting in Boulder. Enhanced observational and modelling efforts for YOPP-SH are being developed.
YOPP Task Teams
Polar prediction involves many different aspects such as observations from airborne platforms, numerical modelling and verification, as well as societal topics involving various groups of stakeholders. In order to advance the planning for specific activities during the Year of Polar Prediction several YOPP Task Teams have been established. Current task teams have been formed in order to enhance particular activities during the Year of Polar Prediction such as Airborne Platforms, Buoys, Communication, Data, Education, Modelling Activities, Societal and Economic Research and Applications (SERA), Satellite, Southern Hemisphere, Special Observing Periods, and Verification (see Table at http://www.polarprediction.net/yopp/yopp-task-teams/). 
YOPP Endorsement 
A YOPP endorsement process has been established (Goessling et al., 2016) allowing for improved coordination of activities relevant to the aims of the Year of Polar Prediction. Projects, programmes and initiatives that plan to contribute to YOPP can request endorsement (for more information see www.polarprediction.net). After passing a rigorous review process, endorsed research projects benefit from increased visibility and hopefully an increased chance of funding from national sources. In turn, endorsement allows the YOPP network to coordinate activities and enhance networking and communication amongst the various activities. About sixty YOPP activities have been endorsed to date, with about half of them being active in the Southern Hemisphere (Fig. 2). It is expected that significantly more activities will request endorsement over the course of the Year of Polar Prediction. 


Fig. 2: Projects, programmes and initiatives endorsed by the Year of Polar Prediction (for more details including the full project name please see at http://apps3.awi.de/YPP/endorsed). 
Other YOPP Activities in the Southern Hemisphere
The Buoy Task Team is developing plans for a strong YOPP Buoy Component for both the Arctic and the Antarctic. There will be two key components: Networks of simple buoys, as dense and evenly distributed as possible, will be complemented by more comprehensive buoys and arrays of buoys, including Argo floats, at individual locations. The planning for deployments ahead of, and during, the Arctic SOPs is already well underway, whereas planning for the later Antarctic SOP is starting now (April 2017). The general approach will be to deploy instruments at the beginning of the SOP, that is, in the early field season in November 2018, to complement instruments still present from the previous season and thereby to strongly enhance buoy (and float) coverage. It is anticipated that the main challenge will be to find sufficient suitable deployment opportunities.
The Satellite Task Team has provided a list of required parameters to the WMO Polar Space Task Group (PSTG) to be considered for polar operational satellite products in support of YOPP. 
At the group’s 2016 meeting at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, the Societal and Economic Research and Application sub-committee (SERA) invited representatives from different stakeholder groups from the Southern Hemisphere (e.g., fishing industry, tourism sector, maritime logistics) to learn about their perspectives and needs regarding polar forecasting. These perspectives is setting the scope of SERA plans and projects during the Year of Polar Prediction and beyond. 
    4. Final Remarks and Outlook
Relevant information, including workshop and meeting reports, but also details on coordinated model experiments, education and outreach efforts, funding aspects, verification, data assimilation, satellite data, and the YOPP data component are available on the website http://www.polarprediction.net and distributed via the newsletter PolarPredictNews. The contact for all YOPP-related inquiries is the International Coordination Office for Polar Prediction office@polarprediction.net.
In order to achieve the goals of YOPP it is crucial to enhance international and interdisciplinary collaboration through the development of strong linkages with related initiatives, strengthen linkages between academia, research institutions and operational forecasting centres, promote interactions and communication between research and stakeholders, and foster education and outreach. Ultimately, the success of YOPP depends on the enthusiasm and willingness of scientists, institutions and governments to contribute with their projects and initiatives. 

    5. Selected Publications
Goessling, H.; Jung, T.; Klebe, S.; Baeseman, J.; Bauer, P.; Chen, P.; Chevallier, M.; Dole, R.; Gordon, N.; Ruti, P. et al. (2016) “Paving the Way for the Year of Polar Prediction” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society (BAMS). ES85-ES88, DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-15-00270.1

Hoke, W.; Liggett, D.; Dawson, J.; Lamers, M.; Werner, K. (2016) “Understanding user needs to improve weather and environmental forecasts in the polar regions“ Northern Notes Issue 46, Autumn/Winter 2016. A newsletter published by the International Arctic Social Sciences Association. http://iassa.org/images/newsletters/Northern-Notes-Issue-46-Autumn-Winter-2016.pdf. Accessed 14 Dec 2016.

Jung, T.; Gordon, N.; Bauer, P.; Bromwich, D.; Chevallier, M.; Day, J.; Dawson, J.; Doblas-Reyes, F.; Fairall, C.; Goessling, H. et al. (2016) “Advancing Polar Prediction Capabilities on Daily to Seasonal Time Scales” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society (BAMS). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-14-00246.1

PPP-SG and co-authors (2016) YOPP Implementation Plan v2.0 (WWRP Polar Prediction Project Implementation Plan for the Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) Version 2.0.), World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/arep/wwrp/new/documents/FINAL_WWRP_PPP_YOPP_Plan_28_July_web.pdf. Accessed 14 Dec 2016.

PPP-SG and co-authors (2013) PPP Implementation Plan (WWRP Polar Prediction Project Implementation Plan), World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. http://www.polarprediction.net/fileadmin/user_upload/www.polarprediction.net/Home/Documents/WWRP-PPP_IP_Final_12Jan2013_v1_2.pdf. Accessed 14 Dec 2016. 

Thoman, R.; Dawson, J.; Liggett, D.; Lamers, M.; Stewart, E.; Ljubicic, G.; Knol, M.; Hoke, W. (2016) Second Polar Prediction Project (PPP) Societal and Economic Research and Applications (SERA) Meeting focused on end user use of weather and climate information. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society (BAMS). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-16-0195.1

