





Eradication of a non-native grass Poa annua L. from ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands








Eradication of a non-native grass Poa annua L. from ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands – update 2016/2017
Information Paper submitted by Poland
Summary
Results of research study on the eradication of non-native species Poa annua from ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay and from Arctowski station are presented. Follow-up activities from the 2016/2017 Antarctic season are reported.
Background
The non-native grass Poa annua L. was accidentally introduced at the Polish Antarctic Arctowski Station during 1980s. Its presence was initially recorded in the austral summer of 1985/86, first in sites disturbed by human activities, later on the deglaciated moraines of the Ecology Glacier, inside ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, about 1.5 km from the Station. 
In accordance with Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, as well as the CEP non-native species manual, and the Management Plan of ASPA No 128, measures to eradicate P. annua from the Area were taken. Progress was reported to ATCM XXXVIII/CEP XVIII (IP78) and ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX (IP60).
Research study on P. annua eradication
Results on the first year of the eradication program were published (Galera et al 2016), and are available as an attachment to this IP or at https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00300-016-2006-y. 
Eradication program was preceded by detailed investigation of the biology of P. annua  in accordance to guidelines regarding the eradication/control of alien species. The distribution, morphology, ecology, genetics, physiology, expansion history and potential sources of introduction of the species were determined. Authors concluded that the species is expanding from the anthropogenic sites to native communities, and presents a potential threat to native flora. Spatial and temporal dynamics of P. annua spread is deemed sufficient to declare this species invasive at the scale of Point Thomas Oasis. At the same time it was not exceptionally intense in comparison with other alien plant invasions worldwide, which make the control/eradication effort a realistic goal.
Point Thomas Oasis and ice-free areas of ASPA No 128 were surveyed, and the each found P. annua tussock was mapped. Thereafter, non-native plants were gradually removed, beginning with those found in the Area as well as those closest to  moss carpet formations. The removal was conducted carefully by hand, in such a manner so as not disturb native plant species. It was estimated that negative impact of the eradication program on native flora was negligible.
Earlier research indicated that the structure of the soil seed bank is highly associated with the location of tussocks. Therefore additional topsoil (0-10 cm) removal from underneath the tussocks should efficiently restrict population recover from the soil seed bank. Authors also noted that the biology of the species (i.e., autogamy, seed persistence, small seed size, minimal requirements for germination, short life cycle, small plant size) may still hamper effective total eradication.
Authors estimated that it was the biggest non-native plant eradication conducted so far in Antarctica.
Follow-up activities taken in 2016/2017 season
Until now the eradication of P. annua in ASPA No 128 and Arctowski Station was conducted as part of a  multi-year research program “The causes, course and consequences of the expansion of Poa annua L. in Western Antarctica, a multi-aspect population study” which was completed in February 2017. 
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS - operator of Arctowski Station – will be continuing the eradication program, using research results and past experiences. Eradication by methods discussed above coupled with long-termed monitoring are planned.
In March 2017 all area around Arctowski Station was surveyed, including sites left over from the previous season. Photographic documentation was prepared, and the location of each grass tussock was marked on the map. All found P. annua were removed by hand, together with roots and topsoil. Almost 350 tussocks were removed from 58 sites. All collected material was documented and destroyed in incinerator “Golar” (at temperature of 1200°C). Prior to the action Expedition Leader organized practical training in species recognition and correct method of plant removal for three ecological observers taking part in it.
Sites near Ecology Glacier (ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay) from which P. annua was previously eradicated, were  surveyed. No new seedlings were found.
The action, both around Arctowski Station, and in ASPA No 128 will be continued during the next Antarctic seasons.
References
Galera H., Wódkiewicz M., Czyż E., Łapiński S., Kowalska M.E., Pasik M., Rajner M., Bylina P., Chwedorzewska K.J. 2017. First step to eradication of Poa annua L. from Point Thomas Oasis (King George Island, South Shetlands, Antarctica). Polar Biology, 40, 939–945

