





An Update on Status and Trends Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Recent Policy Developments at the International Level








An Update on Status and Trends Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Recent Policy Developments at 
the International Level

    1. Introduction

This Information Paper provides an update on the status and trends of biological prospecting in Antarctica, as well as a review of recent relevant policy developments at the international level. Biological prospecting continues to be a topic of interest and concern to the Parties of the Antarctic Treaty System, with discussions having taken place at nearly every meeting of the ATCM in recent years. Notably, Resolution 7 (2005) recommended that governments continue to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and exchange on an annual basis information and views relating to that question as appropriate. In addition, Resolution 9 (2009) recommended that Parties keep this matter under active consideration, including in relation to obligations under Article III(1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty.

This Paper demonstrates that there continues to be activity in patenting of uses and applications based on Antarctic genetic and living resources, highlighting the need to continue considering this topic.

At the same time, discussions in international policy fora, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity and its Nagoya Protocol, and the Preparatory Committee established by the General Assembly to develop an international legally binding instrument under the the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, continue to make progress in addressing genetic resources, including access and benefit-sharing issues. Thus, keeping biological prospecting on the agenda of future ATCMs ensures that Parties can discuss these developments, and where needed, find solutions that are specific to the situation in Antarctica. 

Section 2 provides highlights of patents and applications that date from the period between ATCM 38 and ATCM 40, covering the time period from April 2015 to May 2017. The analysis provides an update on developments since Information Paper 133 of ATCM 38. Section 3 provides updates on recent policy developments relevant to genetic resources, biological prospecting, and access and benefit-sharing which have taken place in relevant international fora.

    2. Some recent examples of biological prospecting in Antarctica

This section of the paper provides highlights of patents and applications that date from the period between ATCM 38 and ATCM 40, roughly covering the time period from April 2015 to May 2017. The analysis is not comprehensive, but rather aims to provide examples of developments since Information Paper 133 of ATCM 38. 

The Antarctic continent has emerged in the last decade as a fertile location for scientists aiming to discover and develop new biotechnological applications. With its unique weather and environmental characteristics, Antarctica is home to an extraordinary variety of extremophile organisms, especially bacteria and fungi, and there are several examples of new molecules isolated from organisms found in Antarctica with potential uses in agriculture, medicine, and a variety of industries.

The patents and applications filed during the past two years can be roughly broken down into three categories: (a) pharmaceuticals, (b) industrial applications and biotechnology and (c) krill-related patents.

    a) Pharmaceuticals

Several discoveries made from Antarctic organisms relate to pharmaceuticals. One interesting example is related with the preparation of an immune-enhancing and antitumor medicine and functional food, where the method comprises drying and crushing Antarctic brown algae. The glucan that is prepared in the invention has immune-enhancing activities, and also has functions of tumor growth suppression and tumor metastasis inhibition (application WO/2017/008768 by Qingdao Haida Marine Biomedicine Sales). 

Marine sponges have proven a rich source of secondary metabolites among the Antarctic invertebrates. Many of these secondary metabolites are bioactive, with some causing feeding deterrence in ecologically relevant predators and some displaying potent antimicrobial or cytotoxicity properties. In a screening program, the Antarctic sponge Dendrilla membranosa was found to produce diterpenoid secondary metabolites with activity against the leishmaniasis-causing parasite Leishmania donovani. In particular, an invention concerns compositions useful for control of Leishmania spp. parasites in vitro and in vivo and treatment of leishmaniasis (application US20160030388 by University of South Florida).

Anticancer effects have been found in an aqueous extract of dried plant Deschampsia antarctica, as a patent application describes that the chemically synthetized component of the extract can be used as a new anticancer agent with potential uses in a broad spectrum of cancer types (application WO/2017/031054 by Antartina). 

Antarctic lichens are known to produce unique secondary metabolites different from those produced by higher plants. A number of patents have been filed relating to pharmaceutical compositions derived from the Antarctic lichen Ramalina terebrata, which contains the compound Ramalin as an active ingredient. Ramalin has been shown to have an anti-inflammatory effect, making it potentially suitable for the treatment of inflammatory and immune diseases. In particular, an invention relates to a novel use of Ramalin, a neurodegenerative disease treatment use and, more specifically, to a composition for preventing or treating neurodegenerative diseases. Ramalin, according to this invention, has an effect of improving a cognitive ability by inhibiting the expression of an inflammatory factor, and is thus useful for preventing or treating memory disorder and neurodegenerative diseases (application WO2016064009 by Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology).

Several of the patents and applications based on krill and its components also relate to development of pharmaceuticals and/or health supplements. Details about these patents are provided in the section relating to krill. 

    b) Industrial applications and biotechnology

Patents in this category generally relate to enzymes that catalyze various industrial processes or to proteins and other substances used in biotechnology and industry. One example is a patent based on a compound prepared by Antarctic bacteria fermentation cultivation with plant pathogenic fungus resistant activity. This compound has broad spectrum plant pathogenic fungus resistant activity and has good application prospects in the aspect of biological control of plant diseases (patent CN10464995, China).

Another invention relates to an abiotic stress tolerance enhancement composition including the nucleotide sequence of genes identified in Deschampsia antarctica, and where the nucleotide sequence is involved in the abiotic stress of plants such as the stress due to drought, saliency, and coldness. A transgenic plant having the over-expression of the nucleotide sequence can have high tolerance regarding the abiotic stress and be grown regardless of the climate and environment of the cultivation region (patent KR1020150054467 by Korea Institute of Ocean Science Technology). 

    c) Krill-related patents

There have been a multitude of krill-related patents and applications filed in the past two years. Most relate to krill oils as nutritional supplements, but other uses and applications have also been patented or filled. Together these patents show a considerable and increasing interest in harvesting and processing Antarctic krill for a variety of uses.

Existing studies have demonstrated that krill oil is rich in unsaturated fatty acids, rich in EPA, DHA, astaxanthin and phospholipids, and so it is a strong antioxidant, activates the role of cell viability, lows blood pressure, improves memory and other functions, but it also has to be quickly absorbed by the body to take profit of its advantages. 

A group of krill patents relate to techniques of processing krill, either for krill oil or for proteins and other substances. Inventions related to improved processes through which it is possible to extract phospholipids to give high phospholipid content and a reduction of undesired components (application WO/2015/104401 by Aker Biomarine Antarctic), methods for extracting high-purity phospholipid from Antarctic krill (patent CN104498180 and CN104479850, China), detecting a non-phenolic krill weak alkaline alkaloid (CN106279181A, China), and for dehydrating Antarctic krill and extracting shrimp oil (application WO/2016/161575 by Jiangnan University). Other inventions relate to a method that can enhance the extraction rate of the Antarctic krill oil, respectively obtain the high-purity triglyceride-type Antarctic krill oil and Antarctic krill phospholipid and enrich the varieties of the krill oil products (CN104388188 by Dalian Polytechnic University), to a method for extracting volatile oil from krill (CN106047502A, China), to a krill oil microencapsulation process for its preparation having an antioxidant effect (CN106360437A, China), or to a method for producing krill oil (patent CN205323246U and application CN105995661A, China).

Patents that relate to krill oil include its use in various omega-3 supplements (application WO/2016/097854 by Aker Biomarine Antarctic), to use omega-3 phospholipid supplements to improve or support brain maturity age (AU2017200344 by Aker Biomarine Antarctic), a krill oil healthcare capsule for improving the memory ability (CN105901724A, China), or krill phospholipid compositions that may be used to treat a variety of subjects (application WO/2016/128838, WO/2015/162277 and WO/2015/121378 by Aker Biomarine Antarctic). Other inventions are an anti-ageing krill oil health oral solution (CN105943879A, China), a krill oil tonic oral liquid with efficacy of resisting fatigue (CN106036865A, China), a krill oil healthcare capsule for preventing the Alzheimer's disease (CN105901722A, China), a krill oil healthy oral liquid capable of preventing and improving diabetes (CN105878840A, China), or a dietary supplement composition formulated in a therapeutic amount to treat and alleviate symptoms of joint pain where phospholipids used are derived from krill (US20160303162 by U.S. Nutraceuticals). 

Krill also provides source material for pharmaceuticals. It is the case of a patent application that relates to a method for increasing muscle growth and/or strength by administering a composition of a krill extract (application WO/2017/031502 by AVOCA INC.), an improved set and dementia medicine with Antarctic krill oil powder used in its composition (CN106139019A, China), or a krill soft capsule composition having a function of reducing blood fat (CN105920052A, China). Other inventions provide a full EPA or all-trans-trans DHA anti-tumor activity, which is isolated from Antarctic krill oil (CN106117044A, China), or emulsions for parenteral administration where Antarctic krill can be used as an emulsifier (WO/2017/001549 by Fresenius Kabi Deutschland). 

Other patent applications include krill as a main raw material in a meat crisp (CN105533513A, China) or in its powder form in a mink growth promoting feed additive (CN105941949A, China).

    3. Recent policy developments at the international level

Recent policy developments relevant to genetic resources, bioprospecting and access and benefit-sharing have taken place in a number of international fora. Of particular note are the developments within the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the Preparatory Committee established by the UN General Assembly to develop an international legally binding instrument under the the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction,  the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and the d) The Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework which are described below.

    a) The Convention on Biological Diversity – Nagoya Protocol

The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), which entered into force on 29 December 1993, defines biodiversity and aims to promote its conservation, the sustainable use of its components, and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the use of genetic resources. In areas beyond national jurisdiction (ABNJ), the Convention applies to processes and activities carried out under the jurisdiction or control of its parties. The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization, which entered into force on 12 October 2014, applies to genetic resources that are covered by the CBD, and to the benefits arising from their utilization. As at 4 May 2017, 96 countries plus the European Union are Contracting Parties to the Protocol. 

The Nagoya Protocol sets out core obligations for its Contracting Parties to take measures in relation to access to genetic resources, benefit-sharing and compliance. The Protocol creates greater legal certainty and transparency for both providers and users of genetic resources by establishing more predictable conditions for access to genetic resources, and by helping to ensure benefit-sharing with the provider country of the genetic resources that are accessed and based on mutually agreed terms. The Protocol only applies to genetic resources within national jurisdictions of countries, and provides for bilateral transfer of genetic resources between provider countries and users. However, Article 10 of the Protocol leaves open the possibility for developing a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism for other genetic resources in the future.

The second meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the second Meeting of the Parties to the Nagoya Protocol (COP/MOP2) was held in Cancun from 4–17 December 2016. It adopted 14 decisions, in particular and among others, related with the Access and Benefit-Sharing Clearing-House (ABSCH) and information sharing, cooperation with other international organizations and conventions, the need for and modalities of a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism, and with the digital sequence information on genetic resources. 

The ABSCH is a platform for exchanging information on access and benefit-sharing established by Article 14 of the Protocol, as part of clearing-house mechanism under Article 18, paragraph 3 of the Convention. It is a key tool for facilitating the implementation of the Nagoya Protocol, by enhancing legal certainty and transparency on procedures for access, and for monitoring the utilization of genetic resources along the value chain. Work is progressing with the implementation of the ABSCH, and indicative goals and priorities have been established which were endorsed at COP/MOP2.

The COP/MOP requested the Executive Secretary to conduct a study into criteria that could be used to identify what constitutes a specialized international access and benefit-sharing instrument, in the context of Article 4 of the Protocol, that establishes that “where a specialized international access and benefit-sharing instrument applies that is consistent with, and does not run counter to the objectives of the Convention and this Protocol, this Protocol does not apply for the Party or Parties to the specialized instrument in respect of the specific genetic resource covered by and for the purpose of the specialized instrument”.  The Secretariat was requested to continue to engage with relevant processes and policy debates, including in WHO, WIPO, CGRFA, ITPGR and others, as appropriate, to collect information on current discussions on ABS arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. 

Regarding Article 10 of Nagoya Protocol, the COP/MOP requested the Subsidiary Body on Implementation to compile the information available on developments in relevant international processes and organizations with a view to informing future discussions on Article 10, and to explore the need for a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism to address the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the utilization of genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources that occur in transboundary situations or for which it is not possible to grant or obtain prior consent. 

Due to rapid advances arising from research and development in biotechnology regarding the use digital sequence information on genetic resources, the COP/MOP decided to consider at its third meeting any potential implications of its use for the objective of the Nagoya Protocol. 

Since the entry into force of Nagoya Protocol, countries have been actively developing draft ABS legislation or enacting ABS laws to implement their obligations under the Protocol or to enable them to ratify the Protocol. Development assistance has been provided through the Nagoya Protocol Implementation Fund and the GEF, through UNDP, UNEP, GIZ and the ASEAN Biodiversity Center and other bodies.  

    b) Preparatory Committee established by the General Assembly resolution 69/292: Development of an international legally binding instrument under the the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction 

The General Assembly decided, in its resolution 69/292 of 19 June 2015, to develop an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, taking into account the various reports of the Co-Chairs on the work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, which was created in 2005 by the General Assembly. To that end, the General Assembly decided to establish, prior to holding an intergovernmental conference, a Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) to make substantive recommendations to the General Assembly on the elements of a draft text of an international legally binding instrument under UNCLOS. 

As well, in resolution 62/292, the General Assembly decided that, before the end of its seventy-second session, and taking into account the aforementioned report of the PrepCom, it will decide on the convening and on the starting date of an intergovernmental conference, under the auspices of the United Nations, to consider the recommendations of the PrepCom on the elements and to elaborate the text of an international legally binding instrument under UNCLOS. 

The General Assembly also decided that negotiations shall address the topics identified in the package agreed in 2011, namely the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction, in particular, together and as a whole, marine genetic resources, including benefit-sharing questions, measures such as area-based management tools, including MPAs, EIAs, capacity building and the transfer of marine technology. 

The PrepCom, whose work started in 2016, has the task to proceed efficiently on the development of the elements of a draft text of an international legally binding instrument under UNCLOS, with the mandate to exhaust every effort to reach agreement on substantive matters by consensus, and has to report to the Assembly on its progress by the end of 2017. 

The first session of the PrepCom (28 March – 8 April 2016, New York), met in plenary and informal working group settings, with delegations outlining detailed positions on the various elements related to the 2011 “package”. Delegates agreed to a procedural roadmap outlining the structure of PrepCom 2, and on having a Chair’s summary of the meeting and an indicative list of issues to be circulated during the intersessional period, which should provide a structured presentation of the issues and ideas reflected in the proposals for elements of a draft text of an international legally binding instrument. 

During the second session of the PrepCom (26 August – 9 September 2016, New York), delegations offered detailed proposals on the possible elements of an international legally binding instrument, and engaged in a preliminary identification of possible areas of convergence of views and of issues requiring further discussion. Delegations requested the preparation of a Chair’s non-paper drawing from the statements made at PrepCom2 and from electronic submissions in order to guide intersessional preparations for PrepCom 3.

During the third session of the PrepCom (27 March – 7 April 2017, New York), delegates met in informal working groups and in plenary to consider: marine genetic resources, including questions on benefit-sharing; measures such as area-based management tools, including marine protected areas; environmental impact assessments; capacity building and marine technology transfer; and cross-cutting issues, such as the scope of an international legally binding instrument, its relationship with other instruments, and its institutional arrangements. PrepCom3 continued the exchange of increasingly detailed proposals on the possible elements of the international legally binding instrument. 

The discussions at PrepCom3 on marine genetic resources focused on: scope and definitions; principles and approaches; access; benefit-sharing; intellectual property rights; and a clearinghouse mechanism.  The clearinghouse mechanism was seen as an important tool for capacity building and technology transfer (CB&TT), by matching resources and needs, and also contribute to benefit-sharing by pooling together marine genetic resources samples, data and publications.  The need to build on common commercial contractual practices, such as “earnout” provisions, to develop a realistic benefit-sharing mechanism was also suggested.  A notification system for access to MGRs that supports scientific knowledge advancements and innovations and also keeps track globally of “who goes where” in the deep seas and ensuring universal access to the samples and information so discovered was also proposed.  Incentives to engage the private sector to opt into engaging in a new regime, rather than going around it were also seen as requiring careful attention.

PrepCom 3 concluded with delegations requesting the preparation of an updated Chair’s non-paper structuring and streamlining submissions, as well as draft substantive recommendations for consideration by PrepCom 4 in July 2017. 

The fourth meeting of the PrepCom is expected to continue work on marine genetic resources and prepare recommendations to the UN General Assembly for the Assembly to decide at its seventy-second session whether to convene an intergovernmental conference to elaborate the text of the international legally binding instrument. 

    c) The International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA)

The ITPGRFA, which entered into force in 2004, is a comprehensive treaty whose objectives are the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture (PGRFA). The centre piece of the Treaty is a ‘multilateral system for access and benefit-sharing’ which for certain categories of PGRFA guarantees facilitated access in return for benefit-sharing.

Since April 2015 the sixth session of the Governing Body (GB) of the ITPGR convened in Rome, Italy, from 5 to 9 October 2015.  The GB extended the mandate of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group to Enhance the Functioning of the Multilateral System (MLS) of Access and Benefit-sharing (ABS) of the ITPGRFA (The Working Group).  The Working Group’s was requested, among other issues, to: elaborate a full draft revised SMTA; elaborate options for adapting coverage of the MLS, based on different scenarios and income projections; and consider issues regarding genetic information associated with material accessed from the MLS. The meeting adopted a work programme for the Global Information System, and resolutions on a series of substantive, cooperation-related and administrative items, with focus on addressing the shortfall in the BSF, and strengthening implementation of Treaty provisions regarding conservation and sustainable use of PGRFA on-farm, through the work programme on sustainable use and farmers’ rights.

The sixth meeting of the Working Group convened from 14-17 March 2017, at the headquarters of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO), in Rome, Italy. The Working Group continued its deliberations on the basis of a third draft of the revised SMTA. The draft focuses on a subscription system to generate advance payments for access to MLS material. For the time being, it retains alternate modalities for access to such material and benefit-sharing. The Working Group also considered coverage of the MLS vis-à-vis the scope of the Treaty, and held a brief discussion on genetic information associated with material accessed from the MLS. 

The MLS was built to respond to the specific characteristics of agricultural biodiversity and the need to maintain PGRFA and basic scientific research as a “public good.” As all countries are interdependent and the exchange of PGRFA is indispensable for the continuation of agricultural research, the bilateral access and benefit-sharing system promoted by the Convention on Biological Diversity is not considered suitable. The MLS has indeed been successful in facilitating access to PGRFA since it started operation in 2004: the CGIAR Consortium reports hundreds of thousands of exchanges of material, the vast majority of which is destined for public research institutes in developing countries. Reports further indicate that significant non-monetary benefits have arisen in the form of freely exchanged material, information exchange and knowledge creation, capacity building, training and collaborative research. Commercial users who would be more likely to trigger monetary benefit-sharing requirements have consistently chosen to access material from other sources, not the MLS. As the MLS tends to only cover public and CGIAR collections of genetic resources of the listed crops, most of its material is also available elsewhere, and can be accessed without adhering to the benefit-sharing terms of the SMTA.  The MLS, however, has been unable to generate monetary benefits as a result of the use of the SMTA. The lengthy time period required for research, development and commercialization is often mentioned as the reason behind the lack of monetary benefits.

The realization that there are no benefit-sharing payments taking place led to the GB 5 decision to revise the SMTA and devise a subscription system for access to MLS material. Compared to the existing benefit-sharing requirements, the subscription system has a fundamental advantage: it would require advance payments for access, therefore increasing predictability and sustainability of the funds flowing in the BSF. The Working Group recognized these advantages and addressed the details of its operation, albeit a series of important questions remain open.

Deliberations will continue at an informal meeting hosted by Switzerland, possibly in May 2017, and a one-day Working Group meeting, immediately prior to GB 7, tentatively scheduled to be held in October/November 2017, in Rwanda.

    d) The Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework

The PIP Framework is an international arrangement adopted in May 2011 by the 194 Member States of the World Health Organization. The Framework aims to ensure that the world is better prepared to respond to pandemic influenza. The PIP Framework is premised on two equally important public health objectives:
    1. To ensure the sharing of influenza viruses with human pandemic potential through a WHO coordinated network of public health laboratories called the “Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System” (GISRS); and
    2. To promote the fair and equitable access to benefits, such as vaccines and antiviral medicines, that arise from such sharing.

The Framework establishes two mechanisms to facilitate access to benefits: the Partnership Contribution (PC) and the Standard Material Transfer Agreement-2 (SMTA-2).  The SMTA-2 ensures that manufacturers and research institutions that receive PIP Biological Materials share with WHO some of the benefits arising from their access to these materials. Its main purpose is to establish a structured process for an efficient and equitable access to vaccines and other life-saving products by all countries at the time of a pandemic. Through this contract, the entity commits to provide to WHO specific items that can be used to prepare for (e.g. training, technology license) or respond to (e.g. vaccines, antivirals, diagnostic kits) pandemic influenza. To date WHO has concluded eight agreements with vaccine and antiviral manufacturers and through these SMT-2s has secured approximately three times the amount of pandemic vaccine available during the H1N1 pandemic. These signatories include three multinational companies and the largest developing country manufacturer.  The WHO has also concluded 50 agreements with academic and research institutions and received 22 benefit-sharing offers. Most of these institutions have offered to provide Laboratory and Surveillance Capacity Building as a benefit contribution.

    4. Conclusions

This paper demonstrates that there continues to be considerable and growing activity in patenting of uses and applications based on Antarctic genetic resources. It also highlights that there are important legal and policy developments on these issues in a number of key international processes.
