





The experience of having SCAR photo exhibition in Turkey as of a new SCAR member 








The experience of having SCAR photo exhibition in Turkey as of a new SCAR member 
Summary
This paper provides the information of the SCAR photographic exhibition which was hosted in Turkey by the  Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Istanbul Technical University (ITU) Polar Research Centre (PolReC). 
Background

The Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs hosted the photographic exhibition “Our Antarctica – Images from the Great White South”, jointly with the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and Istanbul Technical University (ITU) Polar Research Centre (PolReC). The exhibition included boards by PolReC illustrating Turkey’s scientific activities in Antarctica. The opening reception was held on 14 October 2016 at the Ministry’s art gallery. Attendees at the opening ceremony included Turkish and foreign diplomats, including some ambassadors, officials from Turkish government departments and academics. 

Furthermore, ITU PolReC also hosted the images from the Great White South in Istanbul. The opening was held at ITU Maritime Faculty which coincide with the 132nd Anniversary of the faculty. Mr. Ahmet Arslan, Minister of Transport, Maritime affairs and Communication attended the opening on 3 December 2016. Significant number of people, from national maritime community, government departments, non-governmental maritime organizations, academics from several universities, ITU maritime students and graduates, visited the exhibition. ITU PolReC arranged the photo exhibition to travel to several middle and high level schools in Istanbul as well. Afterwards the exhibition was sent to Swiss Polar Institute by PolReC.  
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Professor David Walton, Emeritus Fellow of British Antarctic Survey, Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for arranging SCAR photo exhibition to make its way to Turkey. 

Turkey became associate member of SCAR at the SCAR Delegates Meeting held in Kuala Lumpur in August 2016. We do believe that SCAR photo exhibition provided many Turkish citizens to be aware of the importance of scientists and scientific activities in Antarctica. 

