The experience in the reduction of the sources of waste generation
in the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition
English translation provided by the author
The experience in the reduction of the sources of waste generation
in the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition
Within the framework of the consideration of the issues of CEPXX
Agenda for item 6 Recovery measures and liquidation of
environmental damage, the Republic of Belarus considers it
necessary to bring to the attention of CEP members the conceptual
information of sections 3-5 of the present document and to inform
the members of the Antarctic Treaty about its the experience of
liquidation of one of the sources of waste generation in the
2016-2017.
1. Reference Information
The Republic of Belarus acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 2006; in
2008 our country ratified the “Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” with 5 Annexes.
In May 2015 at ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia (Bulgaria) the
information document submitted by the Republic of Belarus No.
IP39 The building and functioning of the Byelorussian Antarctic
Station on the Vecherniaya Mountain, Enderby Land - the Final
Comprehensive Environmental Assessment was approved by the
Consultative Parties of the Antarctic Treaty without Comments.
In May 2016 at ATCM XXIX in Santiago (Chile) and at COMNAP
AGM XXVIII in Goa (India), the Republic of Belarus informed the
countries-members of the Antarctic Treaty that in December 2015
the Republic of Belarus had started activities on the creation of
Scientific Station in Antarctica.
For the period from 2007 till 2017 with the logistical assistance of
the Russian Federation, the Republic of Belarus organized and
carried out 9 seasonal scientific expeditions to Antarctica. A total of
36 Belarusian specialists took part in the work of the Belarusian
Antarctic Expeditions (hereinafter referred to as BAE) in the
indicated period of time. As a permanent location for BAE in
2007-2017, the location area was the field base of the Russian
Antarctic Expedition (“RAE”) “Vecherniaya Mountain” which was
used in the period of the Soviet Union in East Antarctica, Enderby
Land, Tala Hills.
2. Technical equipment and seasonal demand of BAE in petroleum
products
At present, BAE has the following means of power supply and
transportation: two container diesel power units equipped with
engines manufactured by the German company DEUTZ with the
power of 20 and 60 kW, two emergency generators manufactured
by the German company GEKO with a power of 7 and 6 kW, three
snowmobiles "LYNX", a crawler quad "QUTLANDER APACHE", an
all-terrain caterpillar vehicle “BOBR”. Besides, BAE operates a
number of minor mechanization tools such as low-power electric
generators with the power from 1 to 2.5 kW, water and oil motor
pumps, chainsaws, air compressors and heat guns. For the operation
and maintenance of these facilities in Antarctica, to the site of
location of BAE, a significant amount of oil products and cooling
liquids in metal barrels and plastic canisters are delivered annually.
From the board of the ship to the shore the delivery of barrels with
fuel is made on an external helicopter suspension. The barrels with
oil products, which are delivered to the shore, are placed on open
storage sites located on the open outcrops of the indigenous rocks.
The refueling of power plants and vehicles with fuel is carried out
using manual diaphragm pumps installed on barrels with oil
products. Depending on the duration of the seasonal expeditions,
the annual demand of BAE in fuels, lubricants and cooling liquids is
the following: diesel fuel from 2 to 4 tons (24 to 48 two-hundred
liter barrels), gasoline from 0.5 to 1 ton (6-12 two-hundred liter
barrels), engine oil - about 100 liters, cooling and brake fluid -
about 100 liters.
3. Problematic issues of waste disposal
In total, in the period from 2007 till 2017 to the location site of
BAE in Antarctica 270 metal two-hundred liter barrels of oil
products were delivered. Currently, considering the limited
transportation and technical capabilities of BAE, 130 empty metal
barrels were removed beyond the scope of validity of the Antarctic
Treaty. Currently there are 140 metal two-hundred liter barrels are
located on open storage sites and will be removed in the upcoming
years beyond the scope of validity of the Antarctic Treaty using the
transport and technical capabilities of BAE. In the current situation,
due to significant transport dependence on external factors, the rate
of accumulation of empty barrels for petroleum products exceeds
the technical capabilities of BAE for their regular and timely
disposal in accordance with paragraph 1g, Article 2, Appendix 3 to
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to The Antarctic Treaty.
It should be noted that this situation is not unique and it is typical
for expeditions of other Antarctic Treaty member countries which,
for different objective reasons, have very limited in transportation
possibilities related to the removing of certain types of waste
beyond the scope of validity of the Antarctic Treaty. Besides, the
storage of petroleum products in metal barrels has another negative
aspect: during the transportation and unloading some barrels often
receive minor damage, which sooner or later can lead to
uncontrolled hydrocarbon leaks and their penetration into the
natural environment of the Antarctic, especially in the absence of
seasonal expedition personnel in the place of location.
4. One of the solutions to the current problem by the example of
BAE
To reduce the sources of waste generation in the form of empty fuel
barrels and to minimize possible hydrocarbon leaks into the natural
environment of the Antarctic, the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition
during the period of seasonal works in 2016-2017 shifted to an
environmentally safer way of storing the seasonal stocks of diesel
fuel. For this purpose, in the vicinity of the location of container
diesel power units of BAE, using the transport (helicopter) support
of the RAE a fixed metal tank was installed to store the diesel fuel
with a volume of 10 m3 with a double shell (see Picture 1).
Picture 1 – Fixed metal container with a double shell, volume 10
cubic meters (on the right)
After the installation of the container by the BAE staff the works
were done on laying the fuel line from the open storage area of
diesel fuel in the barrels to the fixed metal tank. The transfer of fuel
from barrels to a fixed metal tank was carried out by a fuel line
certified for hydrocarbons and its length was 120 meters (see
Picture 2), using a peristaltic type pump T3000B-AB/HONDA (see
Picture 3)
Picture 2 – 120 meters long fuel line, laid from the storage area of
fuel in the barrels (in the foreground) to a fixed tank with the
volume 10 m3 (in the background)
Picture 3 – Pumping of the diesel fuel using a peristaltic pump
Т3000В-АВ/HONDA
5. The achieved results
As a result of works carried out by BAE in the season 2016-2017 the
following results were achieved:
- it became possible to deliver oil products to Antarctica, not in
barrels, but in bulk, using the ship tanks;
- it became possible to pump the oil products by the fuel line
directly from the ship to the fixed shore container;
- one of the sources of waste generation and accumulation was
eliminated;
- there is no need for additional technical measures and financial
costs for removing the empty fuel barrels beyond the scope of
validity of the Antarctic Treaty;
- the threshold of environmental safety during the fueling of power
units and vehicles was considerably increased;
- the risk of accidental spills and accidental leaks of oil products
into the natural environment of the Antarctic was minimized.
6. Conclusion
In this document, by the example of the Belarusian Antarctic
Expedition, we described one of the options for reducing the
sources of waste generation and possible leakage of hydrocarbons
by eliminating the open storage of petroleum products in metal
barrels and installing a fixed metal container of large volume. The
Republic of Belarus encourages other Antarctic Treaty membership
countries, which practice the storage of petroleum products in
barrels, to take all possible steps to reduce similar sources of waste
generation and possible leakages of hydrocarbons.
The Republic of Belarus remains committed to building an
ecologically safe research station near Vecherniaya Mountain on
Enderby Land in East Antarctica, the functioning of which will
make it possible to obtain important scientific results. For this
purpose our country will continue to implement a set of measures
to reduce the emissions of pollutants and waste water discharges, to
reduce sources of waste generation, and to prevent fuel leaks.
Moreover, beginning from 2011, the Republic of Belarus
implements monitoring programs on key parameters of the
Antarctic environment in the area of BAE activities, with the
purpose of the accurate assessment of forecasts of the
environmental impact of economic activities and the identification
of the unexpected consequences.
