





Approximate list, scope and character of response actions








Approximate list, scope and character of response actions
In our Information Paper 144 we have already presented the efforts of the Russian Federation in implementing Article 15 “Emergency Response Action” of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annex VI “Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies”.
 In 2012 the Russian Federation adopted the Federal Law No 50 concerning “Regulation of activities of the Russian citizens and Russian legal entities in the Antarctic”. This Federal Law created a legal basis for the Government of the Russian Federation to adopt at the national level Measure 1 (2005) containing Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies”.
In light of the existing general stalemate with regard to this issue it seems to be most appropriate to remind Consultative Parties that the aforementioned Article 15 of the Madrid Protocol stipulates that in order to respond to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty area, each Party agrees to: (a) provide for prompt and effective response action to such emergencies which might arise in the performance of scientific research programs, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities; and (b) establish contingency plans for response to incidents with potential adverse effects to the Antarctic environment or dependent and associated ecosystems. The Article stresses that Parties shall: (a) co-operate in the formulation and implementation of such contingency plans; and (b) establish procedures for immediate notification of, and co-operative response to, environmental emergencies. In the implementation of this Article, the Parties shall draw upon the advice of the appropriate international organizations. 
Additional regulation is provided in Annex VI to the Protocol of 1991. According to its Article 5 “Response Action” each Party shall require each of its operators to take prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies arising from the activities of that operator. In the event that an operator does not take prompt and effective response action, the Party of that operator and other Parties are encouraged to take such action, including through their agents and operators specifically authorized by them to take such action on their behalf. 
Parties taking response action shall consult and coordinate their action with all other Parties taking response action, carrying out activities in the vicinity of the environmental emergency, or otherwise impacted by the environmental emergency, and shall, where practicable, take into account all relevant expert guidance which has been provided by permanent observer delegations to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, by other organizations, or by other relevant experts. 
However we have to admit that the implementation at the national level of mentioned provisions of Annex VI in some occasions faces a number of obstacles. 
For example, in Article 12.4 of the Russian Federal Law an operator in case of environmental emergency taking place as a result of carrying out activities in the Antarctic shall take response actions. An approximate list, scope and character of such response actions, the methodology of calculation of their costs shall be determined by the Government of the Russian Federation.
In this regard the Russian Government raises the following questions:
    • whether it is appropriate for the State to unilaterally decide on this approximate list, scope and character of such response actions?
    • whether the experience of other international organizations and organs is applicable to the Antarctic region and to what extent?
Further implementation at the national level of Annex VI is challenged by a more prominent issue: Annex VI is not yet in force. This factor alone creates series of uncertainties starting from the appropriate timing to start the discussion of abovementioned questions in detail within the ATCM and finishing with the necessity to harmonize the implementation of Annex VI in every national legislation.
The following obvious options in this regard can be outlined:
    • to start the discussion after the entry into force of Annex VI. However this option hampers the implementation of Annex VI by the States willing to do so as far as a number of issues need an international discussion. If the specific modalities are not worked out, Annex VI still cannot be fully implemented; or, what can be described as a more practical approach,

    • to start the discussion in advance before the entry into force of Annex VI. This, in our view, gives (1) an opportunity for those States which are implementing the Annex to have a more solid legal basis for the implementation; and (2) an opportunity for those States which haven’t approved Measure I (2005) yet to take into consideration the existing experience of States while preparing the Annex for entry into force.
Approximate list, scope and character of response actions are the practical issues lying at the core of the challenge before us, but the general question now is the readiness of the Consultative Parties to stand up to it and as always had been the case within the Antarctic Treaty System work out generally acceptable and feasible solutions for the way forward with regard to this pertinent topic, involving several aspects with the protection of the unique environment of Antarctica being the most important of them, as well as requiring most attention on behalf of all Consultative Parties.
In this regard sharing national experience already at this point and initiating the discussion on implementation of Article VI will be a most helpful and welcome development.

