





Antarctic Environments Portal: Content Management Plan









Antarctic Environments Portal: Content Management Plan
Information Paper submitted by Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, United States and SCAR

Summary
The Antarctic Environments Portal continues to provide the CEP and Antarctic Treaty Parties with a reliable source of information on issues of policy and management relevance.  
A Content Management Plan for the Portal has been developed and is appended to this Information Paper.  The content management plan aims to provide a more structured approach to developing articles for the Portal and for facilitating a dialogue with the CEP with regard to the articles published on the Portal website. 


Content Management Plan

As recorded in Working Paper 25, the Management Board and Editorial Group of the Portal have developed a Content Management Plan so as to provide a more structured approach to the development of Information Summaries and Emerging Issue content.  

The Content Management Plan aims to identify a series of topics or issues for which knowledge summaries are required so as to ensure that the content published on the Portal website is contemporary and relevant to current issues being attended to by the CEP and ATCM.

The Content Management Plan will be regularly reviewed and updated by the Editor, Deputy Editor and Editorial Group (e.g. at Editorial Group meetings).

The Portal Content Management Plan also offers a useful mechanism for engaging with the CEP and for offering the Committee an opportunity to provide feedback on Portal content that it wishes to see prepared.

The Committee is invited to provide comment on the utility of the content management plan, and to provide feedback on content that it wishes to see prepared for publication on the Portal website.





ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTS PORTAL
CONTENT MANAGEMENT PLAN







Antarctic Environments Portal - Content Management Plan

Purpose of the Portal

The Antarctic Environments Portal (the Portal) places the right information at the fingertips of Antarctic policy-makers and managers. It is designed to be an on-line resource of policy-ready information on Antarctic environments to support the work of the ATCM and CEP, presenting high quality, unbiased, a-political information in a synthesised form. The bulk of the content comprises short summaries of the state of knowledge on priority issues, linked to other resources that the main users of the Portal will find useful. Links include connections to data portals and repositories to allow the source of the original data to be identified.  The Portal is not meant to duplicate existing information and is designed to complement existing data repositories (e.g. biodiversity.aq). 

The Portal includes an interactive map, where different relevant thematic, spatial information can be overlaid and displayed. The Portal presents content in the four official languages of the Antarctic Treaty.

The Portal will continue to evolve as priorities change and as the knowledge base to support the information grows.

Content in the Portal is primarily written for CEP Members as well as for other delegates at ATCMs. Secondary users include national Antarctic operators, and scientists.  The public are also expected to be an interested audience, using the Portal to gain a greater understanding of the complexities of managing Antarctica.

Once published on the Portal website, knowledge summaries are regularly reviewed (approximately every 18 months) by the original authors if possible, and updated as required.


Purpose of this Content Management Plan

The Portal aims to provide a regular flow of new material for publication on the AEP website.  The content published on the AEP website is contemporary and relevant to current issues being attended to by the CEP and ATCM.

This content management plan aims to identify a series of topics or issues for which knowledge summaries are required, so as to support the CEP and ATCM.

The content management plan is intended to be regularly reviewed by the Editor, Deputy Editor and Editorial Group (e.g. at Editorial Group meetings) and regularly updated by the Editor.  

The content management plan provides an opportunity for engaging the CEP and providing an opportunity for the Committee to review topics that are being considered for publication in the Portal, and to comment on them, or make suggestions for new topics it would like to see included.

Suggestions for new topics (e.g. following meetings of the CEP and ATCM) will be added to this content management plan.


Criteria for selecting content for the Portal

The following is intended to guide the selection of topics or issues for which articles would be desirable for inclusion in the Portal.  Not all of the following need apply in all cases.  

As a general guide, Portal content should be based on:

    • Its relevance to the policy or management interests of the CEP or ATCM, where relevant is taken to mean:
        ◦ A subject matter or topic under current or planned discussion by the CEP or ATCM;
        ◦ A subject matter or topic that is included on the CEP’s five-year work plan or contained within the CEP’s climate change response work programme;
        ◦ Providing important context and information, including new information that managers and policy makers need to be aware of in light of broader policy and management interests;
    • Peer-reviewed published literature;
    • A request directly made through the CEP or ATCM;
    • A suggestion made by a researcher, research group or organisation with justification as to the policy or management relevance;
    • Be sufficiently defined to be able to be summarised within the format and word limits for Portal articles.

Further definition of the topic or issue may still be required at the early editorial stage.


Content Management Plan

The following table sets out a series of subject matter headings under which more specific topics are listed.  A short rationale for including the topics in the Portal is provided.


Topic or Issue
Rationale for inclusion
Antarctic species: status, trends and management
Status and trends of Southern Giant Petrel populations in Antarctica (Macronectes giganteus)
Meets Annex II criteria.  The species was considered as a candidate for specially protected species designation, but was not listed on advice from SCAR.   
Biodiversity knowledge
Marine Biodiversity
Use of the Portal to bring a major SCAR publication to the attention of the CEP and to provide background state of knowledge information to the Committee.
Geothermal areas in Antarctica
Geothermal areas are significant for their biodiversity and science value. CEP and ATCM have endorsed a SCAR code of conduct for undertaking activities in geothermal areas – Resolution 3 (2016).
Biodiversity of freshwater and saline systems
Freshwater systems are significant for their biodiversity and science value.  Relevant to the management of non-native species risks as well as the implementation of the CCRWP
Terrestrial Biodiversity
To provide the CEP with an understanding of the current state of knowledge on terrestrial biodiversity.  Of relevance to the CCRWP.
Marine ecosystems
The role of sea-ice in structuring marine ecosystems
Of background interest to the Committee in relation to the CCRWP.
Antarctic atmosphere
The impact of the ozone hole
Of background interest to the Committee in relation to the CCRWP.
Climate change
Southern Ocean acidification
Use of the Portal to bring a forthcoming SCAR publication to the attention of the CEP and to provide background state of knowledge information to the Committee.
Response of terrestrial ecosystems to climate change
Of direct relevance to the implementation of the CCRWP.
Monitoring climate change impacts
Of direct relevance to the implementation of the CCRWP.
Ocean temperature shifts
Of direct relevance to the implementation of the CCRWP.
Permafrost and clathrates
Of background interest to the Committee in relation to the CCRWP.
Introduction of non-native species
Pathways for non-native species introductions
A priority topic for the CEP. Relevant to the CEP’s five-year work plan.
Micro-organisms as non-native species
A priority topic for the CEP. Relevant to the CEP’s five-year work plan.
Environmental Impacts and Pollution
Micro-pollutants in Antarctic wastewater
An emerging issue that CEP members may be unaware of.
Micro-plastics and their distribution
An emerging issue that CEP members may be unaware of.
Remediation of hydrocarbon spills in Antarctica
Pollution events and environmental clean-up is a priority issue for the CEP.  Of relevance to the CEP’s five-year work plan and also to Annex VI discussions.
Impacts of marine noise on mammals
Requested by Germany at CEP XIX (para 23 of the CEP XIX Report).
Environmental consequences of UAV use
Of current interest to the CEP and ATCM.
Requested by Germany at CEP XIX (para 23 of the CEP XIX Report).
Impacts of trampling and ground disturbance
Of relevance to site visitor management.
Inorganic pollutants in Antarctica
Of interest to the Committee in relation to Annex III and advising the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment.
Long-range transported pollutants in Antarctica
Of relevance to impacts on species and habitats in Antarctica. SCAR produced a report on persistent organic pollutants in Antarctica in 2009.

Topic or Issue
Rationale for inclusion
Conservation and area protection
Antarctic conservation biogeographic regions
Endorsed by the ATCM by means of Resolution 6 (2012) and has been updated recently by the researchers.  Relevant to the management of protected areas and to the CEP’s five-year work plan.
Antarctic Heritage Conservation
No overview of the status of Antarctic heritage conservation exists.  A key role of the CEP is to maintain an overview of listed historic sites and monuments.  Significant effort has been put into conserving some Antarctic buildings. Relevant to the CEP’s five-year work plan.
Geological conservation in Antarctica
An issue of recent discussion within the CEP. Relevant to the CEP’s five-year work plan.
Effectiveness of area protection in Antarctica
A primary function of the CEP is to advise the ATCM on the operation and elaboration of the protected areas system.  Recent publications make it timely to provide the CEP with a status report of the current state of knowledge.  Relevant to the CEP’s five-year work plan.





