





The Future Challenges of Antarctic Research – The Finnish Perspective








The Future Challenges of Antarctic Research – The Finnish Perspective
Information Paper submitted by Finland

Finland’s Antarctic research strategy states that Antarctic research will produce high-quality scientific data 1) on Antarctica and 2) for research purposes that demand indispensable information on Antarctica. The Finnish Antarctic research is internationally interactive. Moreover, this research will generate information to support national and international decision-making. 

The Finnish researchers have identified the following specific future science questions regarding the Antarctic research and global climate change. In general, it is seen that Antarctic research requires well-coordinated international efforts in in-situ observations, in analyses of existing and new data, and in experiments applying a range of models (process models, operational weather and sea ice models, and coupled climate models).
1.	Questions related to the ice sheet and the sea-level rise

a) How will the mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet and ice shelves evolve under changes in precipitation, surface and basal melt, as well as iceberg calving? In particular, how stable are the ice shelves and the West Antarctic ice sheet, and what are the consequences of major collapses of ice shelves? 
Solution: Observations and model experiments focusing on the changes in the amount and phase of precipitation, as well as on the dynamics and thermodynamics of the ice sheet and ice shelves, in particular on the response of glacier flow to ice shelf collapse events.

b)  What is the sensitivity of the Antarctic ice sheet and its contribution to past and future sea level and climate change? Understanding the drivers, processes, and rates of past and future Antarctic ice-sheet change from models and data.
Solution: International scientific drilling studies on Antarctic continental margins closely in relation to ice sheet streaming and variability.

c) Is there a way to mitigate sea level rise from West Antarctica? Can geoengineering prevent rapid ice sheet collapse? 
Solution: Aerogeophysical and shipborne observations and model experiments applying both coupled ice/ocean/atmosphere models and targeted ice sheet dynamics models focused on melting and calving processes.

d) How does the climate change affect the glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) in Antarctica? How to collect reference for the surface model of the Antarctica in 3D?
Solution: Both theoretical modelling work and in-situ measurement efforts need to be intensified. An accurate land uplift model of Antarctica is crucial. 
2. Questions related to meteorology, oceanography, and sea ice

a) How do small-scale processes (which need to be parameterized in climate models) related to clouds, radiative transfer, snow and sea ice thermodynamics, as well as turbulent mixing and waves in the atmosphere and ocean, interact with each other and with large-scale dynamics of the atmosphere and ocean?
Solution: More process-level field observations, analyses of existing and new data, further development of subgrid-scale parameterization methods, and coordinated experiments applying coupled atmosphere – sea ice – ocean models.

b) How soon will we detect a circumpolar decreasing trend in the Antarctic sea ice extent and thickness, and how fast will the decrease progress?
Solution: (i) investigation on the dynamic and thermodynamic factors controlling Antarctic sea ice extent and thickness, (ii) improvement of sea ice schemes in coupled climate models, and (iii) coordinated multi-model ensemble experiments. 

c) How are the Antarctic atmosphere and Southern Ocean affected by forcing from mid- and lower latitudes, and how will changes in the Antarctic affect weather and climate in southern mid-latitudes?
Solution: Research on the factors controlling the variability of atmospheric and oceanic meridional transports of heat and freshwater to/from the Antarctic. The research should be based on atmospheric and oceanic reanalyses as well as experiments applying numerical weather prediction and climate models. 
3. Questions related to climate forcing parameters, atmospheric composition and atmosphere-cryosphere-ocean interactions

a) How strong sink of atmospheric carbon dioxide is the Southern Ocean and how is the strength of this sink connected to the biological activity in the sea? Are there trends of this sink? Is the Southern Ocean a source or a sink for aerosol particles? What are the fluxes of different compounds, and their  temporal and spatial variability, and the factors that contribute to this variability? What changes of Southern Ocean composition fluxes can be foreseen in future?
Solution: More dense and long-term measurements of atmospheric composition (incl. carbon dioxide, methane, trace gases, aerosol number, size and chemical composition) in different parts of the Antarctic, over the Ocean and in southern parts of the Southern Hemispheric continents. Only after improved observational network is the modelling of composition fluxes possible.

b) What is the spatial (horizontal and vertical) distribution of different atmospheric compounds in Antarctica and what are their major sources?
Solution: Improved observational capacities for measurements of atmospheric composition, also the vertical distribution. Over the Antarctic the satellite observations are very sparse and insufficient. In-situ and grounds based remote sensing techniques are needed. Transport modelling and validation of models with in-situ data is needed to better characterize the sources. 

c) How do atmospheric processes related with aerosol aging during transport, gas-to-particle conversion, cloud formation and microphysics, wet and dry deposition, and so forth, affect the climate forcing of different compounds and climate feedbacks at each region of the Antarctic (central, coastal, marine)? 
Solution: Process-level in-situ studies to improve parametrizations of these processes in different type of models. 
4. Biodiversity related question

What are the consequences of climate changes to Antarctic habitat and biodiversity? 
Solution: Examine the effects of past climate change on the processes of genetic divergence, speciation and extinction.
5. Questions related to mantle dynamics, large magma eruptions, and continental breakup

What were the principal mantle sources of the large Jurassic magma eruptions across Antarctica and on the adjacent continents? What were the environmental impacts of the large magma eruptions? 
Solution: Coordinated acquisition of integrated geochemical, geochronological, palaeomagnetic, and seismic datasets. Multidisciplinary collaboration to reconstruct the environmental impacts. International ocean drilling studies.
6. Questions related to human activities in the Antarctic

a) What is the effect of climate change on the operations of ships in the Antarctic waters?
Solution: Extensive monitoring of the ship performance and environmental conditions on the Antarctic waters. In addition, new models should be developed to analyze the extreme wave and ice conditions in these waters.

b) How much do present and foreseen human activities in the Antarctic affect the environment? 
Solution: Long-term and campaigns based measurements of atmospheric and cryospheric composition and measurements and modelling of hazardous compounds and their ecosystem flows in the Antarctic.

