





Report of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group








Report of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group

Information Paper submitted by Australia, China, India, Russian Federation
Summary
This paper gives a brief report on the activities during 2015-16 of the Management Group established to oversee the implementation of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills. Key issues addressed by the group included aviation coordination, collaboration on scientific research and planned improvements to the main access route in the Area.
Introduction
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills was designated under Measure 2 (2007), following a proposal by Australia, China, India, Romania, and the Russian Federation. The management plan for the area was revised under Measure 15 (2014).
The Management Plan aims to protect the Larsemann Hills environment by promoting cooperation and coordination among Parties planning and conducting scientific and operational activities in the Area. Consistent with the approach taken for several other ASMAs, the Parties active in the Area have established a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the Management Plan. This Information Paper follows previous reports to the CEP on the Management Group’s activities1 and provides information on the collaborative actions of the management group during 2015-16.
2016 ASMA Management Group meeting
Members of the Management Group met at the XXVIII COMNAP Annual General meeting held in Goa, India in August 2016. The meeting was chaired by Australia and attended by representatives from China (Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration and the Polar Research Institute of China), India (National Centre for Oceanographic and Antarctic Research) and the Russian Federation (Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute).
In line with current practice of rotating the Chair of the Management Group between members, China took over the role from Australia following the meeting.
Information exchange
Reports of the previous year (2015-16) and activities to be undertaken during the 2016-17 season were discussed by members. Members of the Management Group exchanged information on operational and scientific activities.
Aviation co-ordination
The Management Group members recalled that during their 2015 meeting they had discussed the potential for increasing aviation activities in the region, and had agreed to protocols to ensure awareness and co-ordination of aviation activities in the region, including:
    • daily email communication between station leaders to forecast aviation activities and
    • continuous monitoring of VHF Channel 16 for vessel and aircraft operations. 
Members agreed that these protocols had worked well during the 2015/16 season, and highlighted the need to also be aware of and coordinate ship to shore flying when multiple ships were in the area. Members agreed to communicate the location, start and finish time of such activities.
Regional co-operation between stakeholders in scientific programs
To enable a broad overview of all the science activities being conducted in the ASMA, the Management Group agreed to keep a register documenting all scientific projects being undertaken. Australia offered to establish this register.
In relation to specific collaborative scientific activities between Management Group members:
    • India and Australia identified possible collaboration opportunities on sea bird research.
    • China and India discussed the possibility of collaborative geological activities.
    • China and Russia discussed the potential for collaborative air and ground surveys.
Fuel spill response capability
The Management Group agreed to compile a database outlining members’ fuel spill response capabilities. The database will help identify:
    • the potential capacity of each member to assist others; and
    • gaps in equipment or response capability across the ASMA.
Once compiled the database will allow the Management Group to collaboratively address any gaps to ensure any fuel spill can be appropriately managed. 
Plans on improvement of road network
Russia and China informed the Management Group that discussions had continued on options to improve the road from Broknes peninsula to the plateau. The route design had been finalised and assessed under an Initial Environmental Evaluation and it was expected that work could be commenced in the 2017-18 season. However, a sudden collapse in late January 2017 of an ice bridge on the route to the plateau has forced a reassessment of the planned activities. A meeting to discuss the project, including safety issues, will be held in Russia.
Station leaders
In order to facilitate communication between stations within the region, Management Group members exchanged contact details for incoming station leaders. 

