





Creating spaces of collaboration: Meeting of Administrators of Latin American Antarctic Programs

English version provided by the author









Creating spaces of collaboration: Meeting of Administrators of Latin American Antarctic Programs

Information document submitted by Peru, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador and Uruguay


In compliance with Recommendation XXVII-14 Peru agreed at the XXVII Meeting of Administrators of Latin American Antarctic Programs (RAPAL), held in Guayaquil, Ecuador on July 2016, to submit the present information document to the XL ATCM.

Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay, Ecuador and Peru participate annually in the Meeting of Administrators of Latin American Antarctic Programs (RAPAL), which is the forum for coordination in Latin America on scientific, logistical and environmental topics in Antarctic matters.

RAPAL has its origin in the Meetings of the Directors of the Antarctic Institutes of Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, held in Buenos Aires (1987), Santiago (1988), and Montevideo (1989). The operators of the Antarctic Programs of Brazil, Peru and Ecuador were incorporated since 1990. In the most recent RAPAL, Colombia and Venezuela participated as observers. The next meeting will be XXVIII RAPAL, to be held in Lima, Peru from 9 to 12 October 2017.

Within the framework of the RAPAL, bi-annual congresses on Antarctic science was agreed be held, in order to share information on the results of the research being carried out by Latin American programs and to achieve more and better research together, taking advantage of scientific and logistics capacities of the region's programs. The next one to be held will be the IX Latin American Congress of Antarctic Science, in Santiago de Chile, from 4 to 6 October 2017. 

Until today, 27 RAPAL have taken place, facilitating coordination and cooperation among countries in the development of antarctic operations. Important documents were also made with the aim of promoting the protection of the antarctic environment, antarctic occupational health and safety, among which the following documents stand out:
 
• Antarctic accident prevention manual
• First aid manual (Recommendation XXI-12)
• Guidelines Manual for Antarctic Environmental Protection (Recommendation XXIII-2)

RAPAL on the web
Currently, you can find on the website http://www.rapal.org.ar/ the documentation generated in each Meeting, such as terms of reference, audiovisual material and contact information, among others. On a constant basis, the countries that comprise it are presenting contributions in order to optimize this website. Soon, cultural publications generated in the antarctic campaigns and a database of those in charge of the postal activity by country will be included in order to strengthen the Latin American postal activity as an instrument of diffusion and antarctic culture at the international level.

Recommendations

In connection with emerging issues of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings during the most recent RAPAL, the following recommendations, among others, were agreed:

RAPAL Recommendation XXVII-1: Form an Intersessional Group to develop and contribute to upcoming SCAR events, in accordance with the new Strategic Plan, to promote national activities, foster cooperation and capacity building.

Recommendation RAPAL XXVII-2: Establish a Research Network in Eco-materials, linking different Antarctic institutes and obtain contributions in research, experimentation, development and manufacture of eco-materials, for the protection of the environment in Antarctica.

Recommendation RAPAL XXVII-4: Prioritize the selection of projects involving international cooperation, whose results will be published in indexed journals. To consolidate with the Academy the Latin American Congress of Antarctic Science in the intermediate years to the OSC-SCAR.

Recommendation RAPAL XXVII-6: Activate the Latin American Network for the study of eco-materials for the exchange of views on the project "Ecuadorian Antarctic Refuge".

Recommendation RAPAL XXVII-7: Exchange information on the use of UAVs related to possible environmental impacts for the development of a joint document to work with in the intersessional period.

Recommendation RAPAL XXVII-8: Actively disseminate the commemorative publication for the 25 years of the signature of the Madrid Protocol elaborated by the CPA and the "Declaration of Santiago" adopted during the XXXIX ATCM.

Recommendation RAPAL XXVII-10: Establish an intersessional consultation group to structure common rules on Antarctic diving, as it is a high-risk activity, especially in the Antarctic zone.

Recommendation RAPAL XXVII-11: To make known the "Antarctic Accident Prevention Manual" in order to put it into consideration of the other APAL countries, allowing it to enter into force. However, we urge to make use of the implemented COMNAP Incident Reporting System.

Modification to Recommendation RAPAL XXVI-11: RAPAL offers its support to COMNAP in order to discuss the inclusion of guidelines on the operation of AFIM systems (Antarctic Flight Information Manual), for which it will submit a document on the next COMNAP AGM XXIX (2017).

The member countries of RAPAL emphasize the importance of an Antarctic regional forum that contributes to the observance and dissemination of the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty System and its Protocol on Environmental Protection. It is also an appropriate scope for the treatment and dissemination of the activities the member countries are developing in Antarctica and constituting a contribution to the entire Antarctic community.

