





WMO Annual Report 2016-2017








WMO Annual Report 2016-2017
The World Meteorological Organization1 (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations and includes 191 Member States and Territories. It is the UN system's authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources. 
The WMO Polar and High Mountain regions priority activity promotes and coordinates relevant observations, research and services that are carried out in the Antarctic, Arctic and high mountain regions by nations and by groups of nations. It interfaces with all WMO activities (including the World Climate and Word Weather Research Programmes2) and other related programmes throughout the world, meeting global needs and requirements for observations, research and services in the polar and high mountain regions. 
 
The Global Cryosphere Watch (GCW) is foundational to WMO’s polar initiatives and its observing component is one of the four essential observing systems under the WMO Integrated Global Observing Systems (see IP 113 for further details). Three stations were also added to the Antarctic Observing Network (AntON), which is maintained by WMO and SCAR (see IP 117).
 
WMO’s Polar Space Task Group provides coordination across Space Agencies to facilitate acquisition and distribution of fundamental satellite datasets, and to contribute to or support the development of specific derived products for cryospheric, polar, and high-mountain scientific research and applications. IP 114 gives examples of such products we believe will be of interest to Treaty Parties.
 
The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) is an initiative covering the period 2017 – 2019 centred on 2018, which aims to improve environmental prediction capabilities by coordinating periods of intensive observing, modelling, prediction, verification, and user-engagement and education activities. A special Observing Period is planned in Antarctica from 16 Nov 2018 to 15 Feb 2019 (see associated IP 116).
 
WMO is planning the development of an Antarctic Polar Regional Climate Centre (PRCC) Network based on the example and lessons learned from the Arctic PRCC Network. We invite Treaty Parties and other interested organisations to engage with the development of an Antarctic PRCC (see associated IP 118).

Through its co-sponsored World Climate Research Programme2, WMO carries out a number of research activities (often in partnership with SCAR and others) of relevance to Treaty Parties. This year we are submitting two additional papers, on the Polar Climate Predictability Initiative (see IP 115) and on Model Downscaling in the Antarctic (see IP 119). 
WMO is committed to a positive, mutually beneficial engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate observation, services and research.

