





Annual Report for 2016/17 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 








Annual Report for 2016/17 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
COMNAP is the organisation of National Antarctic Programs which brings together, in particular, the national officials responsible for planning, conducting and managing support to Antarctic science on behalf of their respective governments. 
COMNAP is an international association, established in September 1988, whose Members are the 30 National Antarctic Programs from the countries of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Belarus, Republic of Korea, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States and Uruguay. The National Antarctic Programs of Canada (from August 2016), Portugal (from August 2015), and Venezuela (from August 2015) are currently COMNAP Observers organisations. 
COMNAP's purpose is to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. As an organisation, COMNAP acts to add value to National Antarctic Program’s efforts by serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner, by facilitating and promoting international partnerships, and by providing opportunities and systems for information exchange.
COMNAP strives to provide the Antarctic Treaty System with objective, practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' extensive expertise and their first-hand Antarctic knowledge. Since 1988, COMNAP has been an active contributor to ATCM and CEP discussion, with the presentation of 32 Working Papers and 105 Information Papers. 
COMNAP continues to have a close working relationship with other Antarctic organisations, in particular with SCAR. A joint COMNAP/SCAR EXCOM Meeting was held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, August 2016. COMNAP was an invited observer to the IAATO Annual Meeting and presented reports to the Forum of Arctic Research Operators (FARO) Annual Meeting, to the Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) 14th Conference, and to the 17th International Ice Charting Working Group (IICWG) meetings. A particular highlight for COMNAP in 2016 was the Search and Rescue (SAR) Workshop III convened in co-operation with the Chilean Directorate General of the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine (DIRECTEMAR) and with Instituto Antártico Chileno (INACH).
The COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) was held in August 2016 in Goa, India, hosted by the National Centre for Antarctic and Oceans Research. Sessions on energy & technology, shipping, and safety were convened.  Professor Kazuyuki Shiraishi of Japan’s National Institute of Polar Research continues in his three-year term as the COMNAP Chair to AGM 2017 (August). Michelle Rogan-Finnemore continues as Executive Secretary. The University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, continues to host the COMNAP Secretariat.
COMNAP Highlights and Achievements for 2016/17
Search and Rescue (SAR) Workshop III - convened
In support of safe operations in the Antarctic Treaty region, and as agreed by COMNAP in response to ATCM Resolution 4 (2013), to regularly convene workshops to discuss SAR and emergency response, COMNAP convened the SAR Workshop III on 1–2 June 2016, co-hosted by DIRECTEMAR and INACH. National Antarctic Programs, Rescue Co-ordination Centres (RCCs) IAATO, CCAMLR, and COSPAS–SARSAT delegates participated and a SAR table-top exercise was carried out.  The workshop report is submitted as an IP to this ATCM and is also available from https://www.comnap.aq/Publications/Comnap%20Publications/COMNAP_SAR_WorkshopIII_Final_Report_7July2016.pdf. 

COMNAP Symposium 2016 “Winter-Over Challenges” – convened & Proceedings published
COMNAP convened its 17th Symposium (August 2016); the theme was “Winter-Over Challenges”. The Symposiums are open forums where people involved in managing the support of scientific research in Antarctica can share their experience, expertise and thoughts for the benefit of others. Many National Antarctic Programs are operating wintering/year-round stations and scientific data collected in Antarctica during the winter is critical to inform global studies of the Earth System.  The objective of the Symposium recognised that winter-over is challenging and presented solutions to those challenges that are of an operational, technical and personnel nature. There were 112 participants from 30 National Antarctic Programs and others, who contributed to discussions, made presentations or displayed posters. The Symposium Proceedings (published February 2017) can be downloaded from: https://www.comnap.aq/Publications/Comnap%20Publications/Proceedings%20of%20the%20COMNAP%20Symposium%202016%20Winter-Over%20Challenges.pdf. 
Unmanned Aerial Systems Working Group (UAS-WG) – review of Handbook 
Formed as a sub-group of the COMNAP Air Expert Group, the UAS-WGs purpose is to “…reduce risk to people, infrastructure and environment in the Antarctic Treaty area, while enabling…UAS use in the area for scientific applications and science support purposes.” Experts from fourteen COMNAP Member programs are participants.  In the intercessional period, post-Antarctic summer science support season, the UAS-WG reviewed the UAS Handbook and carried out an informal survey of COMNAP Members in regards to UAS use in the Antarctic Treaty region (see IP to this ATCM/CEP meeting). Intercessionally, the COMNAP Secretariat remained in close contact with the SCAR SC-ATS in regards to their work on UAS and wildlife. 
Station Catalogue – underway with on-line GIS interface complete
The COMNAP Station Catalogue, which began as a collaboration with the EU-PolarNet, provides comprehensive information on the National Antarctic Program stations which will be useful to promote future collaboration, exchange of scientists and sharing of infrastructures. The information in the catalogue was provided by National Antarctic Programs and will be updated in the COMNAP database which supports the range of COMNAP products and tools (see additional information on the catalogue and database in an IP to this ATCM). Non-sensitive data are available publicly by way of a GIS interface at: https://www.comnap.aq/Members/SitePages/Home.aspx. 
COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship – application round open
COMNAP established the Antarctic Research Fellowship in 2011 and since that time has awarded eight fellowships, plus four jointly with SCAR. The Fellowship aims to assist early career researchers, technicians and engineers. The 2016 Fellowships were awarded to Ronja Reese (Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Germany) to undertake research on “Importance of ice buttressing in Antarctica" at the British Antarctic Survey; Blanca Figuerola (University of Barcelona, Spain) to undertake research on “Vulnerability of Antarctic bryozoan communities to environmental change” at the Australian Antarctic Division; and a joint COMNAP/SCAR Fellowship was awarded to Christopher Horvat (Harvard University, USA) to undertake research on " Modelling the Antarctic Sea Ice Floe Size Distribution" at the National Institute of Water and Atmosphere, New Zealand). The 2017 Fellowship round focuses on a list of key projects of value to National Antarctic Programs and closes on 1 July 2017. SCAR and COMNAP are also working with CCAMLR to promote their scholarships. See https://www.comnap.aq/SitePages/fellowships.aspx. 
COMNAP Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) Project – complete
The COMNAP ARC project, a follow-on project from the SCAR Antarctic Science Horizon Scan, explored the technology, logistics, operations, funding and international collaboration challenges that will likely be encountered by the National Antarctic Programs in the delivery of Antarctic science in the mid- to long-term. See COMNAP ATCMXXXIX (2016) IP051 for full outcomes of the project. The project was completed in 2016; results are published in Antarctic Science, volume 28, issue 6, http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0954102016000481.

COMNAP Products and Tools
Search and Rescue (SAR) Webpage    www.comnap.aq/membersonly/SitePages/SAR.aspx
As requested in ATCM Resolution 4 (2013), COMNAP has established a SAR webpage in consultation with RCCs which is regularly updated. SAR contacts have also been publicly listed on the COMNAP website based on SAR Workshop III discussions.
Accident, Incident & Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR) www.comnap.aq/membersonly/AINMR/SitePages/Home.aspx
AINMR was developed to assist in information exchange and is available on the Members-only area of the COMNAP website. The AINMR's primary objective is: to capture information about events that had, or could have had, serious consequences; and/or reveal lessons; and/or for novel or very unusual events. Full reports on accidents can also be posted and shared on the site and can be discussed and reviewed. 
Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS) www.comnap.aq/sprs/SitePages/Home.aspx  
SPRS is an optional, voluntary system for exchange of information about National Antarctic Program ship operations. Its primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration. It can also make a very useful contribution to safety with all SPRS data made available to the RCCs as an additional source of information complementing all other national and international systems in place. A review of the SPRS led to the testing of a new COMNAP “Asset Tracking System (CATS)” for the 2016/17 summer season.  CATS included vessel and some aircraft movements.  The results of the CATS test will be discussed at the COMNAP AGM 2017.  
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)  e-AFIM
AFIM is a handbook of aeronautical information published as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as per Resolution 1 (2013). COMNAP no longer publishes the AFIM in loosely-bound paper format, beginning on 1 October 2016, AFIM is published in PDF format and is available to all subscribers by way of a link to the most current version (date-stamped).   
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM) 
ATOM is an evolution of the handbook of telecommunications practices to which ATCM Recommendation X-3 Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica and the Collection and Distribution of Antarctic Meteorological Data refers. COMNAP Members and SAR authorities have access to the latest version (February 2017) via the COMNAP website.  The format of ATOM will be revised to reflect the new format of the COMNAP database. 
________
www.comnap.aq
Attachment 1: COMNAP officers, projects, expert groups and meetings
Executive Committee (EXCOM) 
The COMNAP Chair and Vice-Chairs are elected officers of COMNAP. The elected officers plus the Executive Secretary, compose the COMNAP Executive Committee as follows:
Position
Officer
Term expires
Chair
Kazuyuki Shiraishi (NIPR) kshiraishi@nipr.ac.jp 
AGM 2017
Vice-Chairs
Javed Beg (NCAOR) javed.beg@gmail.com 
AGM 2019

Yves Frenot (IPEV) yves.frenot@ipev.fr
AGM 2017

John Guldahl (NPI) john.guldahl@npolar.no
AGM 2019

José Retamales (INACH) jretamales@inach.cl 
AGM 2017

Rob Wooding (AAD) rob.wooding@aad.gov.au 
AGM 2017


Executive Secretary
[John Hall (BAS) & Hyoung Chul Shin (KOPRI) completed their 
3-year Vice-Chair terms in August 2016]
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore michelle.finnemore@comnap.aq 

Table 1 – COMNAP Executive Committee.
Projects
Project
Project Manager
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) – Electronic Format Implementation
Paul Morin & Brian Stone (until May 2016)
John Hall (until August 2016) / Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) Working Group
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
Test COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS)
Robb Clifton
Hyoung Chul Shin (until August 2016) / José Retamales
Facilities Database and Catalogue
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore & Andrea Colombo
Yves Frenot
Table 2 – COMNAP projects currently in progress.
Expert Groups
Expert Group (topic)
Expert Group leader
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Air 
(includes the UAS-WG)
Paul Sheppard
John Guldahl 
Energy & Technology
Felix Bartsch & Pavel Kapler
Rob Wooding
Environment
Anoop Tiwari
Rob Wooding
Medical
Anne Hicks 
Javed Beg
Outreach/Education
Dragomir Mateev
Yves Frenot
Safety
Simon Trotter 
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
Science 
(includes the SOOS “Think Tank”)
Robb Clifton
José Retamales
Shipping
Miguel Ojeda 
José Retamales
Training
Veronica Vlasich 
Yves Frenot
Table 3 – COMNAP Expert Groups. 
Meetings 
Previous 12 months 
1–2 June 2016, Search and Rescue (SAR) Workshop III, co-hosted by Instituto Antártico Chileno (INACH) and DIRECTEMAR, Valparaiso, Chile.
16–18 August 2016, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXVIII (2016), hosted by the National Centre for Antarctic and Oceans Research (NCAOR), Goa, India.
19–20 August 2016, COMNAP Symposium 2016 “Wintering-Over Challenges”, hosted by the National Centre for Antarctic and Oceans Research (NCAOR), Goa, India.
21 August 2016, Joint SCAR/COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) Meeting, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

21–22 August 2016, Joint Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine (JEGHBM) Meeting, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

5–6 December 2016, COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) Meeting, hosted by the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Tachikawa, Japan.
Upcoming 
31 July–2 August 2017, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXIX (2017), hosted by the Czech Republic National Antarctic Program at Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. Will include the joint COMNAP/SCAR Executive Committee (EXCOM) Meeting 2017 and a workshop session on energy & technology requirements for science support as identified by the ARC project.









