





Turkey - Czech Republic Scientific Collaboration in Antarctica








Turkey - Czech Republic Scientific Collaboration in Antarctica

Summary
In the context of the First Turkish Scientific Expedition to Antarctica; collaboration with the Czech Republic Antarctic Institute is reported.

 Turkey - Czech Republic Scientific Collaboration


James Ross Island, where the Mendel station is located, is about 2.600 square kilometers in area and only the northern part is deglaciated; in any case, it is regarded as one of the biggest “Antarctic coastal oases”. While Antarctica is a continent where the harshest condition prevails for survival both in marine and terrestrial ecosystems, James Ross Island offers a variety of flora for live sciences. Definitely, the most dominant organisms living in the terrestrial ecosystems of the white continent are lichens. According to literature, more than 350 species of lichens have been reported from the continent although an important number of these species are suspicious. Following lichens, bryophytes (mosses) are the second dominant organisms in terrestrial ecosystems of Antarctica and there are only two known native species of flowering plants. 

Taking into consideration the geographical and climatic peculiarities of James Ross Island, plant science is one of the leading science direction in a long-term research plan of Czech activities at the island. Therefore, an increased attention was given to the research on structure and function of Antarctic lichen flora during the 2016-2017 Antarctic season. During the 2016-2017 Antarctic season, the Czech Republic Antarctic Program offered international cooperation for various foreign institutes and scientists. Accordingly, Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center (ITU PolReC) and the Czech Antarctic Research Program developed a cooperation scheme. Eventually, Prof. Dr. Gökhan Halıcı was invited for scientific research at the Mendel station of Czech Republic on lichens. The joint Czech-Turkish field works focused on lichen taxonomy and ecophysiology. As to the first observations from the expeditions held at the Mendel station, more than 30 species are reported from Antarctica for the first time (for one of the first reports, see the Appendix) and there are at least 5 undiscovered and no name species. Recently, the lichen specimens collected during the expedition have been determined and evaluated at the Masaryk University, Brno (Czech Republic) and the Erciyes University, Kayseri (Turkey).

Dr. Halıcı’s researches with the support of the Czech Antarctic Research Program was successfully conducted and completed. Therefore, we would like to thank to the Czech Antarctic Research Program for their support and kind hospitality. We do believe in that such cooperation may be of interest to Non-Consultative Parties that did not maintain Antarctic bases but strived to conduct “substantial scientific research activity” for the attainment of Consultative status.



Appendix:
Halici, M.G., Güllü, M., Barták, M. (2017): First record of a common endolithic lichenized fungus species Catenarina desolata Søchting, Søgaard & Elvebakk. from James Ross Island (Antarctic Peninsula). Czech Polar Reports (accepted for press, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2017).


