





Significant change to ASPA No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island (Isla 25 de Mayo), South Shetland Islands








Significant change to ASPA No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island (Isla 25 de Mayo), South Shetland Islands
Information Paper submitted by Poland

Summary
Significant change to ASPA No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island (Isla 25 de Mayo), South Shetland Islands is reported by Poland. On 29th November 2016 whale vertebrae were taken from the coastal part of the Area.
Significant change to ASPA No 151 Lions Rump
Under Article 10 of the Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Area Protection and Management) Parties shall make arrangements for “obtaining and exchanging information on any significant change or damage to the Antarctic Specially Managed Area, Antarctic Specially Protected Area or Historic Site or Monument”. 
ASPA No 151 Lions Rump was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No 34 through Recommendation XVI-2 (1991) after a proposal by Poland, and re-designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in accordance with Decision 1 (2002). It is located on the southern coast of King George Bay, King George Island. Lions Rump contains rich lichen flora, and numerous stands of two native vascular plants. Twelve species of birds nest within the area. There are large numbers of elephant seals and fur seals on the beaches. The Area has had minimal human disturbance. Human presence in the Area is limited to two persons carrying out monitoring research between 1st November and 30th March, and occasional  geological and geomorphologic research. Therefore, the Area may be regarded as a reference site for future comparative studies.
On 29th November 2016 whale vertebrae were taken from the coastal part of the Area. During that time persons carrying out ecological monitoring were doing field work in other part of the Area and – on account of terrain obstacles - did not witness the incident itself. However, upon returning to the beach they noticed the disappearance of some whale bones. Whale bones in the Area were not inventoried, but it is estimated that at least three vertebrae were taken (see: photos below). No permits for the entry into the Area were presented and, as far as we know, no permit was issued for whale bones taking.
Whale bones, left on many South Shetlands’ sites by whalers who sailed across the Maritime Antarctica during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, form an important part of the historical landscape of the Islands. Weathering whale bones are also a source of nutrients for local communities of lichens, enhancing local biodiversity.
In view of this incident we would like to stress the need for strengthening efforts to provide good environmental education and training to all personal going to the Antarctica. Wider dissemination of information on core values of Antarctica, as well as on the rules of conduct in ASPAs (and ASMAs), might help us to avoid such incidents.
 
 

Fig. 1 Photographic material documenting the taking of a whale vertebra from ASPA No 151 Lions Rump

