





Brazilian XXXV Antarctic Operation








Brazilian XXXV Antarctic Operation
1. Introduction
Brazil's XXXV Antarctic Operation (OPERANTAR XXXV) was conducted from October 2016 to April 2017. The two Brazilian Antarctic vessels, Polar Ship "Almirante Maximiano" and Oceanographic Support Ship "Ary Rongel", were deployed from the port of Rio de Janeiro. The operation supported field activities for 25 scientific research projects involving 260 researchers, climbers and other personnel. Activities were conducted on board the Brazilian vessels, in the Antarctic Emergency Modules at the Brazilian base and in various camping locations. Research activities were also carried out in other Antarctic stations in cooperation with the Antarctic Programs of other Contracting Parties, while the Brazilian Antarctic Program also provided field support to other countries' activities. 
Deployment to Antarctica was preceded in July and August by a pre-Antarctic safety training course, which also assesses participants' adaptability and physical condition. Training is open to participants from all ATS countries.

Figure 1 – Pre-Antarctic training
OPERANTAR XXXV provided support to the second phase (Antarctica I) of the reconstruction of the Brazilian Antarctic Station Comandante Ferraz (EACF). Furthermore, 10 flights were also performed by the Brazilian Air Force, transporting researchers, base personnel and material. 
2. Removal of the Brazilian Aircraft C-130H 
OPERANTAR XXXV also undertook the removal of a damaged Brazilian Air Force C-130H aircraft stranded after landing at the Teniente Rodolfo Marsh Martin aerodrome of the Chilean station "President Eduardo Frei Montalva" in November 2014. Planning for the removal of the aircraft was conducted during the Antarctic summers of 2014/15 and 2015/16. An evaluation based on multiple site surveys, aircraft dismantling studies and risk assessment concluded that the removal of the aircraft would be conducted in two stages. The first stage (removal of reusable equipment, minor items and aviation fuel) was carried out from 18 to 24 November 2016. The second stage (dismantling, cutting and removal of aircraft fuselage and debris and site clean-up) took place from 7 December 2016 to 31 January 2017. 
Planning and execution were carried out with the valuable support of and in close coordination with the Chilean Government. The Russian Antarctic Program at Belingshausen Station also provided valuable support during the execution of the removal operations. 





































