





Tracking Antarctica - A WWF report on the state of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean









Tracking Antarctica
A WWF report on the state of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
Submitted by ASOC
Summary
ASOC member organization WWF supports a precautionary and science-based approach to identify the pressures and threats to the planet’s largest wilderness. In October 2016, WWF launched a new biennial report - Tracking Antarctica – providing a scientific update on the state of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. It identifies ways to respond to the challenges based on the latest scientific evidence to ensure the wonders of the Antarctic are preserved for generations to come. The report was presented at an event at the 2016 Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) meeting in Hobart. It is available to download in PDF or as digital application for IOS mobile phones and iPADs. 
Tracking Antarctica
The oceans around Antarctica are some of the most pristine in the world. However, parts of the Antarctic are among the fastest warming places on the planet. The habitat and biodiversity are under increasing pressure from climate change and human activity. There is growing interest to expand fishing efforts throughout the region as global fisheries become depleted. Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are remote and inaccessible to the general public. Scientists and government institutions have limited funds, capability and channels for engagement of their work in the Antarctic. 
Tracking Antarctica identifies and explains critical threats such as climate change on Antarctic biodiversity including krill, whales, seals, penguins and flying seabirds. It highlights progress made on IUU (illegal, unreported and unregulated) fishing and promotes sustainable solutions to reduce our footprint and adapt to change. 
To highlight key conservation issues and solutions buried deep in reports and scientific journals, Tracking Antarctica presents the latest scientific information and solutions in an accessible way. The report was co-produced with reputable experts from a variety of scientific fields and is the first biennial report presented at CCAMLR in October 2016.
To engage audiences globally, Tracking Antarctica is available as a digital application for mobile phones and tablets (IOS). It contains additional stories in a digital magazine format featuring biodiversity and conservation topics and the people behind the science. In collaboration with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), we will promote the app to the Antarctic tourism sector and general public. 
Some key findings
Climate change is the biggest threat to the Antarctica and the Southern Ocean through ice loss, ocean warming and acidification. Melting of land-based ice is adding to sea level rise globally, will affect Antarctic biodiversity and worsen the threat from non-native species. 
Increasing human activities will intensify the vulnerability of Antarctic ecosystems, mammals, fish, and birds.
People have introduced more than 200 plant species to sub-Antarctic islands and parts of the Antarctic continent.
Global demand for fish meal and omega supplements are likely to lead to increased krill fishing, which is currently concentrated along the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Arc. The most recent large scale survey to estimate krill biomass and distribution in this area was in 2000. 
Loss of sea-ice and ocean acidification will affect krill and other important marine organisms. 
A third of Adélie penguin colonies in Antarctica could disappear by 2060 due to the impacts of climate change on food supply of krill and fish.
Seabird bycatch by legal fisheries managed by CCAMLR has been reduced to near zero, thanks to the collaboration between scientists, policy-makers, industry and NGOs.
Establishing marine protected areas (MPAs) is a vital part of delivering effective biodiversity conservation. In protected areas of the ocean, activities are managed, limited or entirely prohibited.
MPAs build resilience and mitigate climate change impacts ultimately improving ecosystem and fisheries outcomes. 
WWF and Antarctic Conservation
The WWF Antarctic Conservation Program works with governments, industry and partners as a voice of credible science. We are located in the key member nations of the CCAMLR, which is responsible for conserving Antarctic marine life. The Southern Ocean is a priority place for the WWF global network because of its scientific and natural value. A key focus of our work is to monitor and report on the state of species, ecosystems and human impacts to communicate innovative solutions and achieve conservation impact. WWF is a member of ASOC.
To download the PDF version of the report, visit:
http://www.wwf.org.au/ArticleDocuments/353/pub-tracking-antarctica-14oct16.pdf.aspx
To download the IOS app of the report with additional Antarctic Stories, visit:
https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/wwf-tracking-antarctica/id1157352194
Supplements
Infographics from Tracking Antarctica Report 2016.


