





Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme








Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme

Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary

This paper summarises recent, current and planned ICED research and activities that are of relevance to the work of the CEP, including the Climate Change Response Work Programme.

Background

Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) is an international multidisciplinary programme established in 2008. ICED is undertaking an integrated circumpolar approach to improve our understanding of Southern Ocean change, the implications for ecosystems, and implications for management. ICED is a regional programme of Future Earth’s Integrated Marine Biosphere Research (IMBeR) and is co-sponsored by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). The programme was developed in conjunction with the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) and the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), which has now become Future Earth. 

ICED objectives and implementation 

ICED has three core objectives: 
    • To understand how climate processes affect the structure and dynamics of Southern Ocean ecosystems; 
    • To understand how ecosystem structure and dynamics affect Southern Ocean biogeochemical cycles; 
    • To incorporate these into approaches for sustainable management of Southern Ocean resources.

By linking Southern Ocean research communities across disciplines, ICED has made significant progress towards the above objectives. A wide range of science is underway through a series of ICED-led initiatives, together with contributions from individual scientists and national programmes. Highlights include an expanding body of research to understand the state and variability of Southern Ocean marine ecosystems. 
This includes detailed work on key species (ranging from Antarctic krill to whales), on the links between biogeochemistry and ecology, and on the effects of change on Southern Ocean ecosystems. Other highlights include the continued development of regional models towards end-to-end ecosystem models and historical circumpolar data analyses. We are increasingly focusing on informing management and policy to ensure the most effective application of our scientific findings. Central to this are our contributions to the Antarctic Treaty via SCAR, growing links with CCAMLR and the CEP, our work within IMBeR and Future Earth, and development of stakeholder engagement.

Below we summarise recent, current and planned ICED research and activities that are most relevance to the CEP. 

Detecting, projecting and managing the impacts of change in Southern Ocean ecosystems

Understanding the responses of Southern Ocean ecosystems to change is crucial for effective stewardship of this region and in predicting the effects of these changes on the wider Earth System. In order to address key questions and challenges in polar and global science, the ICED community has held a series of workshops on change in recent years (these include rapid change in polar ecosystems, reviewing the state of change in Southern Ocean ecosystems, and developing scenarios of change), and others are planned (see below). These have led to a set of ICED community papers including scenarios of change (in review), historical data rescue and synthesis (in prep), stakeholder engagement (published 2016), and polar food web diversity and functioning (published 2016).

Given the knowledge gaps and uncertainties inherent in studies of change, the use of future scenarios to explore drivers and the potential responses to change is an area ICED is now focusing on. This work requires continued input from the above research, together with ongoing collaborations between scientists from different relevant disciplines to ensure a shared understanding of the challenges faced, and to develop effective approaches and best practise guidelines for the wider community. This work will lead on to projections of change and is highly relevant to the work of the CEP, CCAMLR and others, and formed the basis of ICED input to a range of meetings in 2016:

    • ICED participated in the second Joint Workshop of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee (SC-CCAMLR) and CEP, May 2016 in Punta Arenas, Chile. At this meeting it was emphasized that further engagement of ICED in the work of both the CEP and SC-CAMLR will be valuable in facilitating the provision of policy-relevant science on climate and ecosystem dynamics; 
    • This led to ICED representation at the CCAMLR WG on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management meeting, July 2016, Bologne, Italy. The meeting endorsed the development of collaborative links between ICED and CCAMLR, and agreed that an ICED projections workshop (planned for 2018, see below) will be developed with input from CCAMLR scientists. This will focus on a series of agreed key questions on the potential impacts of climate change on exploited species, the ecosystems in which they occur, and the implications for fisheries and their management.
    • Results from these activities were further discussed at the SCAR meeting in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, August 2016. ICED scientists are working closely with SCAR groups and programmes (particularly Antarctic Thresholds - Ecosystem Resilience and Adaptation (AnT-ERA) and the Southern Ocean Observing System, SOOS) to generate the biological information and observation series required to understand the impacts of change. 
    • Joint activities between SCAR, ICED and CCAMLR will influence development of the upcoming activities outlined below. ICED scientists will continue to input to the CEP’s work on climate change, particularly through the Climate Change Response Work Programme, as required.

Upcoming activities 

These include an ICED-led workshop (in collaboration with CCAMLR) on projections of change (UK, 2018) and an ICED International Conference on Assessing Status and Trends of Habitats, Key Species and Ecosystems in the Southern Ocean (Marine Ecosystem Assessment of the Southern Ocean (MEASO) Australia, 2018). 

ICED is working with SCAR, IMBeR and associated programmes to raise the profile of Southern Ocean science and ensure that our activities reflect international as well as regional priorities. We are keen to continue to engage with CEP to facilitate the provision and uptake of policy-relevant science on Southern Ocean climate and ecosystem dynamics. 

The ICED Scientific Steering Committee

Chair: Eugene Murphy, British Antarctic Survey, UK
Executive Officer: Rachel Cavanagh, British Antarctic Survey, UK
Programme Manager: Nadine Johnston, British Antarctic Survey, UK
Richard Bellerby, Norwegian Institute for Water Research, Norway
Andrew Constable, Australian Antarctic Division/Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre, Australia
Dan Costa, University of California at Santa Cruz, USA
Eileen Hofmann, Center for Coastal & Physical Oceanography, Old Dominion University, USA
Walker Smith, Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS), College of William and Mary, USA
Dieter Wolf-Gladrow, Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Germany
Jose Xavier, University of Coimbra, Portugal

ICED www.iced.ac.uk ; email iced@bas.ac.uk 


