





On use of the blue ice area in the vicinity of Romnaes Mount as a reserve airstrip


English translation provided by the author





On use of the blue ice area in the vicinity of Romnaes Mount as a reserve airstrip
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation

In 2003, the national Antarctic programs of Belgium, Great Britain, Germany, India, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Finland, Sweden, RSA and Japan have established an international air corporate program, which was called DROMLAN. The main goal of the Program was aviation support for activity of the aforementioned national Antarctic Programs on the Queen Maud Land and adjoining from the west and east regions of East Antarctica. This type of support consists of organization of intercontinental flights of aircraft IL-76TD, Boing-737 and А-319 from Cape Town (RSA) to the ice airstrips at the Russian Novolazarevskaya and Norwegian Troll stations and back to Cape Town, and inland flights of aircraft of the type Basler BT-67 and DHC-6/300 Twin Otter from these Antarctic air fields to the Antarctic stations and seasonal field bases of the aforementioned national programs for delivery and transportation from them personnel and cargo of the expeditions. In addition to these objectives, aircraft IL-76TD deliver cargos practically annually to inland regions of Antarctica by means of paradrops. Such operations significantly extend the periods of performing summer seasonal studies and enhance safety of stay of personnel in Antarctica. 
By mutual consent of all participants the South-African Company “Antarctic Logistics Center International” PTY Ltd (ALСI) located in Cape Town is the air operator of DROMLAN Program. For the past years this Company arranged 158 intercontinental flights of Russian transport airplanes IL-76TD from Cape Town to Antarctica and back, 32 paradrops of fuel and expedition cargos to the inland regions of East Antarctica and more than 2500 inland flights. The main aviation base of the DROMLAN Program in Antarctica is the runway and the passenger terminal located on blue ice of the glacial dome in 30 km to the south of the Russian Novolazarevskaya station (Schirmacher Oasis). The “blue ice” term means outcrop of glacier surface in the regions adjoining mountain massifs that rise over the ice dome of Antarctica. A peculiar wind regime of such regions keeps snow cover from remaining on the glacial surface, creating relatively level segments up to several kilometers long. Thus, blue ice areas become suitable for use as natural runways for aircraft of different classes, including heavy wheeled aircraft without serious additional costs.
The runway at Novolazarevskaya station has an official certificate approved according to all requirements of the Federal Agency of Civil Aviation of Russia (Rosaviatsia). As a back-up landing area, aircraft IL-76 uses the ice airfield of the Norwegian Troll station situated in 360 km west of Novolazarevskaya station. A comparative multiyear analysis of synoptic situation at Novolazarevskaya and Troll stations showed the deterioration of weather conditions for aviation flights to be usually connected with passage of cyclones over these ice airfields directed in general from the coast of Argentina to the Antarctic Cape Norvegia and further along the coast eastward, which significantly connects the dependence of weather conditions between these two stations. This fact made the air operator of DROMLAN Program to look for one more landing area east of Novolazarevskaya station to be used as a backup runway for intercontinental flights and as an intermediate base for refueling of medium-range aircraft making flights to the stations located on the coast of Prydz Bay.
Such site was found in the area of the Romnaes Mount in the Sor-Rondane Mountains in East Antarctica. A suitable site of blue ice for landing and takeoff of heavy transport aircraft on wheeled chassis of the type IL-76 is located at a distance of about 450 km from the airbase Novolazarevskaya and in 650 km from the snow runway S17 of Syowa station (Japan). The distance of this site from the  Belgian station Princess Elisabeth comprises about 60 km. Geodetic explorations were carried out on this site, which confirmed the possibility of constructing on it an airstrip 3000 m long with runway-end safety area of 250 m from both runway ends. The runway width can be 60 m with runway shoulders of 20 m from both sides of the runway and the runway slope comprises 0.8%, which meets the requirements for ice airfields adopted by Rosaviatsia. Approach to landing is possible from the west direction. The geographical coordinates of this runway are 71° 25′ S, 23° 31′ E with a height above sea level of 850 m and its location is at a distance of 14 km from the Romnaes Mount. The natural landscape of the blue ice area does not require additional mechanized work for runway leveling, reducing to the minimum the anthropogenic impact on the environment.
In January 2015, Russian aircraft IL-76TD made test landing on this blue ice site, which was technically supported by aircraft Basler BT-67, which has arrived earlier.
In 2015, the ALCI Company has prepared the Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) for construction and operation of the runway in this region of the Queen Maud Land. However, absence in the RSA of the national procedure for granting permits to the non-governmental organizations for activity in the Antarctic has not made it possible to permit this activity. This fact was widely discussed at ATCM XXXIX with the outcome that all Consultative Parties were of one mind about the impossibility of any type of activity in the Antarctic without the preliminarily prepared and approved EIA.
The Russian Federation has been providing for 14 years its airplanes IL-76TD for the intercontinental flights from South Africa to Antarctica under the DROMLAN program and bears full responsibility for ensuring safety of such flights. These flights are performed by the crews of Rosaviatsia (Moscow) on the basis of Permit of 25 December 2015 No Р/2015/007 for research and cargo-passenger flights of heavy transport aviation in the area of the Queen Maud Land (East Antarctica) and paradrops of cargo in Central Antarctica. In this connection, the Russian Federation is extremely interested in creation of a backup runway located to the east of Novolazarevskaya station, which will significantly increase the possibility of aircraft return to Cape Town at approach to the coast of the Queen Maud Land in case of a sudden deterioration of weather conditions at Novolazarevskaya station. Besides, construction of an intermediate base for refueling of medium-range aircraft, making inland flights to the Japanese Syowa station, Russian Progress, Molodeznaya and Vostok stations and the Indian Bharati station will also significantly enhance the safety level of such flights and their payload. 
To address this objective the “ALCI NORD” company was established in St. Petersburg according to all requirements of the Russian legislature with Russian employees, who annually participate in support of airfield operations at Novolazarevskaya station under the DROMLAN Program. This newly created Russian Company has prepared the IEE for servicing the landing site in the vicinity of the Romnaes Mount and submitted the developed IEE together with the application for performing this activity for consideration in compliance with the procedure adopted in the Russian Federation. We remind that this procedure in Russia is based on the requirements of the Federal Laws of 24 May 1997 No. 79-FZ “On ratification of Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty”, of 5 June 2012 No. 50-FZ “On regulation of activity of Russian citizens and Russian Legal Entities in the Antarctic” and Decrees of the Government of the Russian Federation of 18 December 1997 No. 1580 “On ensuring fulfillment of provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” and of 27 June 2013 No. 544 “On permits for implementation of activity in the Antarctic”. At present, consideration of the documents, submitted by the “ALCI NORD” Company is at the conclusion stage and the Permit for implementation of this work will be obtained before the beginning of the Antarctic season 2017–2018.
The proposed in these documents runway fully corresponds to the afore given characteristics and the field aerodrome camp will be comprised of temporary service-living premises intended for accommodation and meals of 10-12 people of the field camp personnel and 18 passengers, including crew of the medium-range aircraft Basler BT-67. The work period of the field camp will be from the end of November to the beginning of February of each summer Antarctic season. At the time of camp operation it will be equipped with different facilities of satellite and radio-communication, weather station and a small diesel-electric power station. Passengers of aircraft IL-76 waiting for weather to improve at Novolazarevskaya station will stay in their places in the aircraft. At the beginning of each season a supply of aviation fuel in drums, necessary for refueling of medium-range aircraft for flights to the east and return to Novolazarevskaya station will be delivered to the field camp by aircraft or land transport. It is expected that during operation of the field camp, two-three of IL-76 and 6–10 inland flights of medium-range aircraft will be made. All waste from these activities except for filtered grey water disposed to the glacier well will be transported upon the end of the season by aircraft to the airfield of Novolazarevskaya station and to Cape Town for final disposal. 
In accordance with the IEE conclusions, the proposed activity will have not more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment. 
Thus, the use of the blue ice area in the vicinity of the Romnaes Mount as a reserve runway will significantly increase safety of aviation operations at the Queen Maud Land while the activity for its maintenance fully meets the requirements of the Madrid Protocol.

