





Russian legislation on regulation of activities in the Antarctic








Russian legislation on regulation of activities in the Antarctic
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
On 5 June 2012, the Russian Federation adopted the Federal Law No.50 concerning “Regulation of activities of the Russian citizens and the Russian legal entities in the Antarctic”. This Federal Law provided a legal basis for the Government of the Russian Federation to adopt at national level Measure 1 (2005) containing Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Liability Arising From Environmental Emergencies”.
The Federal Law emphasizes fundamental principles of the Antarctic Treaty regarding activities in Antarctica: use of the region exclusively for peaceful purposes; mutually beneficial international cooperation in the Antarctic; freedom of scientific research; protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.
The Federal Law stipulates that a person or an entity planning to undertake activities in Antarctica under Russian jurisdiction should have a special permit issued by a Russian competent authority; such a permit can be issued following a strict procedure that requests inter alia submission and approval of an environmental impact assessment and delivery of financial guarantees to ensure compensation for possible damage to the Antarctic environment.
According to the Federal Law it is the Government of the Russian Federation that identifies the primary spheres of national activities in Antarctica. For this purpose it appoints state operators to organize and carry out activities in the Antarctic in the interests of the Russian Federation in full compliance with its international obligations. So far the only Russian state operator is the Russian Antarctic Expedition. 
As mentioned, Russian citizens and legal entities planning to carry out activities in the Antarctic (operators) are required to obtain a special permit. The procedure for the issuing of permits is established by the Government of the Russian Federation. If the proposed activity is subject to licensing, a license is also needed. The operators bear responsibility for ensuring the safety of their activities in the Antarctic. So, well in advance of the launch of any activity they are obliged to prepare an action plan for emergency situations, insure their civil liability or take other measures to cover possible costs for search and rescue operations, medical assistance and evacuation. Compulsory financial support for activities in the Antarctic (insurance of the risk of liability for causing damage to third parties or a bank guarantee) should also be provided. This, though, does not apply to state operators.
In addition, private (non-state) operators are required to remove on a regular basis the waste resulting from their activities in the Antarctic, and within 3 years after the expiration of the permit, remove all their abandoned property regardless of its condition.
The Federal Law also defines the procedure for investigating accidents taking place while carrying out activities in the Antarctic and for undertaking search and rescue operations. The issues of liability in cases of damage to the Antarctic environment are also settled in the Federal Law.
These are only some of the features included into the Law. More pertinent details can be found in the text itself.
 To make the task easier and in order to share experience of the Russian Federation in implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes, including Annex VI “Liability Arising From Environmental Emergencies, we would like to present to Consultative Parties the translation of the Law into English. 
We find it crucial that the States-Parties to the Antarctic Treaty continue to inform each other of their approaches and solutions to the challenges and tasks we are all facing in the Antarctic region with the aim to further develop and promote it as the place of peace, international cooperation and mutual assistance.


