Field Project Reviews: Fulfilling Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) Monitoring Obligations
Field Project Reviews: Fulfilling Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) Monitoring Obligations
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) conducts field reviews
of new and on-going projects to determine if the environmental
impact assessment (EIA) conducted prior to implementing a project
adequately identified potential impacts and if mitigations are
effective in reducing environmental impacts. In addition, the field
reviews offer project teams an opportunity to identify issues,
improvements, and mitigation alternatives.
During the 2016-2017 summer season, an EIA field review was
conducted of the South Pole Traverse (SPoT). In general, the USAP
found that SPoT operations were consistent with the impacts
identified in the 2004 Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
(CEE) entitled Development and Implementation of Surface
Traverse Capabilities in Antarctica. In addition, the SPoT team
implemented several improvements that reduce impacts and
enhance operations and flexibility of the SPoT system, which has
been used to improve other USAP traverses.
Introduction
The USAP conducts field reviews of new and on-going projects to
determine if the EIA conducted prior to implementing a project
adequately identified potential impacts and if mitigations are
effective in reducing environmental impacts. These EIA reviews
fulfil the monitoring requirements identified in Article 5 of Annex I
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(Protocol) and U.S. regulations (45 CFR 641.21). In addition, EIA
field reviews are consistent with Section 3.6 (Monitoring) of the
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment on Antarctica
(Resolution 1[2016] Annex).
The objective of this paper is to describe the process the United
States uses to review on-going projects as they are implemented.
The review of SPoT is used to illustrate the process and actions that
result from the reviews.
Field Review Objectives and Methods
The objectives of the environmental field review were to identify
traverse activities and assess the associated environmental impacts.
The environmental impacts identified during the review were
compared to the potential impacts estimated in the CEE (http://
ats.aq/documents/EIA/7211entraverse_final_cee.pdf).
Three methods were used to conduct the environmental review.
First, relevant environmental impact assessment documents and
other SPoT documents were reviewed, including resource support
plans and end-of-season reports from prior seasons. Second, an
interview was conducted with the Traverse Operations manager.
The interview covered activities conducted during traverse
operations and between traverses (i.e., maintenance, improvements,
and repairs). Third, a site visit was conducted in November 2016 to
observe the physical layout of the traverse train, which was
scheduled to depart for South Pole Station in the following month.
During the interview and site visit, the Traverse Operations
manager provided observations, lessons-learned, and
recommendations.
General Observations
Project attributes and environmental aspects considered when
preparing the CEE were used as comparisons for this environmental
field review. As defined in the CEE, potential impacts included fuel
use, tractor and generator noise, disturbance of snow from crevasse
mitigation and traverse passage, release of flags marking
the route, release of grey water, and accidental spills (fuel, glycol, &
oil). During the field review, personnel found that impacts were
generally consistent or less than the impacts identified in the CEE.
The actual annual amount of fuel used by the traverse vehicles is
approximately 33 percent lower (425,000 kg) compared to the
estimate provided in the CEE (637,500 kg).
The impact of noise (e.g., explosives use, tractor operations, and
generator use) from traverses is less than minor or transitory since
the traverse route does not cross wildlife areas or Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPA). In addition, to minimize
disturbance, the traverse only crosses ice and snow areas and avoids
dry land and seasonal sea ice.
To ensure safe operations, the traverse route is inspected for
crevasse hazards before departure using remote sensing (aerial or
satellite imagery). Ground penetrating radar (GPR) is used during
the traverse. Crevasse marking and mitigation of the route to South
Pole Station requires approximately 85 person-days. The majority of
this time is taken up by crevasse mitigation through the shear zone
(approximately 70 person-days) during the SPoT 1 round trip. Once
a crevasse is detected and marked (flagged), explosives are used to
open the crevasse and then heavy equipment is used to fill the
crevasse with snow. These actions are consistent with the impacts
projected in the CEE.
Waste management practices are consistent with USAP
requirements (e.g., storage and separation) and the projected
impacts described in the CEE. All human solid waste is incinerated
during the traverse (i.e., there are no releases). Waste water for
cooking and cleaning is released into one hole at each camp, while
all urine is contained. Solid waste is contained and becomes part of
the South Pole or McMurdo waste management system. Kitchen
waste is compacted to reduce volume, transported back to
McMurdo Station, and removed from the continent via vessel for
disposal in the United States.
The CEE acknowledged that spills and accidental releases may
occur and would potentially affect the environment. Each season,
minor spills of fuel and glycol are reported and cleaned up
immediately. These spills are generally associated with hose and
gasket fitting failures. The largest two spills during the 2015-2016
season were approximately 19 liters (oil) and 7.6 liters (ethylene
glycol). The largest spill during the 2016-2017 season was 2.8 liters.
All spills occurred on snow and the contaminated snow was
recovered for proper disposal at McMurdo Station. A number of
mitigations are incorporated into traverse operations to minimize
spills: 1) personnel receive spill response training; 2) each traverse
is equipped with spill response equipment; 3) secondary
containment is used when fueling the tractors during all activities
associated with traverses; and 4) personnel perform daily checks of
fitting, hoses, equipment, and the flexible, 11,400-L fuel bladders
used to transport fuel to South Pole Station. Even with daily
inspections, hoses and fittings would fail unexpectedly due to the
very low temperatures.
All physical impacts (e.g., routes and camp locations), fuel use, and
releases (e.g., waste water and spills) are recorded in the end-of-
season (EOS) report. The mitigations listed in the CEE are part of
traverse planning and operations.
Noteworthy Practices
The traverse team has incorporated several improvements and good
practices into traverse operations. These are:
Installing and using incinerator toilets has reduced disturbances to
ice and snow surfaces and reduced intentional releases to the
environment to only grey water from cleaning and cooking.
Testing and using improved fuel bladders and altering how the
bladders are stored between seasons. The modified storage method
reduces the level of effort required to store and then prepare the
bladders for the following season. In addition, the modified storage
method likely reduces stress on seams and thus prolongs the life of
the bladders. The fuel bladders are constructed of high-tenacity
woven fabrics which are coated and impregnated with specialty
synthetic rubber compounds. These tanks are manufactured with
heat and pressure seams, heavy-duty flange connections and
reinforcements at all corners and openings. They exhibit excellent
resistance to sun light (UV), temperature extremes, abrasion,
corrosion, ozone checking and long-term storage.
Maintaining the staging area close to McMurdo Station and
arranging for all traverses to be staged at one location. Proximity to
the station reduces travel time and fuel use for commuting and to
obtain
repair parts, equipment, and supplies. Having all USAP traverses
staged at one location allows for shared expertise, repair
capabilities, and equipment.
The most noteworthy practice is the transport of fuel via traverse
instead of by aircraft. Last year, the quantity of fuel transported to
South Pole Station by traverse would have required approximately
92 LC-130 flights. In the four years before fuel was delivered by
traverse (2000 through 2004), the number of LC-130 flights ranged
between 250 and 330 flights between South Pole and McMurdo
Station. In the past five years, the number of flights between
McMurdo and South Pole stations declined to between 75 and 115.
The reduction of between 135 to 225 flights annually reduces air
emissions generated by the USAP. Similarly, the total number of on-
continent LC-130 flights has declined from approximately 300 to
400 flights (2000 – 2004) per year to approximately 130 to 205
flights per year (2012-2017).
Opportunities for Improvements
Three opportunities for improvement are under consideration. First,
the traverse team is currently evaluating the use of a UV system to
ensure drinking water quality meets U.S. standards. Cleaning the
drinking water system is a routine maintenance activity between
traverses. However, contamination during a 30 to 60 day traverse
could have substantial human health consequences. Second, the
traverse team is looking to use a wider ski on the sledges. Recent
tests have shown that wider skis result in increased fuel efficiency
compared to the narrow skis currently in use. Third, the traverse
team is evaluating how best to modify sledges to allow the return to
McMurdo station to transport unusually shaped materials and waste
while minimizing damages that would require sledge repairs and
replacement.
Follow-up Actions
Two follow-up actions were identified. The SPoT team will identify
successes and lessons-learned from initial material and waste
transportation from South Pole Station. In addition, the SPoT team
will develop and use a standard “traverse support request form”
during planning. The form would allow for better management and
coordination of all cargo transportation requests for all USAP
traverses, inclusive of SPoT.
No changes are required to the CEE based on the review of SPoT
operations. The current operation is working within the protocols
and procedures reviewed and approved in the initial EIA. The
objectives and methods have not changed. Currently planned
improvements will not require additional review; additional review
would be required if a need was identified due to major changes in
the traverse operations (i.e. major new technologies or
methodologies, increased number of traverses).
