





Fildes Bay Environmental Monitoring Coastal Environmental Observation Program  (P.O.A.L.) 2017



English version provided by the author





Fildes Bay Environmental Monitoring. Coastal Environment Observation Program Chile 
(P.O.A.L.) 2017
IP Submitted by Chile


Summary:

This document refers to the work of the Chilean Navy regarding the marine environmental monitoring in Antarctica, carried out to evaluate the trends of the pollutant elements, within the Coastal Environment Observation Program (P.O.A.L) 

Introduction:

One of the fundamental objectives of the The Protocol on Environmental Protection for The Antarctic Treaty is to “comprehensively protect the Antarctic environment and the dependent and associated systems”. 


For this purpose, the Chilean Navy has implemented the Coastal Environmental Observation Program, in Antarctica. The results are presented in this information paper.
Antarctic Coastal Environment Observation Program (POAL)
The Coastal Environmental Observation Program, (P.O.A.L), consists in an environmental monitoring program carried out on water bodies with high anthropogenic activity, which consists in the collection of water sampling, sediments and biota. Although this program is carried out throughout the Chilean coast, this document presents only the results of Fildes Bay. 
Fildes Bay (King George Island) sampling is being carried out every year since 2004 during summer season. This area was selected because it is a representative sector that concentrates an important transit and presence of people, as well as ships and vessels. In this place the population increases notably during the summer season. 
The POAL monitoring at Fildes Bay consists of a sampling of 8 water stations and marine sediment. While in the water the presence of speciated aromatic hydrocarbons, stable hydrocarbons, nutrients and heavy metal at surface level are analysed, within the sediments matrix, polycyclic hydrocarbons, total hydrocarbons, heavy metals, granulometry, organic content and benthic macrofauna are analysed.
Hereunder the results of some relevant variables are presented in the sediments matrix from years 2014, 2015 y 2017.












Sediments Results P.O.A.L. years 2014, 2015 y 2017:

Image 1.  Bahía Fildes P.O.A.L. sample stations and coordinates.


















Graphic a) Arsenic, Lead and Copper concentration (mg/kg) in sediments at Bahía Fildes, February 11th, 2014.




















Graphic b) Arsenic, Lead and Copper concentration (mg/kg) in sediments at Bahía Fildes, April 14th, 2015.















Graphic c) Arsenic, Lead and Copper concentration (mg/kg) in sediments at Bahía Fildes, February 17th, 2017.



Graphic d) Total Hydrocarbon concentration (mg/kg) in sediments at Bahía Fildes at Bahía Fildes, February 11th 2014.



















Graphic e) Total Hydrocarbon concentration (mg/kg) in sediments at Bahía Fildes, February 17th 2017.



Note: 
- 	Total Hydrocarbons in the 2015 campaign were below the detection limit (<10 mg/kg) of the analytical technique. 
- 	The analytical methods used for all variables are described in the following link:
http://www.directemar.cl/programa-observacion-ambiente-litoral/datos-poal.html
- 	Sample depth = 10 meters.

The results presented in the graphics above show metallogenic presence in the sediments, enriched mainly by copper, arsenic and lead. It is also observed presence of hydrocarbons in this matrix.  

Regarding the water body, the analysed parameters are under the detection limit, with the exception of the nutrients that as for phosphate and nitrate did not overcame 0,084 mg/l and 2,71 mg/l, respectively. It is necessary to emphasise the chemical speciation of the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons that were all under 0,1 mg/l. 

Conclusions:

Chile will continue performing these studies in the future and will publish the results on the web page of the General Directorate of Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine, www.directemar.cl

For further information the contact point is Capitan de Fragata LT Enrique Vargas Guerra, e-mail evargasg@directemar.cl


