Belarusian Antarctic Research Station - the current stage of the
creation and development perspectives
English translation provided by the author
Belarusian Antarctic Research Station - the current stage of the
creation and development perspectives
As part of the consideration of issues in terms of point 13 Safety
and Activities in Antarctica of the Agenda of XL ATCM, the
Republic of Belarus considers it necessary to inform the global
Antarctic community about the course and perspectives of the
creation of the scientific station infrastructure in Antarctica and to
bring to the attention of the countries-members of the Antarctic
Treaty the conceptual information of the section 3 The formation of
the Belarusian Antarctic infrastructure in 2015-2017 and in the
period till 2020 of the present document.
1. Control stages
The Republic of Belarus acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 2006; in
2008 our country ratified the “Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” with 5 Annexes.
In 2013 at ATCM XXXVI in Brussels (Belgium) and at COMNAP
AGM XXV in Seoul (Republic of Korea), the Republic of Belarus
informed the countries-members of the Antarctic Treaty about its
plans to build a research station in Antarctica.
In May 2015 at ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia (Bulgaria) the
information document submitted by the Republic of Belarus No.
IP39 The building and functioning of the Byelorussian Antarctic
Station on the Vecherniaya Mountain, Enderby Land - the Final
Comprehensive Environmental Assessment was approved by the
Consultative Parties of the Antarctic Treaty without Comments.
In August 2015 at COMNAP AGM XXVII in Tromso (Norway) the
National Antarctic Program of the Republic of Belarus was adopted
by 30 COMNAP members.
In March 2016 the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus
approved the National Research Program “The monitoring of the
Polar Regions of the Earth, the creation of Belarusian Antarctic
Station and maintenance of the activity of polar expeditions for
2016-2020” (hereinafter referred to as the Program). The
coordinator of the Program is the National Academy of Sciences of
the Republic of Belarus.
In May 2016 at ATCM XXIX in Santiago (Chile) and at COMNAP
AGM XXVIII in Goa (India), the Republic of Belarus informed the
countries-members of the Antarctic Treaty that in December 2015
the Republic of Belarus had started activities on the creation of
Scientific Station in Antarctica.
2. The concept of the creation of Belarusian Antarctic Station
The conceptual project of the Belarusian Antarctic Station
(hereinafter referred to as BAS) involves the creation year-round
research station, which includes a complex of all necessary facilities
of a modular type in the period 2015-2025 in East Antarctica on the
Enderby Land in the area of Vecherniaya Mountain. During the
implementation of the procedures of projecting and building of the
objects of the Belarusian Antarctic infrastructure, the main
requirements to these objects involve universality, compactness,
energy efficiency, technological and environmental safety, which
will significantly reduce the impact of activities on the environment
of the Antarctic. The advanced design and technological solutions
used in the construction of BAS do not require large-scale
preparatory measures and the use of special construction equipment
in the implementation of installation works; they also make it
possible to carry out a rapid dismantling of the elements of BAS
infrastructure in case of need for their removal or transfer.
At present, the logistics scheme of the Belarusian Antarctic
Expedition (hereinafter referred to as BAE) is implemented in close
cooperation with the Russian Federation. The expedition personnel
and cargo for BAE are delivered to Antarctica on board the Russian
vessel «Academician Fiodorov». The installation of the
infrastructure objects of BAS is carried out on height-adjustable
support platforms mounted in the areas of open outcrops of the
bedding rocks (see Picture 1).
Picture 1 - Installation of the platform on adjustable supports
For the delivery and installation of individual elements of the BAS
infrastructure, K-32 helicopters based on the Russian vessel
«Academician Fiodorov» are used (see Picture 2).
Picture 2 - The installation of BAS section using K-32 helicopter
onto the installation platform
3. The formation of the Belarusian Antarctic infrastructure in 2015 -
2017 and in the period up to 2020
In December 2015 at the Vecherniaya Mountain, Tala Hills,
Enderby Land in East Antarctica, with the transport and logistical
assistance of the Russian Federation, the first BAS was installed - a
three-section control, communication and navigation module on the
installation platform (see Figure 3).
Picture 3 - First building of Belarusian Antarctic station
In the period from May until October 2016, an installation platform
and a section-sauna were manufactured at Belarusian enterprises for
the second BAS object - eight-section laboratory-residential module.
The ready-made elements of BAS were delivered on board the
Russian vessel «Academician Fiodorov» to the building site of the
station in East Antarctica, where on 28-29 December 2016, within
48 hours, eight BAE and RAE employees assembled the installation
platform and unloaded the first section of the Second object of BAS
(see picture 4).
Picture 4 - The installation platform and the first section of the
second BAS object
The construction of the BAS objects is carried out according to the
layout of the location of BAS objects presented by the Republic of
Belarus at the Final Comprehensive Environmental Assessment at
ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia (Bulgaria). The installation
platform of the eight-section laboratory-residential module is
installed 100 m from the first BAS object (see Figures 5 and 6).
Picture 5 - First building of BAS (foreground), Installation platform
of the second object BAS (background)
Picture 6 - First building of BAS (on the right), second object of BAS
(on the left)
Thus, the beginning of the construction of the second BAS object -
the eight-section laboratory- residential module is the next practical
and successive step of the Republic of Belarus in the
implementation of the plan of the creation of a modern research
station in Antarctica.
In 2017-2018 it is planned to finish the construction of the second
BAS object. During this period the structure of eight-section
laboratory and residential module will include: a sanitary and
hygienic section with toilets, shower cabins, washbasins and
washing machines, two laboratory-residential sections comprising
two dwellings and two laboratories (biology and aero-physics), a
section of the entrance group with infra-red clothes dryers, an
isolated cabin for smoking and a compartment for the power
distribution device, two residential sections with rooms for separate
accommodation of four people, and a medical section (surgical
operating room). Besides, in the period 2017-2020 the structure of
BAS is planned to be gradually supplemented with up to 6 other
modular infrastructure units, such as: an oil storage reservoir with a
total volume of about 150 m3, a new power plant complex with
two 125 kW diesel generators each, garage boxes for snowmobile
and cross-country vehicles, a geophysical (non-magnetic) pavilion
and other infrastructure units for residential, scientific, industrial,
environmental and other special purposes. This option of the
creation of the Belarusian Antarctic Research Station will make it
possible to create the necessary conditions for scientific and
industrial activity by 2019-2020 and year-round accommodation of
BAE staff of up to 11-12 people.
4. The perspectives of the development of Belarusian Antarctic
infrastructure in 2021-2025
In the period 2021-2025 second line of the building procedure of
BAS is expected to include up to 10 units of modular housing
infrastructure for manufacturing, environmental protection and
special purposes, which will end the formation of the basic
infrastructure of BAS. In the process of formation of infrastructure
of BAS the implementation of a set of measures to reduce pollutant
emissions, wastewater discharges, education and waste disposal is
planned, as well as the measures to prevent fuel leakage, the
planning of the research routes, and common works with the
Russian Federation on dismantling and removal of scrap
infrastructure facilities and various kinds of waste remaining after
the Soviet period from the field bases Vecherniaya Mountain and
Molodyozhnaya outside the Antarctic.
