





Historical and geo-ecological values of Elephant Point, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands








Historical and geo-ecological values of Elephant Point, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Brazil, Spain and the United Kingdom
Summary
This paper provides information on the high ecological value and important historical significance of the ice-free area of Elephant Point (Livingston Island, South Shetland Island, Antarctica), and provides scientific evidence to inform considerations on the protection and management of this area, possibly by designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA), or by incorporating it within the nearby ASPA 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island.
Background
Elephant Point, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, is an ice-free area of 1.16 km2 located to the south of Rotch Dome and 1.2 km southeast of ASPA 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island (see Figures 1 and 2). On-going deglaciation in the region may mean the ice-cliffs separating Elephant Point and Byers Peninsula may soon retreat, thereby linking the two areas.

By using a geo-ecological approach, based upon the area’s geomorphology together with the distribution of the local fauna and flora, a total of six geo-ecological environments in Elephant Point were identified: Rotch Dome, pro-glacial environment, moraine system, bedrock plateaus, marine terraces and present-day beach (Figure 3). In addition, five well preserved archaeological sites have been found in Elephant Point that were used by sealers and whalers during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

The terrestrial ecosystem in Elephant Point has been examined in detail from a wide range of perspectives. Some of the recently published papers include studies that have been conducted for the very first time in the Maritime Antarctica, such as paraglacial dynamics, permafrost degradation, vegetable colonization since the glacial retreat, soil development following deglaciation, etc. (see Supporting information). Besides, it must be taken into account that Elephant Point constitutes a pristine ecosystem hardly visited by scientists over the last decades, which has minimized anthropogenic impacts.

In summary, Elephant Point has been identified as a location with high historical and scientific values but currently no higher level of protection, as described in Annex V to the Protocol, is in place.
Discussion and conclusion
Elephant Point contains a rich biodiversity and is of high geomorphological and historical significance. Despite its small size, Elephant Point contains outstanding examples of all the values suggested by Annex V to the Protocol (i.e. environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic and wilderness). This Information Paper presents the scientific basis upon which further considerations on the appropriate level of protection of this location could be based.  Potential options for protection of Elephant Point may include:
  designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected Areas; or 
  incorporation into the nearby ASPA 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island.
Supporting information
Oliva, M., Ruiz-Fernández, J., Zarankin, A., Casanova-Katny, A., & Nofre, J. (2016). Geoecology and historical heritage in the ice-free area of Elephant Point (Antarctica). Proposal for future environmental protection. Geoheritage. DOI 10.1007/s12371-016-0184-1 

Oliva, M. & Ruiz-Fernández, J. (2016). Geomorphological processes and frozen ground conditions in Elephant Point (Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica). Geomorphology, doi: 10.1016/j.geomorph.2016.01.020.

Oliva, M. & Ruiz-Fernández, J. (2015). Coupling patterns between paraglacial and permafrost degradation responses in Antarctica. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 40 (9): 1227-1238.

Figure 1. Location map for Elephant Point, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
























Figure 2.  Map showing the location of Elephant Point (bottom right) relative to ASPA 126 Byers Peninsula




Figure 3. The different geo-ecological environments and the five archaeological sites (EP-1 to EP-5) at Elephant Point (Livingston Island).



