





Antarctic Mass Rescue Operations Response and Preparedness Challenges








Antarctic Mass Rescue Operations Response and Preparedness Challenges 
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary 
The intent of this paper is to provide an overview of the challenges associated with responding to a mass rescue operation (MRO) in the Antarctic Treaty area for land, air, or sea search and rescue (SAR) incidents.  A successful MRO response depends upon cooperation and coordination among SAR authorities, National Antarctic Programs (NAPs), industry stakeholders, and other assets available to assist.
More importantly, an effective MRO response relies upon the development of a realistic and effective contingency (MRO) plan and exercises to test the plan.  Fortunately, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) has focused on contingency planning and also now conducts triennial SAR workshops. 
Background 
Internationally, MRO is defined as: search and rescue services characterized by the need for immediate response to large numbers of persons in distress, such that the capabilities normally available to search and rescue authorities are inadequate.  The IAATO Fact Sheet 2016-2017 notes that more than 40,000 tourist visitors were expected for the 2016-2017 season.  Yet, these statistics do not include; the crew of the vessels and aircraft (many which make multiple trips); the thousands of staff members who work in NAP facilities; the logistics staff support network; nor the various types of commercial fishing vessels routinely operating in the Antarctic region.  In considering the Antarctic Treaty area, a MRO could be as little as a few people in distress; based on the geographic location coupled with a lack of available resources. 
In developing MRO plans, SAR services, NAPs, and industry stakeholders consider not only the rescue of survivors, but also medical assistance, shelter and support, survivor transportation, and other actions that may be required.  These response requirements are difficult in any MRO, but are much more so in the harsh Antarctic Treaty area environment with limited resources and long distances for response. 
Effective planning is critical for ensuring coordination and cooperation so that key response roles and responsibilities are identified and understood for when a MRO occurs in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Key considerations in MRO planning may include the following:
    1. MROs are a low-probability, high-consequence event.  If a MRO has not occurred in several years, then response processes and procedures may be overlooked because of too much attention on other types of events that may occur more often but are easier to handle.  The consequence to lowering the priority of MRO response planning could be disastrous when such an event does occur.  The author of the book The Titanic Effect: Planning for the Unthinkable stated that, “The magnitude of disasters decreases to the extent that people believe that they are possible, and plan to prevent them, or to minimize their effects.”  MROs in the Antarctic Treaty area will continue to occur; it is important for SAR authorities and Antarctic Programs to plan and prepare for these events in order to provide an effective and coordinated response.
    2. Capabilities normally available to a SAR Mission Coordinator (SMC) may be inadequate for a MRO response.  For the several incidents in which passenger ships were evacuated in recent past years, the SMC was fortunate to have another passenger ship nearby which could take on all the passengers and crew.  The SMC may have to consider evacuees being on shore due to lack of capacity on board rescuing vessels or weather conditions on the water. 
    3. Success often depends on immediate, well planned, and closely coordinated, and the use of multiple and available resources that can assist in the response.
    4. A MRO involving dozens or thousands of survivors will generate intense media interest and scrutiny by the general public.  Media should be managed through a central point of contact in order to provide information to the public with minimal delay.  Consideration should be given to the types of information released, with an understanding of privacy issues that might arise. 
The MRO responses to the M/V EXPLORER (2007), M/V LE BOREAL (2015), and the potential MRO scenario involving the luxury cruise ship CLELIA II (2010), should warn all that MROs will continue to occur within the Antarctic Treaty area.  Coordinated MRO planning by SAR authorities, NAPs and industry stakeholders will continue to be required in order to effectively coordinate and conduct the response. 
MRO Challenges
In the Antarctic, MRO scenarios can include; the rescue of the crew of a fishing vessel in the Ross Sea, a passenger ship disaster requiring evacuation of all passengers and crew near the Antarctic Peninsula, the rescue of a crew from a private charter vessel in the vicinity of a NAP station as well as incidents with land expeditions and aircraft flights around the continent.  With that said, is the Antarctic Treaty area response community prepared for a MRO involving hundreds if not thousands of people?  If thousands or even dozens of people need rescue and when on scene conditions are less than ideal, the difficulties and risk to SAR responders will significantly increase.  In the development of MRO plans and improving response preparedness, the following challenges associated with any MRO should be considered:
    1. Develop a MRO plan/arrangement:  A local plan is needed, but a regional plan might be most beneficial for adjacent stations.  The International Aeronautical and Maritime Search and Rescue (IAMSAR) Manual (Vol. I) states that, “SAR authorities should coordinate MRO plans with companies that operate aircraft and ships designed to carry large numbers of persons.  Such companies should share in preparations to prevent MROs and to help ensure success if they become necessary” (paragraph 6.6.6). IAATO and COMNAP already provide a strong framework for this. 
    2. Distance from SAR resources:  MRO planners must take into consideration the long distances or transit times (difficult terrain or weather delays) that may be required to be traversed to by SAR responders.  The availability of SAR resources would decrease and response times increase the farther off shore or the more remote an area a MRO occurs.
    3. Lack of adequate refuge for MRO survivors:  Do the visitor destination sites have adequate facilities that could provide care and shelter for potentially dozens or thousands of SAR survivors?
    4. Identification of landing sites (Place of Safety):  MRO planning must incorporate identifying landing sites that can manage several functions simultaneously, including: site safety and security, medical evaluation and support, triage, survivor logistics (e.g., water, food, clothing, waste, etc.), survivor accountability, shelter from weather, and media support as appropriate.
    5. MRO response training:  Do SAR authorities, NAPs, and industry stakeholders conduct MRO planning, discuss MRO preparedness issues and challenges, and conduct MRO table top exercises to ensure plans are effective?  Is the frequency of exercises adequate to maintain proficiency in providing an effective response?
    6. Understand regional response capabilities and preparedness measures:  Are SAR authorities in the multiple SAR regions and NAPs aware of each other’s available SAR resources that can be utilized during a MRO response? 
Conclusion
MRO planning and preparedness in the Antarctic Treaty area should consider the challenges in the coordination and conduct of a response due to the harsh environment, limited available SAR resources, limited communications, possible delays in SAR resources arriving on scene, and survivor survivability.  Stakeholders should work together to develop regional MRO plans that are reviewed on a periodic basis and exercised to ensure the plan remains accurate and effective.
The U.S. Coast Guard has developed an MRO planning and exercise staff.  In support of COMNAP’s intention to conduct its triennial SAR workshop, SAR Workshop IV in 2019, the U.S. Coast Guard would like to offer its assistance in planning for and conducting a table top exercise.  As shown in the COMNAP report on SAR Workshop III, a table-top exercise is an excellent opportunity to bring together key stakeholders and decision makers in an informal setting to generate discussions which could include MRO planning and preparedness. 

