





DROMLAND - Dronning Maud Land Air Network









DROMLAND -
Dronning Maud Land Air Network


Mission and working structure
The Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) is a non-profit, international cooperative project of the National Antarctic Programs of Belgium, Finland, Germany, India, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Sweden and the United Kingdom with stations and scientific interests in the wider Dronning Maud Land (DML) area. 
The aim of DROMLAN is to provide air transportation to/from and within DML to any member of COMNAP in science related activities, including logistics. With the consent of all DROMLAN participants, the Antarctic Logistics Center International (PTY) Ltd. (ALCI) at Cape Town (RSA) is responsible for all air operations and collaborates closely with the DROMLAN SC in their management. ALCI services are used by three different groups:

    • Priority users – members of national Antarctic programs, high profile national authorities under the Treaty or VIP groups
    • Members of governmentally funded scientific expeditions, but not belonging to a national Antarctic program
    • Commercial customers under International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) regulation managed by ‘The Antarctic Company’ (TAC)

Under the DROMLAN umbrella ALCI organises:

    • Air transport into DML from Cape Town 
    • Connecting flights to the destinations within the DROMLAN area and beyond.
    • Establishment of services necessary to perform the flight operations.

The air operations under this project mainly comprise the DML and the adjoining areas up to longitude of Halley Station in the west and the longitude of Syowa Station in the east and up to some stations operated by the DROMLAN members Russia and India at remote locations of East Antarctica. 
The DROMLAN Steering Committee (SC) comprises one representative from each participating country, appointed by the national COMNAP member. It is chaired by two co-chairs since 2012, at present by the UK and Finland. The DROMLAN SC is the decision-making body of DROMLAN for policy and financial matters, the updates of the operating guidelines, the approval of the seasonal flight missions and regular reporting to COMNAP Annual General Meetings (AGMs).
Meanwhile the collaboration under the umbrella of DROMLAN is looking back at a successful operational record over a period of about 15 years. This international collaboration has set up a substantial and fruitful logistic process which complements the former ship-borne only access to Antarctica with a number of regular flight connections from Cape Town to all research stations within DML and beyond towards East Antarctica. Figure 1 shows the stations of 10 DROMLAN members in the DML area.
Already in 1998, the European Polar Board expressed the need for long-range air support for European Polar research, both in the Arctic and Antarctic. Norway conducted the logistic/operational organization for the Nordic Antarctic Program during season 2000/2001. Polar Logistics, a UK based company, was charged to mobilize an aircraft IL-76MD with Ukrainian registration for three intercontinental flights between Cape Town and DML and there to a temporarily prepared blue ice landing strip at Henriksenskjaeret - Blue One (71°19’S; 08°48’E). One of these flights in January 2001 was an evaluation flight joined by 20 experts from 8 countries. The flight evaluation report concluded that the work should continue to prepare for the establishment of an international network. One year later during the COMNAP meeting in Shanghai in July 2002, parties agreed to establish the International Corporate Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) as an umbrella for coordinated air operations in the long term. The Terms of Reference of this program were adopted in 2003 and revised in 2010. 


Fig. 1: Overview of the Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) partners. 
Likewise high profile activities, such as Treaty inspections, have used the opportunities and advantages of DROMLAN services. This air network allowed for very efficient visits of several stations by the inspection teams in a short period of time and even more to get access to stations which were difficult to reach before. The following inspections experienced the operational capabilities of DROMLAN and reported to the ATCM in their respective inspection reports:
    • January 2001: Norway
    • February 2004: Finland 
    • February 2009: Norway
    • January/February 2010: Japan
    • December 2012: joint inspection Russia and US
    • January 2013: joint inspection Germany and South Africa

Infrastructure
The DROMLAN members coordinated their efforts to get the necessary infrastructure in place, enabling to perform the multi year, regular intercontinental flights between Cape Town and DML and to establish intra-continental flights to the various stations. DROMLAN members coordinated support beyond their national needs, in order to upgrade existing or to establish new facilities.
Each DROMLAN member prepared infrastructure at their respective station such as skiways, ground service, fuel storage and refuelling facilities, regular weather observations, communication and accommodation for transit passengers of the intra-Antarctic flight traffic. Additionally, the ship-borne delivery of aviation fuel is organised by the national programs. 
ALCI runs an office in Cape Town as the Antarctic gateway for DROMLAN. The office staff provides all services for passengers such as environmental and pre-flight briefings, flight check-in as well as cargo storage, customs clearance, handling and loading for the intercontinental departures and arrivals. During the season the ALCI staff is responsible for the operational management of the intercontinental and intra-Antarctic flights.



Runways for intercontinental missions
There are two established gateways in DML, one 17 km southwest of the Russian Station Novolazarevskaya called Novo Runway at 70°50’39” S and 11°35’44” E at an altitude of 550 m.a.s.l., and the second, Troll Airfield, is located 7 km north of the Norwegian Troll Station at 71°57’ S and 02°28’ E at an altitude of 1257 m.a.s.l..

In 1982, the runway was constructed at the then Soviet Novolazarevsksya Station for receiving heavy transport wheeled aircraft. The first landing on this runway and take off was undertaken by a turboprop aircraft IL-18D on 14 November 1984. In the end of February 1986, a similar flight was made by a heavy cargo aircraft IL-76TD "Antarktida" with jet propulsion. At that time these intercontinental flights to Antarctica departed from the international airport Maputu (Mozambique). After 1986 such air operations were carried out on a regular basis with two to four round trip flights per summer season. The last flight to Novo Runway was made at the beginning of November 1991 after which these intercontinental flights were terminated until the organizational and technical implementations of the international project DROMLAN began in season 2000/2001. Today Novo Runway and the ALCI seasonal passenger complex are jointly operated by the Russian Antarctic Program and ALCI.
The upgraded airstrip at Novo Runway currently has a size of 3045 x 61 m and is in general maintained to receive aircraft on wheel and on ski landing gear. The runway is equipped with an automated satellite navigation system for aircraft approach for landing under complicated weather conditions (low cloud and poor visibility), refueling facility, fire safety system, loading and unloading equipment, technical means for airstrip preparation, air traffic control, radio-communication, automatic weather station (AWS), self-contained runway lighting for takeoff and landing during dark hours. The passenger complex has living quarters for 40 people (if necessary 15 people can be additionally accommodated directly at the station), mess-room, kitchen and food warehouses. The Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) sledge-caterpillar traverses deliver on a regular basis the jet fuel to the runway from the offloading area located at a distance of 100 km of the station. The Russian Federation has issued a permit No. 075 on 29 December 2012 to RAE for the Antarctic aircraft activity including operation of the Novo runway, which is valid until 31 December 2017. The State Research Institute of Civil Aviation (Moscow) has obtained a permit No. R/2015/007 of 25 December 2015 for 5 years for performing intercontinental flights to Antarctica and paradrop missions of cargo in Antarctica.

Troll Airfield, is operated by the Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI). The airfield is 3000 m long and 60 m wide. The runway surface is ice - mechanically roughened to increase friction. That makes the runway friction equivalent to that of a gravel runway or even better depending on the actual temperature. The airfield became operational during 2004-05 season.
The station has all the necessary communication equipment for aircraft communication and flight following, including an ADS-B receiver (Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast) which allows for real time monitoring of flight movements in the area, as long as the aircraft has a transmitter installed and turned on.
The airfield has full passenger and cargo handling capability and it is equipped with Abbreviated Precision Approach Path Indicators (APAPI) and airfield landing lights, which allows for year round operations if needed. Ground support equipment includes a range of vehicles for skiway maintenance and operations, an Aircraft Starting Unit (ASU), a Ground Power Unit (GPU) as well as aircraft heater unit. The airfield has its own weather station as well as a remotely controlled online web camera. The camera is accessible for pilots and weather forecasters for real time remote observations of the area. 
Jet A-1 is stored in 200 liter drums, in shipping containers, on station, and pumped into big fuel tanks for each flight to guarantee fuel quality and to minimize risk of leaks and fuel spill. The fuel drums are transported by ship to the ice shelf edge and then transported overland to the station. Troll Station can house 60 persons comfortable with a peak population of 85 if needed.
Since the 2014-15 season the airfield fulfills ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization) Category 5 requirements after receiving a Scania Polar graded Fire truck. For the 2016-17 season, a Required Navigation Performance Approach (RNP APCH) was developed for Troll, which allows for landing in poor visibility and bad weather conditions.
From both runways ski equipped aircraft (Basler BT-67 or Twin Otter) depart and arrive to move personnel and cargo to the other stations. At the stations, the preparation of the skiways, ground service, fuel storage and refueling facilities are provided.

Flight weather service
A DROMLAN flight weather service was established at the German Neumayer Station III in cooperation between the Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Center for polar and marine research (AWI) and the German Weather Service (DWD). This service provides daily products, such as general forecasts for stations, ships and field parties, aviation forecasts including DROMLAN Aerodrom Forecast (DAF) and the DROMLAN weather charts. 
The actual data for weather forecasts are the result of meteorological observations at the stations of DROMLAN members and materials in the gridded formats from the International Weather Centers. 
The prognostic calculations are performed using global models of the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), the global Icosahedral Nonhydrostatic (ICON) model of the DWD and the US Global Forecast System (GFS) model. These models are complemented by the Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction System (AMPS).

Specifics of DROMLAN operations during season 2015/16
During the season 2015/16, an advanced version of an Iljuschin IL-76TD-90VD was operated for the first time under the DROMLAN umbrella by Volga-Dnepr Airlines LLC, Ulyanovsk, Russian Federation. Overall 12 intercontinental round-trip flights were performed between Cape Town and Novo Runway and seven flights were made between Cape Town and Troll Airfield using a Boeing 737BBJ and a Falcon 7X aircraft. 
Fig. 2: Flight routes for aircraft movements during season 2015/16; intra-continental flights for DROMLAN logistics (blue) with the aircraft Basler BT-67 (Mia and Lidia) and Twin Otter. For science (orange) with Basler BT-67 (Polar 5). The stations operated by India and Russia in East Antarctica were also approached by the intra Antarctic flight operations of DROMLAN.

In the season 2015/16, 662 persons belonging to the above mentioned categories priority users and members of governmentally funded scientific expeditions and about 61 tons of cargo were flown to Antarctica from Cape Town and back. In addition 114 persons for ground support of ALCI and Kenn Borek Air Ltd. (KBA) company and 266 persons belonging to the category TAC were flown to Antarctica from Cape Town and back.
Intra Antarctic flights were conducted with two Basler BT-67 and one Twin Otter DHC-6/300 chartered by ALCI and one Basler BT-67 (Polar 5) owned by AWI. As in previous years the operator for these aircraft was KBA Company. A map of all intra Antarctic flights in season 2015/16 is shown in Figure 2. 
Additionally to the abovementioned flights, one paradrop mission was performed by the Iljuschin aircraft IL-76TD-90VD departing from Novo Runway to the field site of FD83 on 27 November 2015. Overall 180 drums of Jet A1 and a pallet of equipment were delivered with a 100% recovery ratio. Empty drums and parachutes were brought back by a Basler aircraft or vehicles.

Summary
In total since the establishment of DROMLAN in season 2002/03 until season 2015/16, more than 150 intercontinental round trip flights were successfully completed between Cape Town and Novo Runway/Troll Airfield. The majority of these round trip flights were completed by the cargo aircraft IL-76TD, which in addition has been operated for cargo paradrop missions supporting field parties in the central Antarctica.
Every season about 600 to 800 flight hours are required to cover all intra Antarctic transportation requests of National Antarctic Programs. These flight missions are performed by ski-equipped aircraft such as Basler BT-67 or Twin Otter.
Flight weather service is provided by flight weather forecasters of the German Weather Service staying at the German Neumayer Station III every season.  

Conclusions
DROMLAN as the first internationally organized air gateway has offered easier and more frequent access into DML. It has significantly improved safety standards for scientific expeditions and logistics to DML since the times only ship-born transportation of passengers and cargo was possible. Each summer season the regular round trip flights from Cape Town to Novo Runway or Troll Airfield and the efficiently established intra-Antarctic air traffic are key elements to get researchers and equipment very efficiently to the frontiers of polar research. The network is also used by high profile activities, e.g. Treaty inspections for an efficient way to access stations within a short time period.
The SAR and medevac system of DROMLAN constitutes a new safety standard for the DML area, which has not been available before. The permanent stand by of SAR significantly improved the safety for all scientists and technicians staying in DML during summer season.
According to the Terms of Reference, DROMLAN is open to extend the collaboration with other National Antarctic Programs and to support new and challenging scientific projects as well to further improve the access to stations and research camps in Antarctica.

References
Additional information on the history, working structure and activities of DROMLAN can be found in ATCM as well as COMNAP AGM meeting documents as follows:
Inspection Reports under article VII and article 14 of the Protocol to ATCM with reference to DROMLAN usage: 
    • Norway Jan 2001, ATCM24, wp024 with att001
    • Finland Feb 2004, ATCM27, ip031 with att001
    • Norway Feb 2009, ATCM33, wp057 with att067
    • Japan Jan/Feb 2010, ATCM33, ip005 and ATCM34, wp001 and ip004
    • Russia-US Dec 2012, ATCM36, ip045 with att145
    • Germany-South Africa Jan 2013, ATCM36, wp004 and ip053 with att109 

DROMLAN Annual Reports to COMNAP AGMs for seasons 2012/13, 2013/2014, 2014/2015, 2015/2016
Proceedings of COMNAP Symposium 2014 “Success through International Co-operation”: Dronning Maud Land Air Network – A decade of internationally coordinated air operations.


