





Chile in the Southern Antarctica Joint Scientific Polar Station “Union Glacier”


English version provided by the author






Chile in the Southern Antarctica Joint Scientific Polar Station “Union Glacier”

Summary 
Activities carried out by Chile at the Joint Scientific Polar Station "Union Glacier"
Introduction 

Within the framework of the Chilean Antarctic Policy and in accordance with its international obligations relating to the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection, the Government authorized by Supreme Decree of January 2014 the establishment of the Joint Scientific Polar Station “Union Glacier" (EPCCGU) in the sector of the Ellsworth mountains, transferring the infrastructure and facilities that were at Patriot Hills at a few kilometres distance.

The operational planning, logistics and training issues are regulated by the Joint Staff “(EMCO)”, in coordination with the Antarctic Directorate of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Chilean Antarctic Institute “(INACH)” is responsible for the scientific programs including its planning and the regulation of standards established to that effect.  

In order to guarantee the efficient functioning of this Station, the involved institutions adopt the necessary provisions for the Campaign, ensuring its correct compliance, developing synergy and forming a solid nucleus for the task to be developed.

During each Campaign, the transfer of personnel and cargo is performed in two aircraft C-130 of the Chilean Air Force, which land on the aerodrome of "Union Glacier”, located 3,020 km south of Punta Arenas with the additional support of two Twin Otter aircrafts from at Union Glacier for air exploration and scientific research.

To date, four Antarctic Campaigns have been carried out; the first one, from November 2013 to January 2014, the second one from November 2013 to December 2014. It is important to note that on January 4, 2014, the staff of "Union Glacier” received the visit of former President Sebastián Piñera Echenique, providing a clear and concrete support to the objective and national interest of consolidating the Chilean Joint Scientific Polar Station in the heart of the Antarctic Continent. The last Campaign was held in November 2016, with very good results in scientific research.

Support to Science

 A terrestrial and an aerial unit are provided to guarantee the fulfilment of the scientific program carried out by the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH).

The Terrestrial Exploration Unit consists of two Teams; each one consists of three men under the command of an officer. All of its members have completed the mountain training provided by the Army. However, prior to their transfer to Antarctica, a re-training of ice displacement and rescue technique is held. The team uses snowmobiles for its mobility, and in case of great distances it uses the “Berco” cart with autonomy of 1,200 km pulling a module with a lodging capacity for 12 scientists.

Also, two Twin Otter aircrafts of the Chilean Air Force support the transfer of scientists over long distances and at the same time allow performing programmed aerial explorations. The logistical and base support is materialized by the Navy personnel.

The experience of the specialists who participate in this type of activities in a cold weather, has allowed to comply with the scientific program established by INACH without great inconvenient, except those ones derived from the difficult weather conditions and  risks due to the existing cracks in the work area.

Joint Scientific Polar Camp

The camp is directed alternately by an Officer and composed of a mixed staffing of the four national Antarctic operators that allows fulfilling the objective of ensuring the conditions of habitability and safety required for programmed operational, logistical and scientific purposes. At the end of the campaign the Polar Camp  is disabled , adopting measures to achieve "0" environmental impact and in this way complying  with the commitments of the Chilean State to perform scientific research in the Southern Antarctica and to maintain the highest level of its ecosystem preservation .

The surface of the "Union Glacier" is composed entirely of ice, which carries a risk, due to the presence of cracks and to the severe weather conditions. These represent a great challenge for the terrestrial and aerial exploration unit that have to lead the scientists out to the research areas, providing comprehensive safety measures in order to ensure that their research is of the highest national and international standards.

The commitment of Chile is to continue making the necessary effort to foster Chilean science in Southern Antarctica, taking advantage of the capacity and experience that the national Antarctic operators have acquired through time.





