Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Fortieth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting
CCAMLR Secretariat
Report of the Thirty-fifth Meeting of the Commission (Hobart,
Australia, 17-28 October 2016)
Opening of the meeting
1. The Thirty-fifth Annual Meeting of CCAMLR, which was held in
Hobart, Australia, from 17 to 28 October 2016, was chaired by Mr
Vasily Titushkin (Russian Federation).
2. Twenty-four Members, two Acceding States, one State Observer
and eleven Observers from non-government organisations
participated.
Organisation of the meeting
Status of the Convention
3. Australia, as Depository, reported that the status of the
Convention had not changed during the last intersessional period.
Implementation and compliance
4. The Commission approved the CCAMLR Compliance Report for
2016 – the fourth year of implementation of the CCAMLR
Compliance Evaluation Procedure.
5. Other subjects considered by the Standing Committee on
Implementation and Compliance (SCIC) included:
the review of notifications received for participation in new and
exploratory fisheries for the 2016/2017 season
implementation of CCAMLR’s catch documentation scheme
particularly efforts to strengthen the engagement of non-
Contracting Parties in the scheme, analysis of global toothfish trade
data and progress towards the deployment of a new electronic web-
based CDS (e-CDS) in early 2017. Ecuador was accorded the status
of an NCP cooperating with CCAMLR by monitoring toothfish trade
through limited access to the e-CDS
apparent trends in IUU fishing and the value of cooperation with
Interpol’s Project Scale
Administration and Finance
6. The Commission endorsed the advice and recommendations of
the Standing Committee on Administration and Finance (SCAF),
including supporting further work to examine revenue-generating
opportunities and further reduce costs to secure sustainable
funding.
7. The Commission approved the budget for 2017 and the forecast
budget for 2018.
Report of the Scientific Committee
A more detailed report that focuses on the five issues of common
interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR, as identified in 2009 at the joint
CEP–SCCAMLR Workshop in Baltimore, USA, will be
presented to CEP-XX by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee Chair, Dr
Mark Belchier (United Kingdom). The CEP will also discuss the on-
going consideration of the outcomes of the second CEP-SC-CAMLR
Workshop which was convened in Punta Arenas, Chile, on 19 and
20 May 2016. Additional matters on which the Scientific Committee
provided advice to the Commission at its last meeting included:
Krill resources
8. In relation to catches in the 2015/16 season, the Commission
noted that up to 14 September 2016, 11 vessels fished in Subarea
48; the total catch was 258 365 tonnes of which 154 461 tonnes
was taken from Subarea 48.1; Subarea 48.1 was closed on 28 May
2016.
9. Six Members notified for a total of 18 vessels for the 2016/17
season.
10. The Commission considered that, based on the risk assessment
framework, the risks of localised effects of fishing for krill were
increasing and that the current distribution of the trigger level for
krill in Area 48 described in Conservation Measure (CM) 51-07
should continue for a minimum period of three years. The
Commission requested that the Scientific Committee develop annual
updates to the risk assessment framework, and after three years, in
2019, provide a substantive review to inform the Commission on
the progress towards feedback management and the allocation of
trigger level in CM 51-07.
Fish resources
11. In 2015/16, 12 Members fished for toothfish (Patagonian
toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) and/or Antarctic toothfish (D.
mawsoni)). The reported total catch of Dissostichus spp. to 16
September 2016 was 12 211 tonnes. In comparison, the total
reported catch of toothfish in 2014/15 was 15 891 tonnes. The
Commission endorsed the Scientific Committee’s advice on catch
limits in 2016/17 for the fisheries for D. eleginoides and D.
mawsoni.
12. Two Members, the UK and Australia, fished for mackerel icefish
(Champsocephalus gunnari) and Chile conducted research fishing
for C. gunnari.
13. The Commission endorsed the advice from the Scientific
Committee in respect of the need for continued monitoring of
CCAMLR fisheries for overcapacity and agreed that, although there
was no indication of an excess in capacity at the current time, the
Secretariat should continue to monitor the number of vessels
notifying and then subsequently fishing in a subarea in each year,
in order to detect any increasing trend.
Bottom fishing and vulnerable marine ecosystems
14. The Commission noted the Scientific Committee’s discussions on
bottom fishing and vulnerable marine ecosystems (VME) and that
there was one notification of a VME risk area in Subarea 88.1
during 2015/16, which brings the total number of VME risk areas
to 76.
Marine protected areas
15. The Commission noted the Scientific Committee’s discussions on
MPA planning in Domain 1, preliminary results of research voyages
to the South Orkney MPA, and the latest information on the
development of the Weddell Sea MPA (WSMPA) (Domains 3 and 4).
It further noted that the Scientific Committee had agreed that the
extensive information presented in respect of the Weddell Sea is the
best science currently available and that it provides the necessary
foundation for MPA planning in this region. It also noted that
further work was required to develop these analyses and to identify
how they are used in the development of a WSMPA proposal, and
encouraged the continuation of this work.
16. The Commission adopted a new conservation measure
establishing time-limited special areas for scientific study in newly
exposed marine areas following ice shelf retreat or collapse.
Capacity building
17. The Commission congratulated applicants from Argentina and
China who were selected to receive a CCAMLR scientific scholarship
in 2017 and 2018.
Priorities of the Scientific Committee
18. The Commission considered outcomes of the CCAMLR Scientific
Committee Symposium, held at the CCAMLR Secretariat, Hobart,
Australia, on 13 and 14 October 2016 and noted the discussion on
priorities for the Scientific Committee.
CCAMLR Scheme of International Scientific Observation
19. The Commission endorsed a phased increase in observer
coverage for the krill fishery to achieve 100% observer coverage by
the 2020/21 fishing season.
Impacts of climate change
20. On behalf of the Delegations of Australia and Norway, Australia
provided an initial report from the Intersessional Correspondence
Group (ICG) on considering approaches for enhancing consideration
of climate change impacts in CCAMLR. The paper summarised the
group’s initial work in 2016, including discussions on topics of
concern and processes for improving consideration of climate
change impacts. This included ideas on assessing status and trends
and highlighting key recommendations from the second Joint CEP–
SCCAMLR Workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring which was
held in Punta Arenas, Chile, on 19 and 20 May 2016. Discussions
were supportive of bringing climate change related work into a
cohesive and prioritised framework, such as is exemplified by the
CEP’s Climate Change Response Work Programme. The work of the
ICG will not be restricted to scientific questions and priorities, but
will also seek to take account of policy and management
considerations.
Conservation measures
21. The Commission’s consideration of revised and new
conservation measures and resolutions, and related matters, is
recorded in the Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force
2016/17 published in late 2016.
22. Conservation Measures adopted at CCAMLR-XXXV included one
establishing a Ross Sea region MPA which was first submitted to the
Commission by New Zealand and the USA in 2012 and
subsequently revised in 2013, 2014 and 2015. The MPA, to come
into effect on 1 December 2017, seeks to conserve marine living
resources, maintain ecosystem structure and function, protect vital
ecosystem processes and areas of ecological significance, and
promote scientific research including through the establishment of
reference areas (see Annex).
Implementation of Convention objectives
The objectives of the Convention
23. Chile reported on the second CCAMLR Symposium held in
Santiago from 5 to 8 May 2015 noting that the Symposium
outcomes will be particularly useful in supporting the Commission’s
further consideration of strategic priorities for the next 5–10 years.
Reflecting on these outcomes and the outcomes of the CCAMLR
Scientific Committee Symposium which was held in advance of
SCCAMLR-XXXV, the Commission agreed to terms of reference and
working arrangements for an intersessional e-group on strategic
priorities for the Commission until 2027.
Performance review
24. The Commission agreed to terms of reference and supporting
processes for a second performance review (which will present its
report to CCAMLR-XXXVI in October). At the Commission’s
invitation, the Chair of the CEP, Ewan McIvor, has agreed to
participate in the Review Panel.
Cooperation with the Antarctic Treaty System and international
organisations
25. The Executive Secretary provided the Commission with a
summary of relevant issues arising from the 39th Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM XXXIX).
26. The Commission was advised that a report from the SCAR
Observer was presented to SC-CAMLR-XXXV providing an update
on SCAR’s extensive range of activities relevant to the work of the
Scientific Committee and Commission, highlighting the effective
engagement between SCAR and CCAMLR.
27. Noting that the Commission has formal arrangements with the
Agreement for the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP),
the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna
(CCSBT) and the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission
(WCPFC) the Commission encouraged the Secretariat to establish
MoUs with other relevant regional fisheries management
organisations.
Next meeting
Election of officers
28. The Commission elected South Africa to the position of Chair of
the Commission for the 2017 and 2018 meetings.
29. The Commission confirmed the recommendation from SCIC that
Ms J. Kim be elected as SCIC Chair.
Date and location of the next meeting
30. The Thirty-sixth Meeting will be held in Hobart, Australia, from
16 to 27 October 2017. The Thirty-sixth Meeting of the Scientific
Committee will be held from 16 to 20 October 2017.
Annex
The CCAMLR Ross Sea region marine protected area, including the
boundaries of the General Protection Zone (areas i, ii and iii), the
Special Research Zone and the Krill Research Zone (Conservation
Measure 91-05).
