Report by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)
and
a Proposal for a Seminar on the Importance of Hydrography in the
Antarctic Region
Report by the Secretariat of the International Hydrographic
Organization as Chair of the IHO Hydrographic Commission on
Antarctica
Introduction
The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) is an
intergovernmental consultative and technical organization. It
comprises 87 Member States. Each State is normally represented by
its national Hydrographer.
The IHO coordinates on a worldwide basis the setting of standards
for hydrographic data and the provision of hydrographic services in
support of safety of navigation and the protection and sustainable
use of the marine environment. The principal aim of the IHO is to
ensure that all the world's seas, oceans and navigable waters are
surveyed and charted.
What is Hydrography?
Hydrography deals with the measurement and description of the
physical features of oceans, seas, coastal areas, lakes and rivers.
Hydrographic surveying identifies the shape and nature of the
seafloor and the hazards that lie upon it, together with an
understanding of the impact of tides on the depth and on water
movement. This knowledge supports all marine activities, including
scientific studies, environmental protection and transport.
Importance of Hydrography in Antarctica
Hydrographic information is a fundamental pre-requisite for the
development of successful and environmentally sustainable human
activities in the seas and oceans. Unfortunately, there is little or no
hydrographic information for a number of parts of the world,
especially in Antarctica.
In this particular region, where vessels may face the most severe
weather conditions, any grounding due to a lack of adequate
surveying or nautical charting may have serious consequences.
Unfortunately, the grounding of vessels operating outside
previously navigated routes in Antarctica is not uncommon.
The Polar Code, adopted by the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) in 2014, includes significant cautions
concerning hydrography and nautical charting in the polar regions.
As stated, the Polar Code
… “considers hazards which may lead to elevated levels of risk due
to increased probability of occurrence, more severe consequences,
or both (…)
and notes in particular:
...remoteness and possible lack of accurate and complete
hydrographic data and information, reduced availability of
navigational aids and seamarks with increased potential for
groundings compounded by remoteness, limited readily deployable
Search and Rescue (SAR) facilities, delays in emergency response
and limited communications capability, with the potential to affect
incident response …”
Most scientific studies and an understanding of the marine
environment benefit significantly from a knowledge of the nature
and shape of the seafloor and the movement of the water caused by
tides. Therefore the lack of such hydrographic knowledge in most
Antarctic waters, particularly in the coastal and shallower regions,
must compromise many scientific endeavours being undertaken
under the auspices of ATCM and individual Member States.
IHO Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica
The HCA comprises 24 IHO Member States (Argentina, Australia,
Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Ecuador, France, Germany, Greece,
India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom, Uruguay,
USA, Venezuela), all of which have acceded to the Antarctic Treaty
and are therefore also directly represented in the ATCM.
The IHO Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) was
formed in 1998 aimed at coordinating activities between its
Member States to improve the quality, coverage and availability of
nautical charting and other marine geospatial and hydrographic
information and services covering the region.
Ways and Means to Improve Hydrography and Nautical Charting in
Antarctica
The IHO has reported regularly on the unsatisfactory level of
hydrographic knowledge in Antarctica since ATCM XXXI (Kiev,
2008) and the inherent risks involved for all seaborne activities
taking place around the continent. Barely 5% of the depth in
Antarctic waters has been measured. The IHO has consistently
indicated the requirement to obtain support at the highest political
levels if things are to improve significantly.
It is pleasing that ATCM XXXVII adopted Resolution 5 (2014) on
strengthening cooperation in hydrographic surveying and charting
of Antarctic waters. However, there has been little noticeable
impact or improvement on the previously reported situation.
The IHO HCA attempts to work closely with stakeholder
organizations such as COMNAP, IAATO, SCAR, IMO and IOC,
However, with the exception of successful work with IAATO, no co-
operative programmes or packages using ships of opportunity or
other resources have been achieved in order to improve
hydrographic data in critical shipping areas.
Depth Measurement to be Included in Environmental Data
Observing Programmes
The IHO is committed to the collection and management of
reference bathymetric data sets required for modelling the different
ocean and coastal mechanisms, in particular through the
programme of the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans
(GEBCO), which is co-governed by the IHO and the IOC, and the
IHO Data Centre for Digital Bathymetry (DCDB) that acts as the
global data repository for publicly available bathymetry of the
world’s oceans, seas and coastal waters, including the underpinning
data for GEBCO.
The IHO is now encouraging innovative supplementary data
gathering and data maximizing initiatives, to increase mankind’s
knowledge of the bathymetry of the seas, oceans and coastal waters
including crowd-sourced bathymetry (volunteered geographic data)
including in Antarctica.
The advent of particularly inexpensive data loggers means that it is
now possible to use existing equipment in a non-intrusive way for
all seafarers to collect and render bathymetric data to the IHO
DCDB. Most ships are inherently capable of measuring and digitally
recording the depth in coastal waters using existing ship’s
equipment and an increasing number of vessels are capable of
taking measurements in deeper water using existing ship’s
equipment. This is particularly so for scientific and passenger
vessels and supply ships.
The IHO considers that the measurement, recording and rendering
of depth data as a routine environmental observing activity should
be undertaken at all times when vessels are at sea, and where no
restrictions apply.
Proposal for a Seminar on the Importance of Hydrography in the
Antarctic Region
At the thirty-ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in
Santiago, Chile, the IHO Representative suggested that it would be
useful to examine in much more detail the impact of the status of
hydrographic surveys and nautical charts covering Antarctic waters.
It was proposed that the IHO considers organising a seminar similar
to the one offered at ATCM XXXI held in Ukraine in 2008. Chile and
Ecuador supported the IHO proposal.
As a result,
… The Meeting agreed to insert a new priority relating to
hydrographic surveying in Antarctica, and agreed to consider the
issue in 2018 (see ATCM Final Report paragraph 161).
The IHO proposes that a seminar be arranged during the first days
of ATCM XLI in Ecuador in 2018. It would be led by the Secretary
General of the IHO, who is also Chair of the IHO Hydrographic
Commission on Antarctica (HCA). The seminar would be supported
by the national Hydrographers represented in the IHO HCA. Other
relevant supporting organizations that operate under the umbrella
of the IHO, including the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans
(GEBCO) project and the International Bathymetric Chart of the
Southern Oceans (IBCSO) projects would contribute. Collaborating
and supporting Organizations including SCAR, COMNAP, CCAMLR
and IAATO will be invited to provide their perspectives as part of
the seminar.
In addition to the statement made by Ecuador at ATCM XXXIX in
Chile supporting the principle of holding a seminar in Ecuador as
part of ATCM XLI in 2018, the IHO Secretariat has received further
correspondence Letter from Under Secretary of Latin America and
the Caribbean, Ministry of External Relations, dated 28 November
2016, to the General Commander of the Navy, Ecuador. from
Ecuador as the host country, supporting this position.
The seminar will examine in detail the impact of the currently
unacceptable state of hydrographic knowledge, nautical charting
and bathymetric mapping covering Antarctic waters, particularly in
relation to safety, operations, environmental protection, climate
change, oceanographic modeling and research in the region. The
seminar will go on to identify several practical, low-cost solutions
that States and other Organizations can implement to improve the
current situation. The seminar will also draw attention to the
existing arrangements in the IHO that enable would-be data
providers from the ATCM community to identify specific areas
where their own activities can be used to provide much-needed
depth data for the common good.
The outcome of the seminar will be a number of recommendations
on a coordinated implementation plan for subsequent consideration
by the ATCM.
Proposals for Consideration by ATCM
The IHO invites ATCM to include a seminar on the status and the
impact of hydrography in the Antarctic to be delivered by the IHO
as part of the programme for ATCM XLI in Ecuador in 2018.
The IHO invites ATCM to consider including in its relevant policy/
doctrine/regulations covering ship operations (passenger vessels,
scientific campaigns, supply activities, etc.), an encouragement that
the measurement, recording and rendering of depth data should be
undertaken at sea at all times as a routine environmental observing
activity unless particular restrictions apply.
