





Blue Ice Runway by Romnæsfjellet








Blue Ice Runway by Romnæsfjellet

Summary

At ATCM XXXIX in Santiago, Chile, Norway and Belgium were tasked by the meeting to “conduct further inquiries on the development of the blue ice runway … and to report back to ATCM XL” (paragraph 282 of the final report). This document seeks to give an overview over the case, and summarise the facts pertaining to the development of the runway.


Background

Belgium introduced IP56 titled “Developing a blue ice runway at Romnoes in Dronning Maud Land” at ATCM XXXIX. As Parties will recall, the paper reported on the development of a blue ice runway by a private operator in the vicinity of Romnæsfjellet, near the Belgian Princess Elizabeth Station, in Dronning Maud Land. It noted that the operator had not submitted an IEE or CEE prior to commencing work on the runway. The meeting noted that there was a degree of confusion concerning responsibility for the activity. Norway and Belgium were tasked by the meeting to conduct further inquiries into the development of the blue ice runway, and to report to ATCM XL.  


Result of inquiries

Norway and Belgium have  reached out to the involved Parties and non-governmental actors  (South Africa, Russia, IPF, and ALCI) to determine the course of events. It has been a challenging task to collect the necessary information due to the number of different actors involved, the complicated nuances of the case and the difficulties in identifying and therefore communicating appropriately with the key entities. In determining the course of events of this case, we sought answers to the following questions:

    1. Who is the operator of the runway?
    2. Who is responsible for the construction of the runway?
    3. Is there any infrastructure present? 
    4. Has an EIA been submitted for establishment of runway, and has a permit been given for this activity?
    5. Has an EIA been submitted for flights/use of the runway, and have any permits been given for this activity.

As far as we can verify, ALCI (Antarctic Logistics Centre International) is the operator in charge of construction and operation of the runway. There is no built infrastructure on the runway at present that we have been made aware of. From  received documentation and as was visually confirmed during the inspection mission by Belgium and the Netherlands, there are containers, construction vehicles, building materials and other equipment present in the vicinity of the runway. There were concrete plans to erect infrastructure, but this work has been suspended.  

In answering the questions relating to EIAs for the establishment of the runway, as far as we have been able to establish, plans for construction of the blue ice runway did commence before an IEE/CEE was submitted to an appropriate authority. We have, however, been notified that a draft IEE was made, and that this was sent to South African authorities for comments, but a final IEE/CEE was not submitted and an approval for the activity was not received. 

An EIA has been submitted for flights to the runway. There was a test flight to the runway by Romnæsfjellet with an Ilyushin in 2015 with the aim of certifying the runway, and specialists of the Russian aeronautical authorities GOSNIIGA found the runway apt to receive IL 76 planes. This is required under Russian regulation before providing permits for flight activity. The information relating to the test-flight has been made available through EIES. Russia has conducted an IEE for flight activity, and plans to present this to the Meeting in Beijing. The impact assessment concerns flight activity, not the construction of the runway. ALCI has indicated that they have delivered an IEE to Russian authorities for the construction of the runway at Romnæsfjellet, and that Russian authorities are currently in the process of considering this IEE. It should be noted that Belgian authorities have not been given the opportunity to consider and provide input to this IEE even though the proposed runway is to be located close to the Belgian Princess Elisabeth Station.

There were plans to use the runway in a private expedition during the 16/17 season, but this did not come to fruition.


Conclusion 

As far as we have been able to verify, the biggest issue in this case is that work on the runway was commissioned, equipment was transported in to the location, and work on the runway was planned to begin before an EIA was in place, and before formal approval was given to the operator. ALCI should have submitted an EIA to the appropriate competent authority prior to planning or beginning work on the runway. 

The establishment of a runway by Romnæsfjellet is not in itself problematic. The issue in this case was that the work began before an EIA was approved. The case does, however highlight the importance of proper procedure and clarity when multiple Parties are involved in Antarctic projects. When there are multiple Parties and private entities involved it is especially important that all parties are clear on what procedures need to be followed, and who is in charge of reporting activities to the appropriate authorities, and that all formalities are in order prior to commencing any work. In this context, it is important to emphasize the importance of Parties and private entities ensuring complete transparency with regard to their planned and intended activities in Antarctica, in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty. 


