Operational information – national expeditions: Facilities & SAR
categories
Advice as requested from COMNAP
Operational information – national expeditions: Facilities & SAR
categories
Advice as requested from COMNAP
Background
Recalling the conclusions of the ATCM XXXIX in regards to
Information Exchange, as noted in Appendix 4, page 190, of the
Antarctic Treaty Final Report of the Thirty-ninth Consultative
Meeting, in particular there are two ATCM conclusions which make
specific requests to COMNAP for advice. Those are the ATCM
conclusions which state:
Operational: national expeditions – Stations: “…the desirability of
making possible changes to the items of information in the
Operational: national expeditions – stations’ category. The ATCM
requested COMNAP to consult with its members and provide advice
on an appropriate set of categories for describing stations and
facilities to facilitate the exchange of accurate information”; and
Search and rescue information items – stations, vessels, and aircraft:
“…COMNAP to provide advice on whether there was any need,
from an operational perspective, for Parties to exchange search and
rescue information via the information exchange system. The ATCM
further requested COMNAP to provide advice on whether there
were benefits in having COMNAP-curated search and rescue
information available publicly, by linking to it from the ATCM
website…”
COMNAP’s advice on both these requests is presented to the ATCM
for consideration in this Information Paper.
Advice on appropriate set of categories
In response to the first request, COMNAP wishes to advise that the
following are the categories for “Facility type”, “Status”, and
“Seasonality” that COMNAP has agreed to use in the COMNAP
Antarctic facilities list and in the COMNAP database. The COMNAP
Antarctic facilities list will now be drawn from information in the
COMNAP database. So while the development of the database and
the database fields are recent and were expanded for clarity, these
categories and their intended meaning are based on a long history
of discussion amongst COMNAP Member National Antarctic
Programs for use in COMNAP products.
From the Antarctic Facilities List
Facility types:
Station – An established installation with fixed buildings and
mechanical services (reticulated power, water, sewage etc).
Camp – A more basic and less permanent installation, such as a
group of tents/shelters, often used only for a small number of
seasons.
Refuge Also note Recommendation ATCM III-II (1964) in regards to
“Notification of Unoccupied Refuges” which suggests the term
“refuges” should be understood to mean “an unoccupied building,
hut or caches maintained by them in the Treaty Area in a condition
suitable for use in emergencies”. – Usually a small and very basic
installation, sometimes only one small hut, but usually of a
permanent nature.
Airfield Camp – An installation, whatever its size and type, attached
to an airfield – if the airfield is not attached to a station, camp or
refuge that is not already listed separately.
Depot – A depot of food, fuel or other supply.
Current Status options:
Year-round – Opened all year round – winter and summer.
Seasonal – Opened seasonally only typically opened every summer
or most summers.
Temporarily Closed – Closed temporarily and ready to be re-opened
as and when required.
Closed – Closed indefinitely – but at least part of the facility still
exists and could be renovated and/or re-used.
No Longer Exists – The facility no longer exists.
Under Construction – Under Construction–work has commenced.
Under Consideration – Construction planned but no construction
has commenced.
From the COMNAP Database
DATA FIELD: Facility Type:
[DROPDOWN OPTIONS]
Station
Camp
Refuge
Airfield Camp
Depot
Laboratory The definition for this facility type is “A facility that
provides controlled conditions in which research, experiments, and
measurements may be performed."
DATA FIELD: Facility Seasonality:
[DROPDOWN OPTIONS]
Year-round
Seasonal
DATA FIELD: Facility Status:
[DROPDOWN OPTIONS]
Open - Active (year-round or seasonal)
Permanently Closed - Closed indefinitely, but at least part of the
facility still exists and could be renovated or re-used
Temporarily Closed - Inactive, but ready to be re-opened as
required
No Longer Exists - Closed indefinitely and no parts of the facility
exist at its location
Under Construction - Work has commenced on the facility, but it is
not open
Under Consideration - Construction has been planned, but has not
commenced
Advice on search and rescue (SAR) information
In response to the second request, COMNAP discussed this
information exchange requirement with participants at the
COMNAP SAR Workshop III. Participants from the five Rescue Co-
ordination Centres (RCCs) with co-ordination responsibility over a
portion of the Antarctic Treaty area, all agreed that their RCC
contact information should be made publicly available from the
COMNAP website and this was implemented immediately following
the workshop (See www.comnap.aq/Contact/SitePages/
Home.aspx). In regards to exchange of information related to
National Antarctic Program operated stations, vessels and aircraft
which are used in support of science, logistics and operations and
which may be important during a
SAR event, COMNAP provides this information in its range of
products which include the Antarctic Flight Information Manual
(AFIM), the Antarctic Telecommunication Operators Manual
(ATOM) and in the Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS) which
are, from an operational perspective, adequate tools for information
exchange in regards to those stations, vessels and aircraft operated
by COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs. However, we
note that those products do not include information on fishing
vessels, IAATO and non-IAATO tourism vessels and aircraft, and
others outside of the COMNAP Membership that may be operating
in the Antarctic Treaty area.
