





Procedures for Safe use of Unmanned Aerial Systems in Antarctica








Procedures for Safe Use of Unmanned Aerial Systems in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand

Summary

The use of unmanned aerial systems in Antarctica has been the subject of recent attention by the ATCM.  To support their safe and environmentally acceptable use, COMNAP has developed a Handbook for Unmanned Aerial Systems Operators.

On the basis of the COMNAP guidelines and recommendations, New Zealand has developed a UAS manual relevant to flying unmanned aerial systems in the Ross Sea / McMurdo Sound region of Antarctica.  The manual sets out procedures to be followed, including pre-assessment as well as on-the-ground operational procedures.

A summarised version of the New Zealand UAS manual is attached to this Information Paper.

Background

In a global context, the commercial and recreational use of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) has grown exponentially in recent years, with a wide variety of fixed and rotary wing devices now available.  The use of UAS in Antarctica has also increased significantly over the last few years.

Discussions on the benefits and risks (environmental and safety) of using UASs in Antarctica were supported by a paper submitted by COMNAP to ATCM XXXVIII (ATCM XXXVIII / Working Paper 22).  In discussing the issue ATCM XXXVIII expressed general support for UAS use, and acknowledged UASs as an important tool for the future.  The Meeting also agreed that more research was needed, and looked forward to considering COMNAP’s forthcoming guidelines on UAS use. 

At ATCM XXXIX COMNAP introduced its Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) Operators Handbook (ATCM XXXIX / Working Paper 14), noting that it was an evolving document, and encouraging Parties to give consideration to the non-mandatory guidance the Handbook provided.  COMNAP noted that the Handbook should be viewed as a living document and that as UAS technologies evolved, so should the recommendations and appendices included in the document (paragraph 173 from the Final report of ATCM XXXIX).
CEP XIX also considered the COMNAP guidance document and recognised their usefulness.  CEP XIX informed the ATCM that it would initiate work to develop further guidance on the environmental aspects of UAS use in Antarctica at CEP XX, taking into account anticipated advice from SCAR.
ATCM XXXIX expressed overall support for the use of UASs for scientific purposes and underlined their benefits both for science and other operations in Antarctica. Many Parties acknowledged that additional research was required in relation to the safety risks and environmental impacts of UAS use. Some Parties stated that they had already adopted national regulations on the use of UASs and that it was important for national legislations to be aligned with the work undertaken by the ATCM. Several Parties encouraged COMNAP to continue working on the development of the Handbook (paragraph 174 of the Final Report of ATCM XXXIX). 

Development of Procedures

A number of New Zealand science events have used or are using UAS technology to support research programmes in Antarctica.  This has included terrestrial ecosystems research undertaken in the McMurdo Dry Valleys and protected area survey work in the Ross Sea region (see separate Information Paper XX, submitted by New Zealand).

To support the safe operation of UASs in the Ross Sea Region, New Zealand’s national Antarctic programme (Antarctica New Zealand) has prepared and documented a manual for UAS operations, taking into account the particular environmental and safety considerations of New Zealand’s area of operation.  Importantly, the manual has been prepared in close collaboration with the United States Antarctic Progam (USAP), due to the close cooperation between the two programmes, as well as the significant volume of aircraft activity in the area.

Southern McMurdo Sound is a busy airspace.  Between October and February numerous intra- and inter-continental fixed-wing flights are conducted to and from the region as well as many rotary-wing flights to deploy and recover research events.  Consequently, the safety management of UAS operations is paramount in the region, and a high level of coordination is needed when deploying UAS.

From an environmental perspective, the Southern McMurdo Sound region has a number of important values, including several penguin colonies (on Ross Island), populations of seal (notably Weddell seals that pup on sea ice during the summer months) and a number of designated ASPAs for which overflight restrictions are in place.  The Southern McMurdo Sound area is not heavily populated with flying birds, though colonies of McCormack’s skua exist within the vicinity of penguin colonies on Ross Island. Some snow petrels are occasionally observed in the area.

Drawing on the COMNAP UAS Operators Handbook, the New Zealand UAS manual provides guidance for science events and others, such as media events, wishing to operate UASs in the region.

The procedures draw on national (Civil Aviation Authority) requirements and set out pre-approval requirements for both the pilot (e.g. qualifications and minimum experience) and the airframe, as well as on-site operational procedures that need to be followed (i.e. requirements for: airspace, airframe and air-operators).

Documentation to be completed is included in the manual.

Prior to travelling to Antarctica, event personnel intending to fly UAS are required to submit an application to Antarctica New Zealand.  The application is structured around a concept of operations (CONOPS) based on examples provide by the USAP.  

Antarctica NZ will review all UAS proposals to ensure that:

    • the pilot in charge is qualified and has provided evidence of competency;
    • the airframe is airworthy;
    • the concept of operations (CONOPS) is complete including identification of hazards and assessment of risk to ensure all risks are mitigated to a low or equivalent rating or implementing controls that allow any residual risk which cannot be mitigated to be addressed.

Environmental implications are addressed through Antarctica New Zealand’s existing environmental impact assessment requirements.

Specific hazards are identified and risks assessed in accordance with Antarctica New Zealand’s risk management procedures.

To assist Antarctica New Zealand, an Antarctic advisory group of UAS experts has been established involving subject matters experts including an executive of UAVNZ (a hub for private and commercial UAV and drone operators, suppliers and retailers in New Zealand).  The group is available to support Antarctica New Zealand in assessing UAS proposals; to ensure all pilots are qualified and have the competency and experience to fly the proposed airframes in Antarctica.  The group also assists in reviewing certifications of airworthiness and quality assures the concept of operations (CONOPS) to ensure it meets the standard required under New Zealand Civil Aviation Authority as well as the United States Air Operations Manual.

Once approved by Antarctica New Zealand the documentation is forwarded to the USAP UAS Working Group to review before being operationalised by the USAP Air Traffic Controllers based at McMurdo Station.  McMurdo Air Traffic Control uses the CONOPS to manage temporal, spatial separation and the de-confliction of concurrent activities.  

The New Zealand procedures were developed by Auckland University of Technology in the 2015/16 season and trialled during the 2016/17 austral summer season with two New Zealand research events from Canterbury and Waikato Universities.  Feedback was sought post-season and the document updated to reflect identified improvements.

A summarised version of the New Zealand procedures is attached for the information of Parties.

