





MADICE –Joint Initiative of Scientific Programme at CDML by India and Norway 








MADICE – Joint Initiative of Scientific Programme at CDML by India and Norway
Abstract
The Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) and National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), agreed on providing full support to programme,  “Mass Balance Dynamics and Climate of Central Dronning Maud Land coast, East Antarctica (MADICE)”. The intent   was to encourage collaborative work to investigate ice dynamics, current mass balance, millennial-long evaluation of coastal region at CDML and past changes in atmospheric dynamics and sea-ice in the region using satellite remote sensing, geophysical field measurement and ice-cores. A project proposal based on the Letter of Commitment, received support and funding from the Earth System Science Organization (Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India) and the Research Council of Norway (RCN). .
Introduction
The Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) and the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) have long experience in working in polar region in the field of science and logistics operation.  Central Dronning Maud Land (CDML) holds tremendous potential for studies aiming to increase our understanding glaciology and climate change phenomena. The Indian research station Maitri , and the Norwegian research station Troll, located more than 350 kilometres apart in CDML, albeit in somewhat similar environmental settings, are useful to support such studies. Since the logistic coverage of the two stations is complementary, and joint field surveys have a great potential for sharing experiences, expertise and seamless transfer of knowledge to both the countries, a strong desire for long-term collaboration between these two state parties have emerged.  
Assessing the feasibility and realizing the common scientific interest, NPI and NCAOR, agreed on providing full support to programme “Mass Balance Dynamics and Climate of Central Dronning Maud Land coast, East Antarctica (MADICE)”. The intent was to encourage collaborative work to investigate ice dynamics, current mass balance, millennial-long evaluation of coastal region at CDML and past changes in atmospheric dynamics and sea-ice in the region using satellite remote sensing, geophysical field measurement and ice-cores. A project proposal based on Letter of Commitment received support and funding from the Earth System Science Organization (Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India) and the Research Council of Norway (RCN). The programme will go over four years starting in 2016, ending in 2020, and includes two joint field seasons in the austral summers of 2016-17 and 2017-18.

NCAOR and NPI signed a Letter of Commitment framing the practical cooperation. NPI committed to provide necessary scientific and logistics support including, deployment of scientific personnel to the project, as well as environmental management expertise during the 2016-17 campaign. 
NCAOR committed to provide scientific and logistics support as well as deployment of scientific personnel, transportation of personnel and cargo between Troll runway and Novo runway. Furthermore, NCAOR would provide for the deployment of vehicles (i.e. piston bully, snow scooter, over snow convoy) to the field site near Maitri station, as well as camping etc. It was also agreed that the ice-core analysis work would be carried out at NCAOR, Goa. 
Objectives
The MADICE project aims to achieve the following objectives;
    • Understand the current status and dynamics of ice shelves at CDML to decipher their sensitivities for future climate change.
    • Study the mass balance and long-term evolution of Antarctic ice rises to assess the buttressing effect of ice rises on the ice shelves and upstream ice sheet.
    • Conduct a high-resolution ice core based reconstruction of oceanic and atmospheric dynamics and its possible tele-connection to the coast of Antarctica.
    •  Synthesize new and existing knowledge on regional instability and selection of full depth ice-coring site.
Study Area and Importance of Project
An Indo-Norwegian joint workshop held in New Delhi (November, 2013) identified the proposal as an important research topic that meets mutual interests, connect strong and complementary research groups in both nations, and which was well suited for rapid project development. Ice rises are important to investigate oceanic and atmospheric dynamics in Antarctica and their relations with the global change. Relatively high surface mass balance and close proximity to storms that circulate Antarctica make ice cores from ice rises well suited to examine highly-variable Antarctic climate and sea ice, as well as their tele-connections. The study area is depicted in Figure1.


 Figure 1: Study area in central Dronning Maud Land (DML), including the Nivlisen and Lazarev ice shelves, and ice rises Djupranen (labeled “D” in red circle) and Leningrad (L). The ice shelves are punctuated by these and smaller ice rises and rumples (masked with black). The red curve shows the calving front in 2013  and the blue curve shows the grounding line. Black dashed lines show approximate traverse routes for the first (2016-17) field campaign. The background is a composite of the MODIS and LIMA satellite mosaics  and the color shows ice flow speeds. The inset shows the DML coast together with Norwegian Troll Station and the coverage of the main map. Also shown are seabed topography with hill shade, inland outcrops and surface elevation contours (500-m intervals). Both insets show abundant ice rises and rumples (masked with black).


First Field Campaign
Scientific and logistics personnel from NPI and NCAOR initiated the project during austral summer of 2016-17 and undertook the planned survey and collection of geophysical data as well as ice-cores during an approximately one month long field campaign along the route shown in Figure 1.
 Environmental impact 
An environmental assessment was undertaken for the project in accordance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol and was submitted to and considered by Norwegian competent authorities.  Project team members are familiar with the Protocol provisions and follows the environmental protocols in place in order to minimize the impact of activities on the Antarctic environment.

