





Report on Clean-up at Metchnikoff Point, Brabant Island








Report on Clean-up at Metchnikoff Point, Brabant Island
Information paper submitted by the United Kingdom.

Summary

This paper reports on a clean-up project undertaken by the United Kingdom at Metchnikoff Point on Brabant Island in the Antarctic Peninsula.

Background

Between 1983–85, a British Joint Services Expedition (JSEBI) explored Brabant Island. The expedition involved 35 servicemen and civilians and operated over two Austral summers and a winter. JSEBI ended prematurely following an accident and as part of the following evacuation much of the expedition’s equipment had to be abandoned. This included the principal base camp hut and stores at Metchnikoff Point and a number of subsidiary sites containing stores around the island. 

Prior to the implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty into domestic UK law however, information about expeditions to Antarctica was not centrally collated in the UK.  Consequently, there was little information about the residual waste left by JSEBI, until a report was received by the UK’s competent authority in 2009.  In line with the UK’s aim to clean-up, as far as practicable, all British residual waste in Antarctica, plans were prepared for a clean-up programme.  

Difficulties in accessing the JSEBI site by ship in poor weather meant that this clean-up programme has taken a number of years.  The crew of HMS Protector commenced the clean-up in 2014, and identified and cleared various sites around the island.  The final stage of the clean-up, involving the main site at Metchnikoff Point was tackled this past season. 

Recent Action

Utilising the CEP Clean-up manual, a team from HMS Protector went ashore at Metchnikoff Point on 3 and 4 January 2017. Whilst removing the visible waste that had been consolidated into a pile during previous clean-up efforts, a further area was uncovered which required extensive excavation to remove. A total of 14 ‘Hippo Bags’ of waste were removed over the course of two days, as well as a large skidoo sledge and numerous scaffolding poles. Details and photographs of the clean-up are at annex A.

It was not possible to remove all traces of the expedition due to ice cover and the degradation and subsequent dispersal of small fragments of waste.  When favourable conditions allow, HMS Protector aims to visit the site in a future season, with the aim of fully completing the clean-up. 















Attachment A

Waste Removal from Brabant Island 

    1. The following photographs detail the clean up conducted by HMS Protector 3 – 4 Jan 2017 at the Metchnikoff Point site, Brabant Island.

Photograph
Description

Zodiac in bay on approach to beach.  Note the decreasing width of the bay on approach to the beach.  Inland site accessed from scree slope or flatter slope to beach left.    




Initial dump detailed in previous reports.  This was visible at initial recce and all waste seen here was removed. 

Rations including tin cans, plastic wrapped food items and cardboard boxes, present at initial recce.  Note wide dispersal of fragmented rations.  All visible traces of rations were removed however; small fragments may still be present.  

Part buried rations at initial recce. 

Further waste including concrete weight and stores area looking west toward the landing site/ beach.  All waste here was removed.  

Equipment visible, partly frozen in ice.  A mesh wire roll uncovered here was cut down as much as possible but could not be fully removed as it was partly frozen in the ice.    

HMS Protector’s crew conducting clean up at Metchnikoff Point.

Uncovering waste covered by snow and ice.

Part buried area now excavated, scaffolding poles and timber removed.

Area cleared to solid ice.  Timber stakes, steel bar, and plastic container remain, frozen in situ.

Condition of site once clean up complete, view from Belgian Plaque looking down on the site.





