





Search and Rescue Cases in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula Period 2016 / 2017
 MRCC Chile



English version provided by the author





Search and Rescue Cases in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula 
Period 2016 / 2017
MRCC Chile

Introduction:

SAR operations and medical evacuations in the Antarctica pose many challenges, which are frequently hampered by the extreme weather conditions that make them challenging. 

The increase of maritime traffic in Antarctica requires a capability to respond in case of a maritime emergency, where coordination and cooperation play a major role. 

Any support in case of an event can have a severe impact on national Antarctic programs; this requires Maritime Search and Rescue Centers (RCC’s and/or MRCC’s) to be prepared to coordinate a rescue operation.

Fortunately, during period 2016/2017 there was only one maritime emergency in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula; however, MRCC’s must remain alert and attentive to coordinate whatever is necessary if an emergency occurs.

SAR Cases in the Antarctic Peninsula Period 2016/2017:

None.

Medical Evacuation Period 2016/2017:

On January 11, 2017, a medical evacuation was performed from M/V “Ocean Endeavour”, Bahamas flag, due to a heart failure suffered by a national from the United States. The passenger was disembarked at Ardley Cove and then was taken to Punta Arenas by aircraft.
 
Maritime emergencies vary in occurrence, severity or importance: The International Maritime Organization recently adopted the Polar Code, with the purpose to act as a compliment to other international instruments with a view to increase the safety of the vessels operations and reduce their impacts on people and environment of polar, remote, vulnerable and possibly inhospitable waters. Search and Rescue Coordinator Centers, National Antarctic Operators, vessels that operate in the Antarctica whether they do tourism, scientific research, fishing, recreation or other activities, must be alert for new maritime emergencies. This is why the concepts of “Mass Rescue Operations, MRO” and “Vessel Triage System” are being introduced. 

The first is related to the need for providing immediate assistance to a great number of people in distress where the normal capabilities of the Search and Rescue Authorities are inadequate or insufficient. Fortunately, Mass Rescue Operations are few compared to normal SAR operations; however, they can happen at any moment.

The second is a method to assess the safety conditions of a vessel in distress. This method can be used by a vessel as well as by a Search and Rescue Authority, and has two steps: the first one is the knowledge of risk factors (flooding, reduction of maneuverability); and the second is related to the assessment of the severity of the risk factors through a risk matrix by providing a safety status.


Conclusion:

In comparison with period 2015/2016, there continues to be a considerable amount of passage, research and tourism vessels that navigate in the vicinities of Antarctic Peninsula; however, there was a decrease of maritime incidents that required the coordination of MRCC Chile.

Nonetheless, the great number of vessels that operate in the area during the summer season requires being alert in case of any incident.

Chile has Maritime Stations in Fildes Bay, Paradise Bay, Chile Bay (Greenwich Island) and Covadonga Cove (Luis Felipe Peninsula, Bransfield Strait), that not only coordinate in case of emergency, but also provide weather and safety information for navigation.

Under both concepts of Mass Rescue Operations and Triage for vessels, the intention is to find, in the short term, agreements or approaches that allow ensuring the life at sea and maintaining the marine ecosystem, which are essential aspects in Antarctica.

