





Report from Asian Forum for Polar Sciences to the ATCM XL








Report from Asian Forum for Polar Sciences to the ATCM XL
Introduction
This report is prepared to update the new developments of the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) since the ATCM XL. The AFoPS, now a 13 year old Asian organization dedicated to polar research and cooperation, is gearing up for the next decade to further develop and strengthen cooperation in polar sciences. Today the AFoPS consists of six Members - China, India, Japan, Malaysia, Thailand and the Republic of Korea and a growing number of observing participants (for example, Australia, Indonesia, Turkey, Philippines, Vietnam and Sri Lanka). 
Recent Developments
The latest AFoPS Special Meeting (AFoPS-XX) was held in Prague, Czech Republic on 31st  March 2017. Meanwhile, the next general meeting is planned to be held on September 7th to 8th 2017 in Shanghai, China. At the special meeting, several significant developments have been achieved:

Acceptance of New Member
Thailand was formally accepted as a member of AFoPS. The Polar Science Consortium of Thailand which is the new established institution for polar research activities, will be the one that cooperate with the other Asian polar research institutes in the future. It is believed that with the contribution of Thailand, AFoPS will further strengthen polar scientific research cooperation among Asian countries and other countries.

Endeavors for Stable Secretariat functioning
The new Secretariat was nominated to the Polar Research Institute of China from 2017 to 2018. The outgoing and incoming Secretariats from Korea and China cooperated closely to achieve seamless transfer of the secretariat function during the intersessional period. The handover work of the Secretariat started from November 2016 to March 2017. The jobs include preparation of next meetings, updating the official website of AFoPS with the information of the new Secretariat, documents, and new pictures, revision of the information of the member countries and observers and so on. 

Roadmap for the Next Decade
A Task Force (TF) was initiated to generate a framework that will assist with AFoPS deliberation and decision-making in preparation for the next decade, since November 2015. The TF, which consists of coordinators from the six member institutions, conducted a two phase structured online survey to solicit the AFoPS community’s views on the priority of AFoPS activities and to generate a prioritized plan with requirements. The survey result indicated research collaboration is what requires more immediate attention as well as the ultimate form of achievement AFoPS can prove its value with. A draft roadmap for the next decade of AFoPS development has been deduced from the survey responses regarding the priority action items. This time-phased plan suggests focusing on research collaboration and human exchange in the first stage of four years, executing logistics/operation cooperation in the next three years, and substantial development of strategic planning in the last three years.

AFoPS cooperative projects
Progress reports were made on the five AFoPS cooperative projects, AFoPS-endorsed programs that jointly planned and executed by utilizing the members’ existing research capabilities. The table below describes research/expedition focuses of the five projects. Opportunities to propose more AFoPS cooperative projects involving multiple members should be encouraged and left open. An effort to develop a format to share information on major research programs of member institutions is continuing by the outgoing Korean secretariat with an aim to explore for more cooperative projects.

Project Title
Focus
Point of Contact
AFoPS Arctic Ocean Observing System
International research cruise to better understand the rapid sea ice loss in the Arctic Ocean
Dr. Sung-Ho Kang
shkang@kopri.re.kr
Climate Change: ecological winners and losers
Ecological responses of Antarctic penguins to environmental changes
Dr. Nobuo Kokubun
kokubun@nipr.ac.jp
AFoPS Geology Expedition in Antarctica (AGEA)
Geological survey in the high-grade metamorphic terranes in East Antarctica
Dr. Yoichi Motoyoshi
motoyosi@nipr.ac.jp
Teleconnectivity between polar and tropical climate variabilities
Relationship between Antarctic sea-ice extent and Asian monsoon variability
Prof. Azizan Abu Samah
azizans@um.edu.my
Early Paleozoic in northern Victoria Land
Sedimentological and paleontological field works on the Lower Paleozoic Bowers Supergroup
Dr. Jong-Ik Lee
jilee@kopri.re.kr

Third AFoPS Joint Journal Publication
As another contribution of the AFoPS joint publication series, the third AFoPS special issue is being prepared and is expected to be published by the end of the year in Current Science, with the joint of Malaysian and Indian effort. The guest editors for this Issue are Prof. Michael Wong Vui Ling (UMS-NARC, Malaysia) and Dr. Rahul Mohan (NCAOR, India).

Concluding Remarks
Asian polar research community pledges to take part in the global efforts of addressing key scientific questions that can be answered in the Polar Region. AFoPS already has initiated a pathway that can help take us into the future, which are our well-placed infrastructures and our human resources that we have nurtured over the years. There is also a sufficient, high quality fuel supply already, and that is our enthusiasm. AFoPS member states remain fully committed to playing a due part in the efforts of the global community to contribute to polar sciences. 

