





Trace element contamination and availability within the Antarctic Treaty Area









Trace element contamination and availability within the Antarctic Treaty Area
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Germany, Chile, Russian Federation and the United Kingdom
Summary
This paper builds on earlier reports of trace elements in soil and seawater samples collected from Fildes Peninsula and within ASPA 150 Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island (South Shetland Islands) (ATCM XXXIX/IP8). Results indicated that contamination originated from specific anthropogenic sources and may have a negative effect on native biota.  We encourage Parties to share their monitoring data, from across the Antarctic Treaty area, to help inform future monitoring research and policy development, and consider the implementation of appropriate contamination control and remediation methods.
Introduction
The Protocol was developed and agreed with a view to enhancing the protection of the Antarctic environment and ensuring activities in the Antarctic Treaty area are planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment (i.e. avoid degradation of or substantial risk to areas of biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness significance), with earlier developments made by many National Antarctic Programmess, via SCAR and COMNAP, on the Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook (May 2000) (https://www.comnap.aq/Publications/Comnap%20Publications/comnap-scar_env_monitoring_handbook_jun2000.pdf).  The South Shetland Islands have been subject to long-term human activity, which increased with the establishment of research stations by several nations as scientific activity in the region expanded.  Fildes Peninsula, in particular, has a long history of human presence and contains an airfield and a high density of scientific research stations and shelters compared to other areas of Antarctica (e.g. with infrastructure operated by Chile, China, the Russian Federation and Uruguay, some of which started 50 years ago).  In accordance with the provisions of Annex I to the Protocol, the area has been the subject of scientific investigations for monitoring of environmental impact (ATCM XXII/IP44; ATCM XXXI/IP30) with more recent research suggesting that parts of Fildes Peninsula have been subjected to negative environmental impact caused by historic and potentially on-going local human activity around the scientific stations (ATCM XXXIX/IP8).
Assessment of trace elements
Building on earlier monitoring work in the region, an international consortium of scientists from Portugal, Chile, the Russian Federation, Germany and the United Kingdom, carried out further research to evaluate the natural and anthropogenic sources of potential toxic trace elements (Cr, Ni, Zn, As, Pb, Cd and Hg) in soil and seawater samples collected from different sites in Fildes Peninsula, as well as within ASPA 150 Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, in February 2014.  

In general, the levels of each trace element in the soils suggested that parts of the Fildes Peninsula have been impacted by human activities. The highest concentrations of some contaminants, compared with the control samples, were found near waste disposal sites or fuel tanks (e.g. marked in Figure 1 as AC2 and AC3).  Ecotoxicology tests showed that these metal contaminants were available for uptake by biological organisms, indicating a potential hazard to the native biota in the contaminated area.  Furthermore, the concentrations of trace elements in Maxwell Bay seawater samples were higher than those generally found in the Southern Ocean and in other areas of Antarctica. These higher concentrations of trace elements may be related to the discharge of effluents in adjacent contaminated land.































Figure 1. The top left panel shows the general location around Maxwell Bay of the reference site (BD: Bellingshausen Dome) and study sites around Ardley Cove (Ardley Island is located just below Ardley Cove). The three putatively contaminated sites around the edge of Ardley Cove are shown as AC1-AC3 (bottom left panel); black houses represent scientific stations, red pins represent fuel tanks, and the red-brick shading denotes a spill area). As an example, we show the range of values of the trace element Lead (Pb) detected in soils found near contamination sources in February 2014 (bottom-right hand panel). Using the standard test microalgae (Raphidocelis subcapitata) we show a dramatic inhibition of algal growth (c. 50%) caused by soils from sites AC1-AC3 (upper right hand panel). 


Corresponding with the requirements of Annex I to the Protocol, and mindful of recent work on the revision of the Guidelines for Environment Impact Assessment in Antarctica (ATCMXXXVIII/WP13), we encourage further monitoring of contaminant levels in areas of substantial human activity throughout the Antarctic Treaty area with a view to assessing if contamination is still taking place and identifying possible sources. Furthermore, we would like to promote greater information exchange between Parties on contamination, in accordance with the principles set out in the Protocol, to help inform future monitoring research and policy development.  With these aims in mind, we encourage all Treaty Parties already monitoring or interested in doing so within the areas of activity of their national programmes to coordinate methodologies, including environmental sampling and analysis of trace elements, with a view to enhancing inter-comparison and inter-calibration.     
Supporting documentation

ATCM paper
Assessment of trace element contamination within the Antarctic Treaty area. Portugal, Chile, Germany, Russian Federation, United Kingdom. ATCM XXXIX/IP8, Santiago de Chile, Chile, 2016

Research papers
Amaro, E., Padeiro, A., Mão-de-Ferro, A., Mota, A.M., Leppe, M., Verkulich, S., Hughes, K. A., Peter, H.-U., and Canário, J. (2015) Assessing trace element contamination in Fildes Peninsula (King George Island) and Ardley Island, Antartic. Marine Pollution Bulletin 97: 523-527.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.05.018

Padeiro, A., Amaro, E., dos Santos, M. M. C., Araújo, M. F., Gomes, S. S., Leppe, M., Verkulich, S., Hughes, K. A., Peter, H.-U., Canário, J.  (2016) Trace metal contamination and availability in the Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, Antarctica.  Environmental Science Processes and Impacts. 18: 641-657. DOI: 10.1039/C6EM00052E

Pereira, J. L., Pereira, P., Padeiro, A., Gonçalves, F., Amaro, E., Leppe, M., Verkulich, S., Hughes, K. A., Peter, H.-U., Canário, J.  (2017) Environmental hazard assessment of contaminated soils in Antarctica: using a structured tier 1 approach to inform decision-making. The Science of the Total Environment 574:443-454. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.09.091
