





Update from the COMNAP Unmanned Aerial Systems Working Group (UAS-WG)








Update from the COMNAP Unmanned Aerial Systems Working Group (UAS-WG)
As reported in COMNAP WP14 (ATCM XXVIII, 2016), COMNAP established a Working Group as a sub-group of the Air Expert Group to focus discussions on UAS use in the Antarctic Treaty region in order to “…reduce risk to people, infrastructure and environment in the Antarctic Treaty area, while enabling, in situations where allowed, UAS use in the area for scientific applications and science support purposes.”  The group developed the “Antarctic Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) Operator’s Handbook and through the UAS-WG, COMNAP continues to keep the Handbook under review and to share information in relation to UAS use by COMNAP member National Antarctic Programs.
Informal review of Handbook
In February 2017, the Leader of the Air Expert Group, Paul Sheppard (US Antarctic Program) and the COMNAP Vice Chairman with oversite of the Air Expert Group, John Guldahl (Norwegian Polar Institute), led an informal review of the Handbook and asked COMNAP UAS-WG members to consider, in particular:
    • the Purpose and Scope of the Handbook
    • the Decision-Making Flow Chart
    • the Future Considerations section
    • the continuing relevance of the Recommendations
    • and whether there should be additional appendices of information added.
Members replied that they were generally happy with the Handbook as it stood, and that they felt no formal revisions were needed at this time, especially since information from SCAR was pending and that upon receipt and review of the SCAR information, the handbook would be updated with any new information in relation to wildlife disturbance.
The review did however highlight the quickly evolving nature of technology, especially in regards to Automatic Dependent Surveillance–Broadcast (ADS–B)1 transponders and noted that UAS-WG members should be aware of this technology and its usefulness especially in some regions of Antarctica to further support safe separation distances between personned and unpersonned vehicles. The UAS-WG will discuss this technology at the COMNAP Annual General Meeting UAV safety session in August and will consider specific mention of this technology in the next revision of the Handbook in preparation for the start of the next Antarctic research season.
Survey of National Antarctic Programs 
In addition to the review of the Handbook, the COMNAP Secretariat led a survey by way of email of all 30 of the COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs in relation to the UAS use in the Antarctic for the period 1 April 2016 through 31 March 2017. All 30 COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs provided responses.  The survey questions and a summary of responses are given below:
SURVEY QUESTION 1: Does your country/government have national UAV guidelines/national UAV regulations?  YES or NO or DON’T KNOW
RESPONSES TO QUESTION 1:   80% Yes; 17% No; 3% Did not know.
SURVEY QUESTION 1a: If “YES” [to Question 1], then do these national guidelines/regulations apply to the Antarctic Treaty area? YES or NO or DON’T KNOW
RESPONSES [24] TO QUESTION 1a: 33% Yes; 58% No; 8% Did not know.
SURVEY QUESTION 2: Does your National Antarctic Program have internal UAV guidelines/regulations? YES or NO
RESPONSES TO QUESTION 2: 47% Yes; 53% No.
NOTES: In two of the “No” cases, the national Antarctic program noted internal guidelines were currently under development. In one of the “No” cases, a national Antarctic program noted they use the COMNAP UAV Handbook.
SURVEY QUESTION 3: Did any person within, or supported by, your National Antarctic Program in the Antarctic Treaty area make a request (in advance) to use a UAV (of any size) while in the Antarctic Treaty area during the time period? YES or NO
RESPONSES TO QUESTION 3: 63% Yes; 37% No.
SURVEY QUESTION 3a: If “YES” [to Question 3], then was the request to use the UAV granted? YES or NO
RESPONSES [19] TO QUESTION 3a: 100% Yes.
NOTES:  There was one instance within one National Antarctic Program that there were multiple requests from separate entities and while some were given permission, others that did not meet the national Antarctic program requirements for operation of a UAV were declined.
SURVEY QUESTION 4: Did any person within, or supported by, your National Antarctic Program in the Antarctic Treaty area use/deploy a UAV (of any size) while in the Antarctic Treaty area during the time period? YES or NO
RESPONSE TO QUESTION 4: 70% Yes; 30% No
NOTES: Meaning that 21 of the 30 National Antarctic Programs deployed at least one UAV in the Antarctic Treaty Area for the period 1 April 2016 through 31 March 2017.  For the 9 national Antarctic Programs that answered “No” to this question, that was the end of the survey. Those who answered “Yes” were asked to response to Question 5.

SURVEY QUESTION 5: Please list as many projects or uses of a UAV by any person in your National Antarctic Program including anyone provided any level of support by your National Antarctic Program during the time period. Be descriptive, so we can get an idea of range of uses and who is using UAVs in the Antarctic Treaty area and for what purposes-we are especially interested to know which are for science purposes and which are for operational/logistics purposes.
GENERAL OUTCOMES OF RESPONSES TO QUESTION 5 (Full list of UAV deployments is provided on next page): 
    • There were 63 separate examples of UAV deployment in the Antarctic Treaty region provided.
    • Thirty-two of the 63 examples were categorised as “Science” project use; Meaning 51% of all UAV deployments listed were directly for science/within a science team. Types of science listed were biology, environmental, geology, glaciology and meteorology.
    • Of the 32 science examples, 1 of 32 (3%) included multiple deployments of a UAV in an ASMA and 13 of 32 (41%) were deployed in coastal areas. 
    • Twenty-three of the 63 examples were categorised as “Operations/logistics” project use; Meaning, 37% of all UAV deployments listed were for national Antarctic program uses such as cartography, safety (including sea ice reconnaissance from a ship, ice shelf reconnaissance, medevac preparation, station relocation and station roof inspection), operations and outreach (photography, filming and education).
    • Eight of the 63 examples were considered “Other”, that is neither science nor operations/logistics purposes; Meaning, 12% of all UAV deployments were listed for three “other” purposes: “Tourism” (marine non-coastal), “Recreational” by national Antarctic personnel (two instances, both in immediate vicinity of the station and one in winter-over period), and “Media” (all within the immediate vicinity of a station).




