





Benefits of Logistic collaboration in Antarctica in support of Antarctic Science programmes: Australia’s experience in 2016-17








Benefits of Logistic collaboration in Antarctica in support of Antarctic Science programmes: 
Australia’s experience in 2016-17
Summary
This paper gives a brief report on Australia’s experience of the collaborative logistics and operational cooperation undertaken by Parties active in East Antarctica, and elsewhere, in support of Antarctic science programs during the 2016-17 season.
Introduction
National Antarctic programs (NAP’s) are focused on conducting world class science of global significance. In order to support outcomes across a variety of scientific disciplines and differing geographical locations NAP’s have developed complex logistics and operational capabilities. The remoteness of East Antarctica poses its own challenges, the distance from ports and airports as well as the distance between stations all impact on a NAP’s ability to undertake scientific activities. In fact, through cooperation and collaboration it is possible for NAP’s to undertake a broader range of potential or planned scientific activities with other Parties. 
In recent years NAP’s active in East Antarctica have been increasing collaborative operational activities. This collaborative activity has provided a number of opportunities and benefits for Parties, including, reducing costs, limiting duplication of activities, decreasing environmental impacts, and in combination providing a logistics capability that is better able to support the delivery of a wider range of scientific and logistics activities across East Antarctica.
Collaborative activities
Australia has actively engaged with a number of Parties active in East Antarctica to ‘share’ assets and capability where possible. Over time these bilateral collaborative activities have expanded considerably and in the 2016-17 summer Antarctic season Australia shared logistics capacity across aviation, shipping and traverse activities in East Antarctica and elsewhere, including through formal agreements between NAP’s.
Aviation agreements
The increasing availability of intercontinental and intracontinental aviation assets was highlighted this season. Australia had agreements with NAP’s active in East Antarctica and with the British Antarctic Survey to share or access aviation capability.
Intercontinental aviation cooperation
Australia and Norway entered into a bilateral logistics cooperation agreement for the first time. The Norwegian Polar Institute chartered the Australian A-319 for intercontinental flights between Cape Town and Norway’s Troll station in Dronning Maud Land for the Norwegian National Program. Australia and Norway also commenced an exchange of operational aviation personnel involved in intracontinental aviation planning and support, with Australia hosting Norway’s Aviation Manager in Hobart and at Casey station to observe Australian aviation operations. This exchange will be reciprocated in 2018. These exchanges will assist with building and sharing knowledge between National Antarctic Programs on aviation operations and logistics.
The United States supported transit of Australian aviation activities through McMurdo with provision of intercontinental and intracontinental transport of Australian personnel. The United States provided a dedicated ski-equipped LC-130 flight to transfer passengers between Australia’s Davis and Casey stations and supported the transit of Australian chartered aircraft through South Pole Station. In return Australia contributed the use of aviation assets and retrieved USAP science equipment from the field. 
Australia provided its A-319 aircraft and a medical team to conduct a medical evacuation of a tourist vessel passenger, via McMurdo station, as part of a response coordinated by the New Zealand Rescue Coordination Centre. 
In addition, through bilateral agreements with China and France, Australia provided intercontinental transport of program personnel on A-319 flights from Australia (Hobart) into Antarctica (Wilkins runway) for Chinese and French personnel.
The British Antarctic Survey once again facilitated transit of Australian intracontinental aircraft into Antarctica, and onward to Australia’s Davis Research station, through Rothera station, including through the provision of fuel.
Intracontinental aviation cooperation
Australia provided weather forecasting for China’s intracontinental operations (ski-equipped Basler) and hosted CHINARE aviation personnel in a knowledge sharing exchange and provided aeromedical equipment. In return China provided Australia with aviation support for logistics and science purposes and provided mutual SAR coverage for flight operations. 
For the first time Australia, China and the United States successfully initiated an agreement to share intracontinental aviation resources across the three National Antarctic Programs in East Antarctica. 
Following intercontinental transfer from Australia on the A-319, Australia transported French program personnel onward from Wilkins runway to Concordia station. 
France’s NAP assisted Australia with the provision of fuel, SAR cover, weather forecasting and communications support at Concordia Station, for intracontinental aviation operations (ski-equipped Basler) to South Pole Station.
Australia sub chartered its Basler aircraft to the New Zealand program to facilitate science support operations from Scott base.
Shipping
As part of our bilateral cooperative agreement with the French Antarctic program, France once again provided shipping support to the Australian Antarctic program, with transport of personnel and cargo on board the MV L ’Astrolabe, allowing Australia early season access to Macquarie Island. 
Traverse
The French Antarctic Program and the British Antarctic Survey both hosted an Australian participant on their annual traverse routes to build and share knowledge on traverse activities. Consistent with the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan, Australia continues work to develop an overland traverse capability to enable planning with international partners for a collaborative scientific effort to retrieve a million year ice core.
Conclusion
By pursuing collaborative activities between NAP’s, Parties are acting to further the objectives and principles of the Antarctic Treaty, in particular the principle to facilitate international scientific cooperation in Antarctica as outlined in Article IX (1). While this report focuses on Australia’s recent mutually beneficial experience with international partners in East Antarctica, we are aware that similar cooperative arrangements are undertaken by others NAP’s elsewhere in Antarctica. It is likely that the opportunity for logistics and operational collaborative activities will expand into the future, enabling Parties to more efficiently and effectively deliver scientific outcomes of global significance throughout Antarctica that would otherwise be beyond the capacity of NAP’s operating in isolation.




