





Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2016/17 intersessional period









Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2016/17 intersessional period
Information Paper submitted by the CEP Chair
Summary
The 19th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XIX) was held in Santiago, Chile, from 23 to 27 May 2016. This paper presents a summary of intersessional activities arising from CEP XIX, as identified in CEP Circular: 1 / CEP XX. Where appropriate, the details of related papers submitted to CEP XX are provided.

Priority1
Action
Report Para #
CEP Member / Observer
Related papers to CEP XX / comments
Agenda Item 3: Strategic Discussions on the Future Work of the CEP
2: Outreach and education
Disseminate the publication on the 25th Anniversary of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, including via mechanisms identified by the ICG led by Argentina, and release the publication at events on 4 October 2016.
10-12
All CEP Members and Observers
The 25th anniversary publication was completed and made available from the Secretariat website on 4 October at: http://www.ats.aq/documents/atcm39/ww/atcm39_ww007_e.pdf 

Give further consideration to options for the future management of the Antarctic Environments Portal, advise the Editorial Group on information summaries for the Portal, and encourage scientists to work with SCAR in the preparation of articles for the Portal.
23-25

All CEP Members
WP025 Antarctic Environments Portal (Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, SCAR, United States) – submitted under CEP 4
Agenda Item 5: Cooperation with other Organisations

Dr Frenot (France), Dr Penhale (United States) and Dr Hughes (United Kingdom) to represent the CEP at COMNAP XXVIII, SC-CAMLR XXXV and SCAR XXXIV, respectively.
57
France, United States and United Kingdom
The CEP was represented in meetings of other organisations as follows: COMNAP XXVIII – Dr Frenot (France); SC-CAMLR XXXIV – Dr Penhale (United States); SCAR XXXIV – Dr Hughes (United Kingdom).

IP009 Annual Report for 2016/17 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) (COMNAP) – also submitted under ATCM 4

IP050 Report by the CEP Observer to the XXXIV SCAR Delegates’ Meeting (United Kingdom)

IP053 Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the twentieth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CCAMLR)
1: Climate change implications for the environment

2: Monitoring and state of the environment reporting

3: Biodiversity knowledge
Give further consideration to the recommendations arising from the Joint CEP / SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring. SC-CAMLR to consider the recommendations at its meeting in 2016.
49


All Members and Observers; SC-CAMLR
As reported in CEP Circular: 4 / CEP XX, SC-CAMLR XXXV welcomed the report of the Joint CEP / SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring, held in Punta Arenas in May 2016, and endorsed the workshop recommendations.

IP053 Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the twentieth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CCAMLR)


Agenda Item 6: Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
2: Repair or remediation of environmental damage

Prepare for discussion at CEP XX on considering a review of the Clean-Up Manual. 


WP028 Review of the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual (Australia, United Kingdom) 

Provide status reports on which sites of past activities are more likely to be affected by climate change and plans to clean up or remediate those sites.

CEP Members
This and other actions identified in the Climate Change Response Work Program (CCRWP) were considered in the informal discussions on implementation of the CCRWP (see WP002 under CEP 7b).
Agenda Item 7a: Climate Change Implications for the Environment: Strategic Approach

Consider contributing through national processes to the IPCC Special Report on the Implications of Global Warming of 1.5oC and the IPCC Special Report on the Oceans and Cryosphere.
66
All CEP Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XX.
Agenda Item 7b: Implementation and Review of the Climate Change Response Work Programme

Support and facilitate the research and monitoring requirements identified in the CCRWP.
73
National Antarctic Programs, SCAR, WMO and relevant external expert programs
WP002 Informal Intersessional Discussion: Implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme (New Zealand)

IP069 Mapping SCAR affiliated research to the CEPs Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) (SCAR)
1: Climate change implications for the environment
SCAR and WMO to report to CEP XX on research and monitoring activities relevant to the CCRWP.
74

SCAR, WMO
IP069 Mapping SCAR affiliated research to the CEPs Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) (SCAR)

IP115 The Polar Climate Predictability Initiative of the World Climate Research Programme (WMO) – submitted under CEP 7a

IP118 Progress Update on WMO Polar Regional Climate Centres (WMO) – submitted under CEP 7a

IP119 Regional climate downscaling through the Antarctic-CORDEX project  (WMO) – submitted under CEP 7a
1: Climate change implications for the environment

Request relevant external programs including SOOS and ICED to provide information about how their activities could contribute to climate change research and monitoring needs identified in the CCRWP.
74
CEP Chair, SOOS, ICED
WP002 Informal Intersessional Discussion: Implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme (New Zealand)

IP052 Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme (United Kingdom) – submitted under CEP 7a

IP068 Update on activities of the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) (SCAR) – submitted under CEP 11 and ATCM 15

Participate in informal intersessional discussions to be led by New Zealand on initiating coordination of the CCRWP, including its communication and preparing suggested updates of the CCRWP, as well as options for establishing a subsidiary group to review and manage the CCRWP
79
New Zealand, interested Members and Observers
WP002 Informal Intersessional Discussion: Implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme (New Zealand)


SCAR to finalise report on ocean acidification and submit to CEP XX for preliminary consideration.

SCAR, CEP Members
Final report is expected to be submitted to CEP in 2018 (see IP069 Attachment A).

Prepare for discussions at CEP XX on the best means for managing and supporting implementation of the CCRWP.
80
All Members
WP002 Informal Intersessional Discussion: Implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme (New Zealand)
Agenda Item 8a: Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations

Italy to take into account the CEP’s advice if it decides to proceed with the proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli station.
90-91
Italy
IP070 Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica	(Italy) – submitted under CEP 8b
Agenda Item 8b: Other EIA Matters
2: Monitoring and state of the environment reporting: priority
SCAR to continue preparing a summary of the state of knowledge regarding the impacts of UAVs on wildlife for submission to CEP XX.
98


SCAR
WP020 State of Knowledge of Wildlife Responses to Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) (SCAR) – submitted under CEP 10c and ATCM 13

BP001 Best Practice for Minimising Remotely Piloted Aircraft System Disturbance to Wildlife in Biological Field Research (SCAR) – submitted under CEP 10c and ATCM 13
2: Monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Present information on guidance being developed and relevant research to inform further discussions at CEP XX and in an ICG to be established at CEP XX on managing the environmental aspects of UAV use.
102-103


Interested CEP Members and Observers
IP038 Use of UAVs in Antarctica. A competent authority’s perspective and lessons learned (Germany) – submitted under CEP 10c

IP045 UAV remote sensing of environmental changes on King George Island (South Shetland Islands): update on the results of the third field season 2016/2017 (Poland) – submitted under CEP 10c

IP046 UAV impact – problem of a safe distance from wildlife concentrations (Poland) – submitted under CEP 10c

IP075 A Report on the Development and Use of UAS by the U.S. National Marine Fisheries Service for Surveying Marine Mammals (United States) – submitted under CEP 10c

IP077 Update from the COMNAP Unmanned Aerial Systems Working Group (UAS-WG) (COMNAP) – submitted under CEP 10c and ATCM 13
2: Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Participate in work to be led by the United Kingdom to develop a working paper to support further discussion of the broader policy and other EIA issues at CEP XX.
109-110


United Kingdom, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP041 Environmental Impact Assessments – Update on broader policy discussions (United Kingdom, Australia, Belgium, New Zealand, Norway)
Agenda Item 9a: Management Plans

Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) to review revised versions of the management plans to be submitted by Chile for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) 125 Fildes Peninsula, 144 Chile Bay, 145 Port Foster and 146 South Bay, and 150 Ardley Island.
118-119
Chile, SGMP, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP045 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during the intersessional period 2016-2017 (Argentina)
2: Monitoring and state of the environment reporting
United Kingdom and other Members to monitoring the status of ASPA 107 Emperor Island for a further five years and report back to the Committee.
136


United Kingdom, interested CEP Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XX.
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans.

Participate in work to be led by Norway to inform further discussion at CEP XX on the development of procedures or criteria to inform the Committee’s consideration of proposals to de-designate ASPAs, including in the context of the framework provided by the CCRWP.
137



Norway, interested CEP Members and Observers


China to lead informal intersessional discussions on practical and possible management options for the Dome A area.
144-145
China, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP035 Report of the Informal Discussion for the intersessional period of 2016/17 on the Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A (China)
Agenda Item 9b: Historic Site and Monuments
2: Designation and management of Historic Sites and Monuments
Participate in an ICG led by Norway and the United Kingdom to develop guidance material for Parties’ assessment of conservation approaches for the management of Antarctic heritage objects.
157


Norway, United Kingdom, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP047 Report of the intersessional contact group established to develop guidance material for conservation approaches for the management of Antarctic heritage objects (Norway, United Kingdom)
Agenda Item 9c: Site Guidelines

Ecuador and Spain to continue long-term monitoring to assess the recovery of vegetation on tracks at Barrientos Island, and to provide future reports on their status.
181
Ecuador, Spain
No specific action anticipated for CEP XX.

Continue collecting information about visits by National United Program personnel to locations with ATCM Site Guidelines for Visitors.
185
All CEP Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XX.
Agenda Item 9e: Other Annex V Matters
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans

2: Overview of the protected areas system
Participate in work to be led by the United Kingdom and Norway to present an updated proposal to CEP XX for templates to summarise the prior assessment of a proposed ASPA or ASMA for subsequent consideration by the CEP.
207


United Kingdom, Norway, interested CEP Members and Observers
WP021 ASPA/ASMA prior assessment process (United Kingdom, Norway)

SCAR to bring forward its other Codes of Conduct in a Working Paper to CEP XX.
212
SCAR
WP017 SCAR’s Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research of Subglacial Aquatic Environments (SCAR)

WP018 SCAR’s Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica (SCAR)
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans
SGMP to conduct work under its terms of reference 4 & 5, as outlined in the work plan agreed by CEP XIX, including work to finalise the development of guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA, and initiating the development of guidance on who to present a management plan if an ASMA designation was identified as the most appropriate management tool.
216


SGMP, Norway, United States interested CEP Members and Observers
WP045 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during the intersessional period 2016-2017 (Argentina)

WP016 Guidance Material for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) designations (Norway, United States)


SCAR to report back to a future CEP meeting on its research activities relevant to conservation planning and extension of the current terrestrial protected area network.
219-220
SCAR
No specific action anticipated for CEP XX.
1: Overview of the protected areas system

Prepare updates for CEP XX on: research and management efforts to apply biogeographic tools; and research undertaken or planned to identify climate change vulnerable biogeographic regions.

All CEP Members and Observers
WP029 Proposed update to the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Australia, New Zealand, SCAR)

WP042 Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in the Sør Rondane Mountains (Belgium)

WP044 Mecanismos de protección para la colonia de pingüino emperador de la isla Cerro Nevado, noreste de la Península Antártica (Argentina) – submitted under CEP 10c

IP015 Antarctic biogeography revisited: updating the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Australia, New Zealand, SCAR)

IP084 Climate change impacts on Antarctic ice-free areas (Australia) – submitted under CEP 7a
3: Protection of outstanding geological values
For CEP XXI (2018): SCAR to provide advice on systems and practices for Antarctic geoconservation, to inform discussions on protection geological values.
221-222


SCAR
No action anticipated for CEP XX.
Agenda Item 10a: Quarantine and Non-Native Species
1: Introduction of non-native species

Initiate intersessional work to inform discussion at CEP XX about assessing risks of relocation of native Antarctic species and existing non-native species between and within Antarctic biogeographic regions and identifying relevant management actions.
229
All CEP Members and Observers


Prepare for discussion at CEP XX on: initiating intersessional work to develop a non-native species surveillance and response strategy (including by identifying relevant existing research projects); and education initiatives around the risk from non-native species.

All CEP Members and Observers
WP005 Non-native Species Response Protocol (United Kingdom, Spain)
1: Introduction of non-native species
Argentina to present its manual on preventing the introduction of non-native species to CEP XX for possibly incorporation in the CEP Non-Native Species Manual.
231


Argentina
IP128 Prevention of Introduction of Non-native Species to the Antarctic Continent. Manual for the operations of the Argentine Antarctic Program (Argentina)

Undertake ongoing collaborative efforts to address issues related to the presence of non-native flies in sewage treatment plans on King George Island.
235
Republic of Korea, United Kingdom, Chile, Uruguay and interested Members
WP026 Inter-Parties’ Action Plan to Manage the Non-Native Flies in King George Island, South Shetland Islands (Korea (RoK), Chile, United Kingdom, Uruguay) 

COMNAP to discuss the extent of non-native fly infestations in Antarctic waste water treatment plants, as well as best practice for prevention and response, and report back on its discussions at CEP XX.
238
COMNAP
The outcomes of discussions at the COMNAP AGM in 2016 are reflected in WP026 (see above).
Agenda Item 10c: Other Annex II Matters

Prepare for discussion at CEP XX about a program of work with SCAR, SC-CAMLR, ACAP and IUCN on initiating a program to provide regular update reports on the status of Antarctic species.

All CEP Members and Observers
This and other actions identified in the Climate Change Response Work Program (CCRWP) were considered in the informal discussions on implementation of the CCRWP (see WP002 under CEP 7b).

SCAR and Monaco to provide a full report to CEP XX on the outcomes of the Monaco Assessment meeting.
248-249
SCAR, Monaco
WP013 Antarctica and the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 (SCAR, Belgium, Monaco)
Agenda Item 11: Environmental Monitoring and Reporting
1: Tourism and NGO activities

Provide feedback to New Zealand, Australia, Norway and the United States to inform the further development of the draft methodology for assessing the sensitivity of sites used by visitors.
257


New Zealand, Australia, Norway, United States, interested Members and Observers
IP083 Update on work to develop a methodology to assess the sensitivity of sites used by visitors (Australia, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom, United States)

Prepare for discussion at CEP XX on developing advice to the ATCM regarding ‘best estimate’ trigger levels to assist in guiding monitoring efforts, as outlined in Recommendation 7 of the 2012 CEP Tourism Study.

All CEP Members and Observers
IP083 Update on work to develop a methodology to assess the sensitivity of sites used by visitors (Australia, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom, United States)
Agenda Item 12: Inspection Reports

Contribute through national processes to ICG established by ATCM XXXIX to consider how inspections could be more effective.
275
All CEP Members and Observers
WP040 Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Inspections in Antarctica under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol (Netherlands, Korea (RoK), United States) – submitted under ATCM 14


