





Climate change impacts on Antarctic ice-free areas








Climate change impacts on Antarctic ice-free areas
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
This paper summarises a forthcoming publication in Nature by Lee et al. (In Press), which quantifies the potential impacts of climate change on Antarctic ice-free areas, home to over 99% of Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity. Under the strongest climate change scenario used in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report, ice-free area could substantially expand by the end of this century. The majority of this expansion occurs in the Antarctic Peninsula. The publication explores the potential implications of these physical changes for Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity, including increased competition and the spread of invasive species. These findings are directly relevant to the CEP’s work on several priority issues, particularly its ongoing efforts to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for the governance and management of Antarctica.
Introduction
The CEP has developed a Climate Change Response Work Program (CCRWP) to guide its work to understand and address the environmental impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for the governance and management of Antarctica. Implementing the CCRWP is identified as a top priority action in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan. The research presented in a forthcoming scientific paper, and summarised below, is of direct relevance to the need identified in the CCRWP1 to understand ‘how the abiotic terrestrial environmental will change due to climate change, and the impacts of these changes’. It is also likely to be of particular value for the Committee’s ongoing work on other priority issues, including to address non-native species risks, to further develop the Antarctic protected areas system, and to provide advice to the Parties on the management of tourism and non-governmental activities.
Climate change impacts on Antarctic ice-free areas
Climate change research on the melting of the Antarctic ice sheets to date has largely focused on their contribution to global sea level rise. The publication Islands in the ice: Climate change impacts on Antarctic biodiversity habitat, by Lee et al. (In Press) presents the results of new analyses to explore the impacts of climate induced ice melt on Antarctic ice-free areas and potential implications for terrestrial biodiversity.
The study used a temperature-index modelling approach, incorporating radiation and precipitation to project ice melt and the resulting impacts on ice-free areas under two Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) climate forcing scenarios (RCP4.5 & RCP8.5). The analyses utilised newly available 10 km resolution temperature data from the Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction System (AMPS), Antarctic specific climate projections and updated Antarctic ice-free areas from the SCAR Antarctic Digital Database (Version 7). 
Climate change impacts on ice-free areas were quantified for each Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) and are projected to be spatially variable across the continent. Whilst most bioregions will experience little change by 2100, ice-free areas in the North Antarctic Peninsula and South Orkney Islands are projected to considerably expand under RCP8.5, transforming the terrestrial habitat. Expansion and coalescence of ice-free areas may have substantial consequences for terrestrial biodiversity in these regions. 
In contrast to most regions of the globe, where climate change is expected to increase habitat fragmentation, in the Antarctic Peninsula it may increase the amount of suitable habitat. It may also increase connectivity as the distance between ice-free patches decreases and as ice-free areas coalesce. This may enable some native species to colonise new space, but will also increase opportunities for the dispersal of non-native species, which are likely to establish more easily as climate ameliorates. Widespread dispersal of native and non-native species could eventually lead to increased competition and/or regional biotic homogenisation.
These results highlight the need for continued monitoring and modelling of Antarctic ecosystems as climate change progresses and longer term projections become available.
References
Lee, J.R., Raymond, B., Bracegirdle, T.J., Chadès, I., Fuller, R.A., Shaw, J.D. & Terauds, A. (2017) Islands in the ice: Climate change impacts Antarctic biodiversity habitat, Nature. In Press.

The spatial layers representing the ice-free areas under two different climate forcing scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5) are publically available for download from the Australian Antarctic Data Centre at: data.aad.gov.au (doi:10.4225/15/585216f8703d0).


