





Status Report 2017: Ongoing and Recently Ended Antarctic Research Funded by the Academy of Finland 








Status Report 2017: Ongoing and Recently Ended Antarctic Research Funded by the Academy of Finland 
Information Paper submitted by Finland

The Academy of Finland is the main financier of Finnish Antarctic research projects. In accordance with Finland’s Antarctic Research Strategy (2014), the purpose is to focus on interactive, multidisciplinary and high-impact research in order to promote the renewal and regeneration of science.  The selected projects have to support the Antarctic Research Strategy and be feasible in terms of logistics. Coordination with the Arctic research has been strengthened.
Since January 2017, the Academy of Finland is funding five Antarctic research projects with a total amount of nearly 2 M€. During the years 2013-2016, four projects were funded with 2.5 M€. All projects were selected among the proposals received for the quadrennial targeted calls within the framework of the Antarctic research. In addition to these projects, the Academy of Finland is currently funding two Antarctic research projects through its annual call with ca. 963 000 €.  All of these eleven projects approach Antarctic research from various aspects such as geosciences, -physics and -chemistry, meteorology, atmospheric sciences, climate research, remote sensing, space physics, marine technology, ecology, evolutionary biology and ecophysiology.
Both national and international cooperation play a central role in the Finnish Antarctic research. In the above mentioned projects Finland has collaborators in fifteen countries: Argentina, Australia, China, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, UK and USA. 
Short descriptions of the funded projects are provided in the following.
The Antarctic Meteorology and Snow Research: from Process Understanding to Improved Predictions (ASPIRE) project (2017–2020) is conducted by the Finnish Meteorological Institute. The main objectives of ASPIRE are to i) obtain better knowledge on the physical processes of Antarctic snow, atmospheric boundary layer, clouds, as well as atmospheric dynamics and transports, ii) apply this knowledge to improve satellite remote sensing algorithms for snow properties, and iii) improve weather and climate predictions. The project involves an expedition to the Finnish Aboa station which is planned for the Antarctic summer 2017-2018. ASPIRE will be carried out in an extensive international collaboration as it has twenty-two key partners from thirteen countries.
The GRAVLASER - Improved absolute-gravity measurements in the Antarctic is a project (2017–2020) by the Finnish Geospatial Research Institute. It aims at deepening the knowledge of the cryosphere-lithosphere interaction in Antarctica and to improve current and future scenarios of the Antarctic ice sheet contribution to the global sea level rise. Measurements of absolute gravity change, together with observed vertical deformation from the Global Navigation Satellite System, will improve current Glacial Isostatic Adjustment models and therefore also estimates for the Antarctic ice mass balance and predictions for Antarctic contribution to the sea level rise. The project also involves measurements at the Norwegian Troll station. GRAVLASER has five international collaborators from Australia and USA.
The Volatiles and large volcanic eruptions (VALVE) project (2017–2020) is conducted by the University of Helsinki, Finnish Museum of Natural History. The researchers of this project have discovered exceptionally well-preserved, primitive types of flood basalts in Antarctica and Africa. These samples will be used for combined analysis of trace elements, isotopes and volatile compositions and the results are expected to provide unique insights into the origins and impacts of the largest volcanic eruptions. The key international collaborators of VALVE are from South Africa and USA.

The Cosmic Rays in the Polar Atmosphere: Exploration (CRIPA-X) project (2017-2020) is conducted by the University of Oulu, Sodankylä Geophysical Observatory (Finland). This project utilises ground-based double cosmic ray detectors which are installed at the French-Italian Concordia station on the Antarctic plateau. Atmospheric aerosols and cosmic rays will be measured simultaneously to study the hypothesis that cosmic rays may affect atmospheric aerosols/clouds, providing an indirect solar-terrestrial link. Cosmic ray monitoring will also provide information on the cosmic ray variability. CRIPA-X is a continuation to the CRIPA project which was funded by the Academy of Finland during 2013–2016. Both of these projects involve vital collaboration with Italian and South African partners.
The Gene flow, adaptation and speciation in Antarctic octopus: consequences of climate change project (2017–2018) is carried out at the University of Oulu (Finland). The genomes of many Antarctic octopus species will be sequenced to determine whether they are similarly adapted to the depth at which they live. Also, the controversial idea that species moved to quite different parts of the Southern Ocean during a period of climate change will be examined. This project has collaborators in Ireland and Australia.
The Simulating Antarctic marine ice sheet stability and multi-century contributions to sea level rise project (2015–2019) is undertaken by the University of Lapland, Arctic Centre (Finland). A computer model of the Antarctic ice sheet will be used to simulate its behaviour in response to changing climate. This research has collaborators in Australia, China, UK and USA, and it will help to provide estimates of the future contribution of the Antarctic ice sheet to sea level change.
The Partial melting processes in the contact zones of layered intrusions Academy Research Fellow project (2016–2021) is carried out at the University of Helsinki (Finland) in collaboration with several actors from Canada, Switzerland, Germany and USA. This project explores magma-wallrock interaction at three major intrusive complexes in USA, Finland and Antarctica in a study that includes computational modelling. The modelling will be tested against existing and potentially new geochemical data and wallrock partial melting experiments that will provide insight into generation of layered intrusions and associated ore deposits.
The Variation of Antarctic sea ice thickness and its effect on the load level of ice navigating (ANTLOAD) consortium project (2013–2016) was conducted by the Aalto University (Finland) and the Finnish Meteorological Institute. The objectives of the project were to i) extend the Antarctic thickness data pool by shipborne profiling along the same routes during several years, ii) develop altimetry methods to classify ice cover with respect to navigational difficulty, iii) implement a high-resolution sea ice–ocean model with an enhanced thickness description, iv) study the effect of ice dynamics on the observed variation and trends of Antarctic ice thickness, and v) link stochastic properties of ship ice loads with prevailing ice conditions. The project was enabled by access to the South African research vessel S.A. Agulhas II and since 2012 the researchers have made annually measuring trips from Cape Town to Antarctica. Cooperation has also taken place with Chinese and Norwegian partners.
The Antarctic Meteorology and its Interaction with the Cryosphere and Ocean (AMICO) project (2013-2016) was conducted by the Finnish Meteorological Institute. The Antarctic climate system still includes poorly understood aspects and in AMICO some of these were studied: i) the surface energy balance over the continental ice sheet, ice shelves, sea ice, and the open sea, ii) thermodynamics and dynamics of the lower atmosphere, and iii) the atmospheric large-scale circulation, cyclones, and moisture transport from lower latitudes to the Antarctic. The field experiments included measurements at the Aboa station (Antarctic summer 2014–2015) and an extensive winter campaign in the Antarctic sea ice zone (Weddell Sea 2013). AMICO had the same key collaborators as the ongoing ASPIRE project.
The Atmospheric Composition and Processes relevant to climate change in Antarctica (ACPANT) was a consortium project (2013–2016) of the Finnish Meteorological Institute and the University of Helsinki (Finland). It provided a new scientific insight into atmospheric composition and associated processes relevant to climate change in the Antarctic atmosphere. The investigation was based on measurements/field campaigns at four Antarctic research stations (Aboa, Concordia, Neumayer, Marambio). Research carried out at these sites complemented each other in creating a wider picture of Antarctic atmosphere, both in time and in space, as the stations are located at distinctly different environments.

