





To question on the project of the international scientific drifting station “Weddell-2”


English translation provided by the author





To question on the project of the international scientific drifting station “Weddell-2”
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation

12 February 2017 marked 25 years from the day of opening the Russian-US drifting scientific station in the southwestern part of the Antarctic Weddell Sea. This was the first experience of organizing a research camp on sea ice of the Antarctic, after having more than a 50-year practice of application by the USSR and the USA in the Arctic. The scientific camp was established on an ice floe 2.6×1.6 km in size, comprised of multiyear and first-year ice breccia with a thickness of 80 to 600 cm with prevailing over the ice floe area thickness of 175–190 cm. The snow depth on the ice floe changed from 44 to 55 cm. The ice floe of the station was in a massif with ice concentration of about 90%, with multiyear ice comprising 50% and first-year ice – 40%. Coordinates of the ice camp were 71° 30′ S and 49° 45′ W. This Antarctic drifting station received the name “Weddell-1”. Its organizers were the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of Russia (Roshydromet) and the Office of Polar Programs of the US National Science Foundation. Fifteen Russian and seventeen American specialists participated in the station operation. They represented the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of Roshydromet, Institute of Oceanography and Institute of Medical-Biological Problems of the Russian Academy of Science – from the Russian Side and Columbia University, University of California, Washington State University and Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory of the US Army Corps of Engineers – from the US side. The scientific studies at the station were devoted to physical and chemical oceanography, meteorology, mechanical and dynamical properties of sea ice and hydrobiology. The station was opened by means of the Russian expedition vessel “Akademik Fedorov” and was closed on 4 June 1992 by the same Russian vessel together with the US research icebreaker “Nathaniel Palmer”. During the entire period of the drift of “Weddell-1“ station the scientific studies outside the ice camp and safety of station personnel were provided by two US helicopters Bell-212. A snow-ice runway was equipped on the camp ice floe, to which the DHC-6 Twin Otter aircraft chartered by the US Antarctic Program arrived twice from Punta Arenas (Chile) for partial rotation of American personnel.
The scientific studies at the “Weddell-1” drifting station were carried out in the practically unexplored region of the Antarctic. The point is that the western part of the Weddell Sea adjoining the east coast of the Antarctic Peninsula is annually blocked by a massif of multiyear sea ice impassable for ships. We know about the historical experience of forced drifts in this Antarctic region of the expedition vessels “Deutschland” (Germany) in March–November 1912 and “Endurance” (Great Britain) in February–October 1915 under the leadership of W. Filchner and E. Shackleton, respectively.
The drift of the ice floe with the camp of the “Weddell-1” station had a predominantly wind character, the average drift velocity was 6.6 km/day, the maximum –25 km/day (24 May) and the minimum velocity was 0.5 km/day (27 February). The total drift from 12 February to 4 June 1992 comprised 750 km and the general drift was 700 km in the direction of 357°.
As noted above, the scientific programs were carried out in very sparsely explored Antarctic region, as there are no observation stations in the areas of the south and west coast of the Weddell Sea and complicated ice navigation conditions did not give any possibility for research vessel to visit them. The station had the most advanced scientific equipment of the end of the 20th century, using which the natural processes of meso- and micro-scales were investigated in detail in the surface layer of the atmosphere, sea ice and ocean waters. As a result, it was possible to determine the regularities of water and ice motion at the western periphery of the Weddell Gyre, producing a significant influence on water circulation in the Southern Ocean and the processes of formation of climate variability in the Antarctic. The features of formation of cold bottom Antarctic waters on the shelf and continental slope of the Antarctic Peninsula, which produce a very important influence on water circulation of the world ocean, were determined by means of several oceanographic transects made across the drift direction of the ice camp. Many interesting results were obtained from studies made during the drift period of the station in all scientific disciplines.
On 13 February, 2017, a special meeting of participants of this unique full-scale experiment was held in St. Petersburg, dedicated to the 25th anniversary from the moment of opening the Russian-US “Weddell-1” station. Professor Arnold Gordon from the Columbia University, scientific supervisor of this joint project in 1992, has stressed in his address a great scientific importance of the Antarctic and oceanographic studies of the global ocean, which were performed by the US and Russian scientists and made a proposal of a possible repetition of this experiment. In the opinion of the author of this proposal, which was supported by different specialists from Russia and the USA, the new full-scale experiment should take into account all modern knowledge accumulated for this Antarctic region, new research technologies and available experience of organization of activities on drifting ice. The experiment should have an international character with involvement of wide scientific circles from different countries of the Antarctic community. As a work model for arrangement of such full-scale experiment, one can use a scheme of international cooperation, which successfully proved itself and is used in the ANDRILL Program in the Ross Sea. For formation of a complex scientific program of possible studies under this Project it is proposed to set up on a voluntary basis an organizing committee consisting of the scientific and logistical groups, which will prepare proposals on the character and methods of scientific studies, their logistical support and general organization of the Project.
The Russian Delegation proposes to all interested Antarctic Treaty Parties to join the work of such Organizing Committee.

