





Clean-up and removal of Italy installations at Sitry airfield camp along the avio-route MZS-DDU, Antarctica








Clean-up and removal of Italy installations at Sitry airfield camp along the avio-route MZS-DDU, Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Italy 
    1. Background
During the austral summer of the year 1999 (15th Italian Antarctic expedition), the Italian National Antarctic Programme (PNRA) established an intermediate landing point between the Italian Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS), in the Ross Sea region, and the French Station Durmont D’Urville (DDU) in Adélie Land. The airfield camp, called Sitry (71°39’19’’S – 148°34’09’’E, 1600 m a.s.l.), has been used for several years for the refuelling of Twin Otter aircrafts, increasing the safety of air operations, especially in changing weather conditions. 
The site was prepared with a groomed airstrip and equipped with an automatic weather station (Irene-AWS), a Weatherhaven tent and other material such as a stove, an electric generator, sleeping bags, table and chairs, and food. The site was initially able to support up to 8 people for some days. Some fuel drums were present as well.
In the next years the site was regularly visited, however the Weatherhaven tent was buried almost quickly as a snow accumulation of 35 to 40 cm per year, equivalent to 120 mm water a year, was measured. In 2005 the tent was completely buried and nearly impossible to use for safety reasons. As a consequence, to allow a better preparation of the skiway and to re-establish a safety-heated place, in 2005, a Pisten Bully PB270 and an equipped insulated container were brought on site. Most of the equipment of the tent (electric generator, spare parts, motor oil etc) was transferred in the container. 
In 2010, the last visit to the site, the tent was impossible to reach and the situation of the site was as in Figure 1, where eleven full fuel drums were present. After 2010, landing at Sitry was not possible anymore because of the presence of sastrugi of 1 m height in the radius of 2 km. 
 
Figure 1- Sitry point in 2010
Since 2010 the site has never been visited, and to secure air operations, another site called Talos Dome (TD), already used for scientific reasons, was equipped.
    2. Sitry clean-up operations
During the last Antarctic season (32nd Italian Antarctic Expedition), the ITASE scientific traverse equipment involved in the European Project “Oldest Ice-Beyond Epica”, was transferred from MZS to Concordia Station (DC). Taking advantage from this required activity, the Sitry clean-up operation was scheduled. In effect to perform the clean-up, it was mandatory to reach the site via “land” and prepare a new suitable airstrip allowing material to be easily moved away, thus reducing the environmental impact of the operation.
In Figure 2, the route of the ITASE traverse from MZS to DC is reported, the red point showing Sitry location, were removal of materials took place.
Figure 2 - ITASE traverse route from MZS to DC

The ITASE traverse stopped in the Sitry area for 3 days. The activities began on 23 November, 2016 and finished on 27 November, 2016. Figure 3 illustrates the situation as it was found by the personnel upon arrival at Sitry of the ground traverse. Since 2010, nearly 2,30 m of snow accumulated and the PB270 and the container were almost buried.
                         
Figure 3 - Sitry situation in 2016			  Figure 4 - Dismounted container prepared for transportation

A team composed of 7 people started to prepare the new skiway and unburied the Pisten Bully and the container. The container and its content was excavated using the PB330 of the ITASE raid, dismounted and sent back to MZS by aircraft (Figure 4). Irene-AWS was also removed as well as the scientific paline field stakes. Approximatively 10 m3 of materials weighing about 3 tons were produced.
Three flights were required to transport all retrieved material to MZS for the required recycling or safe disposal. After completion of maintenance on the unburied old PB270, it was possible to drive it to Concordia, along with the BE-OI traverse.
Unfortunately, due to the impossibility of landing on site, the signalization sticks of fuel drums, to overcome snow accumulation, were not maintained since 2010. To retrieve the eleven buried fuel drums, a metal detector was sent on site but this operation was unsuccessful and no “blind” mechanical excavation was performed, as considered too risky for environmental reasons. Manual excavation and the use of avalanche probes did not help to detect the exact drums location. Only a georadar survey could give such an information and enable future retrieval. 
The buried Weatherhaven was under a presumable snow cover of nearly 7 m. The tent was not reachable in a compatible number of days with the available equipment, and was consequently left on site.
    3. Cost of a dedicated clean-up 
Operations in remote sites such as Sitry, are in fact only possible using traverses, transporting all needed material, fuel and accommodation facilities. If a fully dedicated operation were to be done for the dismantling of the installations at Sitry, the traverse would have to perform a return trip to Sitry. 
Sitry is 550 km far from TD and a trip of 7 days is needed. The fuel consumption of such a traverse would be about 1,6 m3 per day. The cost of the fuel for this operation could be therefore estimated in around 70 kEuro including transportation in Antarctica. Concerning air transportation the total cost of the two flights including fuel could be estimated in approximatively 40 kEuro. Concerning personnel, the cost of could be evaluated in approximatively 60 kEuro. Therefore on the hypothesis of a dedicated operation using already existing traverse equipment, the total cost of the clean-up operation would be around 170 kEuro. 
    4. Conclusions
Italy is committed to the full respect of Article 1 Annex III to the Protocol, which requires abandoned work sites to be cleaned up unless the site has been designated as an historic site or monument, or the removal of such structures or waste materials would cause greater environmental impact than leaving them in place. 
In this IP, Italy presents the operations conducted to dismantle the Sitry airfield camp, an intermediate remote landing point between the Italian station of MZS and the French station DDU. Synergies that were found taking advantage of the relocation of the ITASE scientific traverse at DC, allowed important savings in terms of logistics and environmental impact of the operation.
Unfortunately, eleven buried drums and a buried Weatherhaven tent were left on the site. At the present state, no dedicated operation is planned to retrieve them as it could result in a greater environmental impact. 

