





Environmental monitoring of the reconstruction work of the Brazilian Antarctic Station (2015/16 and 2016/17)








Environmental monitoring of the reconstruction work of the Brazilian Antarctic Station

1. Introduction
The Ministry of the Environment is charged in the Brazilian government with the environmental segment of the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR), which has the support of the Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA), the federal institution that executes the policy to comply with the guidelines established in the Madrid Protocol.
In order to carry out the reconstruction of the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF), government experts drafted an Environmental Impact Study which was evaluated and approved by the Environmental Assessment Group (GAAm), coordinated by the Ministry of the Environment. The GAAm was created in January 1995 and is part of PROANTAR, alongside the Advisory Group (GA) and Operations Group (GO). It is composed of representatives of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Education, Navy, Science and Technology, the GO and GA coordinators and four representatives from the scientific community from the fields of Oceanography, Biology, Geology and Atmospheric Sciences. With a view to ensuring minimal environmental impacts, the GAAm approved recommendations for the construction work.
The IBAMA team also assesses risk analysis studies and develops, in partnership with the Ministry and the Brazilian Navy, plans related to accident prevention to avoid any type of oil contamination in the Antarctic environment (Risk Management Program) and plays an active role in the event of environmental accidents (Contingency Plan and Emergency Action Plan). In addition, IBAMA conducts an annual training, with the Brazilian oil company Petrobras and the Ministry of the Environment, for Brazilian Navy personnel to be deployed to the station, focused on prevention and response to environmental emergencies in Antarctica.






















2. Environmental monitoring
One of the environmental requirements for the reconstruction of the EACF was the presentation of an Environmental Plan for Construction (PAC). The PAC sets out a set of actions to be taken during the reconstruction work and establishes a routine to monitor activities to be carried out in the area. The PAC aims to manage environmental programs, minimize resource losses, prevent accidents, control operational procedures, and develop strategies for corrective and mitigating actions. IBAMA's technical staff reviewed the PAC with a view to ensuring its environmental adequacy and feasibility.
In the Antarctic summer of 2015/2016 the reconstruction work began, with analysis and demarcation of the area of the future station and load tests. Three environmental monitors were present at this stage. Their mission was to guide the proper disposal of waste, maintain protection of Antarctic avifauna, require preventive actions against oil incidents, verify the implementation of mitigation measures and ensure compliance with the Madrid Protocol.
in the summer of 2016/2017 nine environmental monitors supervised the actions proposed in the PAC, in order to ensure compliance with the guidelines regarding the preservation of the Antarctic environment.




















Monitoring encompasses all environmental variables that could be affected by the reconstruction works. In the summer of 2016/2017 the construction company carried out several environmental programs such as: solid waste management, environmental education, control and minimization of plant suppression and flora recovery, monitoring of air, water and soil quality plus vibrations, noise and effluents.
    • Regarding the solid waste management program, the construction company adequately performed the segregation of waste from the construction site as well as manual collection of small waste at the construction site.
    • As for the environmental education program, IBAMA provided lectures and information material to the workers on conduct allowed in the Antarctic environment.
    • In the summers of 2015/2016 and 2016/2017, IBAMA supervised and instructed the transplant of mosses from the area of the future helipad to an environmentally similar area, in compliance with the program of control and minimization of plant suppression and flora rescue.
    • As for the monitoring of air quality, vibrations and noise, no relevant changes were found that required corrective actions.
    • Conclusive results of the monitoring programs on water, soil and effluent quality have not yet been delivered by the construction company.



3. Conclusion
Supported by an institutional framework that allows for a coordinated approach to Antarctic affairs and by an Environment Plan for Construction, the supervision and guidance of environmental officers on the construction site in Antarctica during the summers of 2015/16 and 2016/17 have been crucial to managing and minimizing the risks to the Antarctic environment posed by the reconstruction of the Brazilian Comandante Ferraz Station.





