





The Polar Code – Finnish Views








The Polar Code – Finnish Views
Information Paper submitted by Finland

Finland welcomes the entry into force of the mandatory IMO Polar Code on the 1st of January 2017 as its enforcement enhances both shipping safety and environmental protection in its application areas in the Arctic and Antarctic waters i.e. in both polar regions. 
The Code consists of two parts, part I addressing safe design, construction and operation of ships and part II addressing environmental protection. And both I and II parts include mandatory and recommendatory sections.   
The environmental regulations e.g. total ban for discharge of oily waters are enforced through the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) and safety regulations are enforced through the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) convention. Detailed training requirements for crew members working on polar ships are provided in amendments to the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCW) which will enter into force only in mid-2018. 
When the Polar Code was under development at IMO, Finland´s view was that all the relevant regulations concerning navigation in ice conditions, including the Finnish-Swedish Ice Class Rules (FSICR), and experiences of navigation in ice conditions in other sea areas should be taken into account. It was noted that ships strengthened in accordance with the FSICR and the equivalent ice class rules of classification societies have successfully sailed both in Arctic and Antarctic waters for decades. The Finnish view is that as far as the structural design of ships sailing in either polar region is concerned, ships strengthened in accordance with the FSICR and equivalent ice class rules of classification societies can be allowed to be used in first-year ice conditions also in the future. In the FSICR the ice conditions for which the rules have been designed are very well defined: the maximum first-year level ice thickness is 0.8 m for ice class IA and 1.0 m for ice class IA Super. To our satisfaction this issue was acknowledged at IMO and according to the Polar Code (Resolution MSC.385(94), sections 3.3.2 and 6.3.3) also ships ice-strengthened in accordance with the FSICR can be used in polar waters in relevant ice conditions.
The Polar Code, as it now reads, provides a good package to enhance maritime safety and environmental protection in polar waters, however it is not perfect. For example, for the reason that the Ballast Water Management Convention had not yet entered into force, there are no legally binding regulations on ballast water in the Code for the sensitive polar waters, only a recommendation.  Likewise, legally binding regulations on black carbon are lacking in the Code, although black carbon (BC) has huge impact on climate change, especially in the polar areas. This is because an agreement was not reached on the definition of the BC in IMO when the Polar Code was adopted.  Finland confirms its commitment to decrease BC emissions in the polar regions and is conducting studies to test the candidate measuring methods and collect data on BC emissions from shipping. Finland can summarize the results of the studies so far by saying that several parameters such as engine size, engine load, fuel type etc. can have an impact on how much BC emissions will be introduced. These results have been presented in IMO (PPR4 meeting) in January 2017. In the light of these results it seems to be very clear that more research work on BC emissions from ships is needed before any regulations to limit these emissions can be considered. To do so there is necessity to know what are the circumstances and parameters to introduce BC emissions from shipping.
All the Arctic States, Finland being one of those, negotiated jointly and actively the Polar Code in IMO. Now it is of great importance to ensure a harmonized implementation and enforcement of the Polar Code, wherein the IMO, the Arctic Council and the Antarctic Treaty Parties have a major role to play. 
Finland together with the Russian Federation have initiated a project proposal for the Arctic States regarding how the Arctic Council Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment Working Group (PAME WG) could report on the implementation of the Polar Code, Port State Control regime statistics on ship compliance, and challenges, if any, in observing the Polar Code implementation. Finland and the Russian Federation will have the co-lead on this PAME project which was introduced in PAME I 2017 meeting in Copenhagen in January and it will be further discussed in PAME II 2017 meeting in Helsinki in September. The Paris Memorandum of Understanding which aims at eliminating the operation of sub-standard ships through a harmonized system of Port State Control has an important role in monitoring the implementation of the Polar Code, thus it is very important to involve the Paris MoU organization in the project.   
Finland will arrange a related event, an International Conference on Harmonized implementation of the Polar Code in February 2018 (tentative date 22 February) in Helsinki, wherein also the project "Harmonized implementation of the Polar Code" and especially the Polar Code Implementation Inspection Campaign will be launched.    
Additionally, the Arctic Council PAME WG has established the Arctic Shipping Best Practice Information Forum to support effective implementation of the Polar Code by making publicly available at a web portal hyperlinks to information relevant to all those involved in safe and environmentally sound Arctic shipping, including vessels owners/operators, regulators, classification societies, marine insurers, and indigenous and local communities.
Information that the planned web portal would hyperlink to are e.g. Marine insurance guidance (e.g., UK P&I Club’s Arctic Shipping: P&I Insurance FAQ) and Industry guidelines for safe operations (e.g., the Arctic Expedition Cruise Operators Wildlife Guidelines).
 The first meeting of the Arctic Council’s Arctic Shipping Best Practice Information Forum, by invitation only, will take place 5-6 June 2017 at Lloyd’s Register Office in London. Finland as an incoming chair for the Arctic Council will chair the meeting. And accordingly, enhancement of Maritime safety including Environmental safety in Arctic waters is one of the Finland´s priorities during her Arctic Council Presidency in 2017-2019.  Equally, Finland encourages the Antarctic Treaty Parties to support effective implementation of the Polar Code in the Antarctic waters.

