





Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 4) - 2017 Management report








Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area          (ASMA No. 4) 2017 Management Report
Information Paper submitted by the United States, Argentina,                               Chile, Norway, Spain, and the United Kingdom
Introduction
Deception Island (latitude 62°57’S, longitude 60°38’W), South Shetland Islands, is a unique Antarctic island with important natural, scientific, historic, educational and aesthetic values.  An area of 98.5 km2 encompassing Deception Island, Port Foster, and several small outlying islands was formally adopted as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 by Measure 3 (2005).  The Management Plan was revised by Measure 10 (2012).  A review of the current ASMA No. 4 Management Plan has been initiated and will continue as the focus of the Management Group’s work.  This paper highlights the discussions held at the 2016 Management Group meeting held in Santiago and actions that have occurred during the intersessional period.
Management Group
The Management Group consists of representatives from the following Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties: Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States.  The United States currently chairs the Management Group.  Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) are advisory members.  Topics discussed during the 2016 meeting included the planned ASMA Management Plan review, increasing pressures from new scientific projects and new visitor activities, an update on the Volcanic Alert System, and the development of a Visitor Brochure.  Concerns related to pressures on ASPA No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, were discussed.  During the intersessional period, further discussion on these topics was held amongst the Management Group and advisors.  An additional point of discussion was the discovery of new graffiti on several of the oil tanks in Whalers Bay.
Review of the Management Plan
The Management Group initiated a process for the review of the Management Plan for ASMA No. 4, where the review itself will begin in 2017 and submission of a revised plan expected no sooner than 2019.  Topics that will be addressed during the review include:
    1. A reaffirmation or modification (as appropriate) of values to be protected, including the natural environment, scientific activities, historic sites, aesthetic values, educational values, and others.
    2. A potential revision of the descriptions of sub-parts of the Management Plan, such the sections covering facilities, deployed instrumentation, HSMs 71 and 76, areas with Site Guidelines, etc.  It is noted that a revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, has been submitted to the CEP by the United Kingdom (ATCM XL, WP 008) and a revised Management Plan is in progress by Chile for ASPA No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.
    3. A revision to the maps to bring them up to date and to meet current standards.
    4. A review, revision and/or reorganization of the appendices which deal with the Conservation Strategy, various Codes of Conduct (e.g., for the Facilities Zone and for Visitors, Volcanic Alert Scheme and Escape Strategy, and Practical Biosecurity Measures).
    5. A reference to or incorporation of the SCAR Code of Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica into the Management Plan.
    6. A review of the Visitor Site Guidelines that apply to Deception Island.
Other Topics
During the Management Group meeting, the potential of environmental impact of “new” science and “new” visitor activities was discussed.  Some felt that there had been an increase in the number of activities (in particular science projects and yacht visits) as well as an increase in “new” activities such as hiking by both by non-IAATO visitors and scientists.  Several national programs have provided specialized training for scientists who have not worked in the area previously in order to minimize impacts.  The use of the EIA process for cumulative impact and the use of better communication methods for sensitive areas awareness for both visitors and scientists was recommended.
There was concern expressed about the potential environmental impact to some of the plant communities in sites protected within ASPA No. 140.  In some areas (e.g., Site C, Caliente Hill), intense research activities have resulted in the inadvertent trampling of rare plants.  In contrast, Site J, Perchuć Cone, which contains a diverse selection of plants representative of geothermal fumeroles, has been rarely visited, due to its isolated location.  The Management Group agreed that this site should be proposed as a Prohibited Zone in the revision of the Management Plan (ATCM XL, WP 008) in order to protect the vulnerable plant and soil communities.
Argentina has taken the lead in the development of a Visitor’s Brochure for distribution to those who plan to engage in non-scientific activities within the ASMA.  The brochure, which contains photos, presents an overview of the island and highlights expectations for visitor activities within the ASMA, with a focus on the historic sites, seabird colonies, and areas to be avoided, such as ASPA Nos. 140 and 145, the summer stations, and sites of scientific research.  The brochure is in the final stages of review and is expected to be available for the 2017-18 season.
IAATO provided information and photos to the Management Group which showed new damage to structures within historical area of Whalers Bay.  The roof on Biscoe House (formerly Whalers Barracks) suffered further collapse and concern was raised about further damage and flying debris resulting from wind storms in the area.  The managing Parties of HSM 71 are considering whether any further action is required at this stage.
The Management Group was discouraged to learn from IAATO that there was new graffiti discovered on the oil tanks in Whalers Bay.  IAATO forwarded photos taken on January 28, 2017 which showed the damage to the tanks.  Given the high visitation of the area, it was assumed that the markings were made during in the few days leading up to that date.  An investigation into which ships were in the area during this time period, including tour ships, yachts, and national program ships, is ongoing, in an attempt to learn more about the incident. 


