





U.K./U.S. Research Initiative on Thwaites: The Future of Thwaites Glacier and its Contribution to Sea-level Rise








U.S./U.K. Research Initiative in West Antarctica: The Future of Thwaites Glacier and its Contribution to Sea-level Rise
Information paper submitted by the United States and United Kingdom
Introduction
Considerable uncertainty remains in projections of global sea-level rise, and much of this uncertainty resides in the projections of ice-loss from West Antarctica.  Reducing this uncertainty is an international priority that was recently underscored by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research in its “Horizon Scan 2020” (http://www.scar.org/horizonscan).  This is also the top Antarctic research priority of the recent National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine report, A Strategic Vision for NSF Investments in Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/21741/a-strategic-vision-for-nsf-investments-in-antarctic-and-southern-ocean-research).
Building on agreed community priority, and recognizing that such research is becoming an increasingly global endeavor with demands that exceed the capacities of any one nation, the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) agreed a joint program with the objective to substantially improve both decadal and longer-term (century-to-multi-century) projections of ice loss and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier (NSF Program Solicitation https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2017/nsf17505/nsf17505.htm).  Since the 1990s, satellites have shown accelerating ice loss driven by ocean change in five neighboring glacier catchments including Thwaites and Pine Island glaciers (see Figure 1), which, together, drain more than one third of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS).  The rate of ice loss from this region doubled in six years and now accounts for about 10 percent of global sea-level rise (Mouginout, Rignot, & Scheuchl, 2014).  The most rapid ice loss is currently from Pine Island Glacier, which has been the focus of several recent NSF-funded projects and the NERC iSTAR Programme (2010-2017, http://www.istar.ac.uk/).  However, a consistent result obtained by recent ice-sheet modeling studies is that on societally-relevant decade-to-century timescales, the most significant, and potentially irreversible changes in West Antarctica are likely to occur on Thwaites Glacier (National Academies of Sciences, 2015).  Satellite studies confirm that significant changes are already underway on this glacier, but the potential contribution to sea-level rise cannot currently be assessed with certainty.
Proposals from science teams, each with U.S. and U.K. participants, were submitted on 1st March, 2017 and are now under review.  The proposals selected will form a collaborative program that is intended to produce a direct and significant improvement in understanding of the stability of marine ice sheets and specifically the West Antarctic Ice Sheet in the vicinity of Thwaites Glacier.  It will improve the ice-sheet modeling community’s capability to simulate ice sheets and thus reduce the uncertainties in sea-level projections.  In addition, the program will contribute to improving risk assessments that coastal communities need for decisions about adaptation and long-range planning.
Research program description
The Thwaites Glacier (TG) research program will support an observational and modeling campaign in the TG and neighboring Amundsen Sea region to understand the changes taking place and the processes driving these changes.  Modeling activities will proceed hand-in-hand with data collection to help optimize measurement strategies, decipher external drivers, and, ultimately, deliver improved projections of sea-level rise.  Teams will collect observations from the zone where TG comes into contact with the ocean, as well as contextual data on TG and its catchment.  These data will feed into coupled models to enhance decadal projections.  Longer-term projections will be constrained by answering the critical question “did TG survive the last interglacial?”  Observational evidence would constrain the extent and timing of past deglaciation of TG.  This would provide a key opportunity to test hypotheses regarding the instability of marine ice sheets.
Projects will address one or more of the following themes:
    1. Boundary Conditions: characterizing the boundary conditions and current state of TG and its surroundings through observations on or near the ice surface, in the ocean, and at the ice-sheet bed and margins.  These observations will inform coupled models of ice-bed-ocean-atmosphere interactions that will be used to project future change.
    2. External drivers of change: identifying and characterizing the past, recent, and potential future drivers of change at TG and address the question of why TG is changing now.  Activities may include oceanographic measurements from ships, autonomous vehicles, and moorings; atmospheric measurements; shallow ice cores; land-surface, airborne, and satellite remote sensing; and high-resolution modeling to understand key processes determining forcing on TG.
    3. Processes leading to collapse: examining key poorly understood processes that influence the dynamics and collapse of marine ice sheets (e.g., processes leading to shelf disintegration, grounding line retreat, enhanced sliding).  Activities should be conducted at TG or have strong relevance to TG-related questions.  These activities will inform treatment of collapse processes in models.
    4. Past change: identifying past changes that inform understanding of TG history.  Activities may include drilling for sediment or bedrock samples, and results should inform modeling efforts.
    5. Forecasts of future change: simulating the potential evolution of TG and its effect on sea level.  Activities will include the continued development of ice-sheet models capable of coupling with ocean/climate models to fully exploit the improved understanding of the WAIS developed in the other dimensions of this program.
Field seasons
The field component is anticipated to be carried out in three summer field seasons:  2018/19, 2019/20, and 2020/21.  The first of these seasons will be primarily for logistics preparation, but may also include deployment of long-duration sensors.  The later seasons will involve both marine and over-snow field campaigns.
Contacts for international collaboration and cooperation
International collaboration by nations other than United States and United Kingdom are welcomed.  The contacts listed below are interested in learning of other nations who are or intend to be engaged in research in this region over this time frame in the event that synergistic activities might be developed.  These collaborations may include direct scientist-to-scientist collaborations, but direct discussions with the Antarctic national programs will be required if additional logistic support is needed.  The primary contacts are:

NSF and NERC:
Paul Cutler, NSF; telephone: +1 (703) 292-4961, email: pcutler@nsf.gov
Jessica Surma, NERC; telephone: +44 (0)1793 411600, email: jetc@nerc.ac.uk

USAP and BAS logistics:
Jessie Crain, NSF; telephone: +1 (703) 292-7457, email: jlcrain@nsf.gov
Mike Dinn, BAS; telephone: +44 (0)1223 221637, email: medi@bas.ac.uk











Figure 1 – Location map for Thwaites and Pine Island glaciers.  The background image shows the ice-loss 2010-2013 measured using data from ESA’s Cryosat-2 satellite (McMillan et al.  2014).

References
McMillan, M., Shepherd, A., Sundal, A., Briggs, K., Muir, A., Ridout, A., Hogg, A., & Wingham, D.  (2014).  Increased ice losses from Antarctica detected by CryoSat‐2.  Geophysical Research Letters, 41(11), 3899-3905.  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2014GL060111/full
Mouginot, J., Rignot, E., & Scheuchl, B. (2014).  Sustained increase in ice discharge from the Amundsen Sea Embayment, West Antarctica, from 1973 to 2013.  Geophysical Research Letters, 41(5), 1576-1584.  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2013GL059069/full
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2015).  A Strategic Vision for NSF Investments in Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research.  Washington, DC: National Academies Press.  https://www.nap.edu/catalog/21741/a-strategic-vision-for-nsf-investments-in-antarctic-and-southern-ocean-research

