





Turkish Antarctic Expedition 2016 - 2017 (TAE - I) Experiences









Turkish Antarctic Expedition 2016 – 2017
 (TAE - I) Experiences

The Republic of Turkey conducted its very first national and independent Turkish Antarctic Expedition - I (TAE - I) between 24 February and 4 April 2017. Turkish Antarctic Expedition - I was supported by the “Presidency of the Republic of Turkey” and sponsored by the “Ministry of Science, Industry and Technology” and coordinated by the Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center (ITU PolReC). The expedition consisted of nine scientists from 4 different universities all around Turkey. Researchers under the Turkish Antarctic Expedition - I focused on 4 scientific fields including, physical sciences, life sciences, geosciences and humanities and social sciences. Turkish Antarctic Expedition - I was conducted through non-governmental R/V Australis authorized by Australian Antarctic Division. With the support of the R/V Australis, the expedition included physical sampling of planktons, algae, benthos, distributed over a distance of 2000 nautical miles along the West Antarctic Peninsula. During the expedition, surveying and mapping on land, approximately 2 (two) million square meters of location, a number of points for satellite validation and ground-truthing as well as around 1 million square meters of bathymetric surveying at the adjoining locations were conducted. Bathymetric surveys were jointly conducted by the TAE- I members and the crew of the R/V Australis. The expedition reached until 6756’ South along the Peninsula. Projects and researches under the TAE - I were shared with Turkish scientific community during the “Polar (Arctic and Antarctic) Scientific Program Workshop” held at 12-13 April 2017 in Istanbul, Turkey. Results were highly welcomed by Turkish science community and scientific authorities. 27 national universities joined the workshop and recommendations were put forward for the TAE - II to be held between December 2017 and March 2018. The other main purpose of the workshop was also to set up Polar science priorities for Turkey.

During the TAE - I, Turkish scientists visited Prof. Julio Escudero Base of Chile on 28 February 2017, Jubany - Carlini Base of Argentine on 2 March 2017, Rothera Base of UK on 7 March 2017, Akademik Vernadsky Base of Ukraine on 16 March 2017, Bellinghausen Base of Russian Federation and Great Wall of People’s Republic of China on 28 March 2017. Turkish scientists were welcomed by Base commanders and staff. Chilean, Argentinian, British, Ukrainian, Russian and Chinese base experiences were much appreciated by TAE - I members and Turkish authorities. We would like to note that, such experiences may strengthen the cooperation and relations with Consultative and Non-Consultative Parties of the ATCM. Therefore, we would like to thank INACH (Chilean Antarctic Institute), Argentine Antarctic Institute, British Antarctic Survey and National Antarctic Scientific Center of Ukraine, the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of the Russian Federation, Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration of People’s Republic of China for their support and kind hospitality. Besides that, we believe that such cooperation may be of interest to Non-Consultative Parties that did not maintain Antarctic bases but are striving to conduct “substantial scientific research activity” for the attainment of Consultative status.

