





Study on monitoring penguin colonies in the Antarctic using remote sensing data








Study on monitoring penguin colonies in the Antarctic 
using remote sensing data


Information Paper submitted by Germany
Introduction
In response to the call of the ATCM XXXIV to the Treaty Parties to intensify their efforts in using remote sensing techniques for improved monitoring of environment and climate changes in the Antarctic, Germany carried out a feasibility study on penguin monitoring using such techniques. This study was presented by a German Information Paper at ATCM XXXV (ATCM XXXV IP 46 Pilot study on monitoring climate-induced changes in penguin colonies in the Antarctic using satellite images) along with a corresponding Working Paper (ATCM XXXV WP 18 Penguin monitoring via remote sensing). Now, the follow-up study of the German scientists “Monitoring penguin colonies in the Antarctic using remote sensing data” is available. 
Abstract
In the context of the already observed population changes at specific time intervals and the shift in penguin breeding sites because of global warming and the fluctuations in availability of food, the full-scale monitoring of Antarctic penguins seems reasonable. This report should contribute to choosing among the possible methods. Given the large number of colonies and their general inaccessibility, on-site counts can often only sample certain parts of the breeding population. It can also be assumed that there are still a considerable number of currently unidentified colonies. An extensive and comprehensive monitoring thus seems only possible based on remote sensing data.
To be able to detect preferably all the penguin colonies in Antarctica, satellite data will be required, which should be relatively cheap to acquire given the enormous quantities of data available, which cover the entire region. In this study, the Landsat 8 data, available since 2013, appeared to be most suitable for this purpose. In contrast to its predecessor, Landsat 7, which has had an error in its scan-line corrector since May 2003, it has the advantage that the complete image can be evaluated, which allows a higher temporal coverage of the entire Antarctic coastline. If the intention is to measure precisely the size of the colonies and detect small-scale changes, satellite data are required, as they have a high spatial and temporal resolution. In such cases, high-resolution, multi-spectral satellite data with ground resolutions of less than 0.6 m have proven to be the most suitable option. First of all, the high-resolution VNIR data from Worldview 3 satellites were also successfully tested.
Using 12 high-resolution and over 50 medium-resolution, multi-spectral satellite images, a series of methods was tested for their capacity to detect details on high- and medium-resolution satellite images. The most difficult task proved to be classifying guano on the high-resolution images. Dark-appearing guano could hardly be detected with the methods tested. In contrast, the bright orange-reddish guano was easy to spot. This demonstrates in general that the classification conducted on the continentally located Cape Bird colony was more precise than that on Ardley Island, which could be ascribed to the relatively large areas of dark guano and the great variability in geomorphology and vegetation on Ardley Island. The tested methods revealed that the maximum likelihood and ACE (Adaptive-Coherence-Estimator) classifications produced the best results for the detection of guano on high-resolution images. By comparing satellite images to the ground surveys, it became evident that it is not possible to identify all nest groups on Ardley Island from satellite images, not even manually. Good results were obtained with the ACE  and SAM (Spectral-Angle-Mapper) classifications using medium-resolution Landsat 8 images of continental and maritime Antarctica. Both methods seem suitable for an automated classification of the whole of Antarctica. Schwaller et al. (2013b) and Lynch & Schwaller (2014) have already impressively demonstrated that an automated detection of Adélie penguin colonies on continental and maritime Antarctica is possible with Landsat 7 images.
To be able to evaluate the validity and the precision of information obtained from the satellite images, precise control data from the ground are required. Four different methods to obtain such reference data were investigated in this project and compared to one another. Panorama photography is the fastest method, but provides relatively imprecise results, just like GPS-based partial surveying. GPS-based full surveying produced the most accurate count of breeding pairs of all of the methods tried. It demands the greatest time investment, however, and has the disadvantage that it disturbs the breeding penguins the most. An intermediate option is provided by surveying with very high-resolution UAV orthomosaics (a mosaic of geometrically corrected "orthorectified" aerial photographs or images with an uniform scale and without distortion), which can survey large areas in a short period of time. RGB (red, green, blue) orthomosaics were found to be most suitable for identifying breeding pairs, while NIR (near Infrared) orthomosaics were the best for detecting guano and vegetation. Thermal infrared orthomosaics have a great potential for identifying penguins on or next to a nest. However, the method is not practical given the low resolution of thermal sensors. A detailed examination was carried out of the potential disturbance of birds by the use of UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles). Results showed that flyovers conducted more than 50 m above the ground (corresponding to the minimum flight altitude for UAV survey flights) triggered mild reactions compared to the behaviour of penguins in response to lower flying heights. 
Furthermore, an investigation was carried out whether the guano coloration of a colony varied over the course of a season or whether there were differences between species which could be recognised with remote sensing methods. The results of tests with a standard colour reference system (Munsell colour charts), photography on site and UAV and satellite images from two seasons revealed that the test areas with Adélie penguins could be distinguished from the gentoo penguin areas at the beginning of one season. The distinction consisted of the relative red and green components of guano being close together at the start of the breeding season, so the guano appeared greenish. In the rest of the season, the red component predominated for all species. Given this colour difference, it was possible to distinguish the Adélie penguin nest groups from the gentoo penguin ones on high-resolution satellite images.
Along with guano coloration, the habitus (breeding biology and phenology) of penguins was explored as a possible distinguishing characteristic between Adèlie, chinstrap and gentoo species using remote sensing data. It is possible to distinguish the chicks of the three species on UAV images with a ground resolution of at least 10 mm under optimal recording conditions. With adults, however, the only reliable characteristic detectable was the hourglass-shaped white patch on the top of gentoo penguins' heads, and even that only when the head is held upright. Differences in the breeding biology allowed chinstrap penguin nest groups (adults still breeding) to be distinguished clearly from gentoo penguin nest groups (chicks already hatched) using an UAV orthomosaic of Narebski Point.
The intraseasonal variation in colony expansion and occupation was also extensively investigated with GPS-based partial surveying of the nest groups and the breeding phenology on Ardley Island. Results showed that the size of nest group areas remained extremely constant over the period examined (beginning of December – beginning of January), in contrast to the number of nests and thus the density of the nest groups, which decreased greatly. It was also observed that nest groups with 1-10 nests declined most clearly in the period investigated, which could possibly be ascribed to their location on the colony periphery and thus the entailing greater predation pressure. The investigation of Cape Bird with Landsat 8 images revealed that no intraseasonal variations in colony expansion could be determined there. The likelihood that the colony is covered with snow, and thus allowing only partial or no detection, increases at the beginning and end of the season. However, high-resolution satellite images revealed clear confirmation of intraseasonal variation of the guano-covered areas on Ardley Island. The guano-covered areas of the colony increase radically at the end of the season until they decrease again under the influence of diminishing guano deposits and the constant presence of erosion. Further analysis showed that a correlation (R²= 0.84) exists between the time at which the satellite image was taken and the mean nest density of the guano-covered areas.

The detectability of interseasonal variations in colony expansion and occupation were investigated with high- and medium-resolution satellite images of colonies on Ardley Island and Cape Bird. For Ardley Island, no correlation was found (R² = 0.05) between the number of nests and the nest group area determined from ground surveys. A similar result was noted for the Adélie penguin colony Cape Bird North according to high- and medium-resolution satellite images. Furthermore, Landsat images could not detect any changes in the number of breeding pairs from the guano-covered area data, not even when the number of breeding pairs more than tripled. This was the outcome of analyses of the Cape Bird North colony in the period between 1985 and 2016. The cause is probably the change in density within the nest groups.
References
Lynch, H. J. & Schwaller, M. R. (2014): Mapping the Abundance and Distribution of Adélie Penguins Using Landsat-7: First Steps towards an Integrated Multi-Sensor Pipeline for Tracking Populations at the Continental Scale. PLoS ONE 9.
Mustafa, O., Esefeld, J., Grämer, H., Maercker, J., Pfeifer, C., Rümmler, M.-C. & M. Senf (2017): Monitoring penguin colonies in the Antarctic using remote sensing data. On behalf of the German Environment Agency. Texte 30/2017. Dessau-Roßlau. Download at https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/monitoring-penguin-colonies-in-the-antarctic-using
Schwaller, M. R., Southwell, C. J. & Emmerson, L. M. (2013b): Continental-scale mapping of Adélie penguin colonies from Landsat imagery. Remote Sensing of Environment 139. pp. 353–364.

