





The role of monitoring, education and EIA in the prevention of vegetation trampling within ASPA No. 140, Site C: Caliente Hill 








The role of monitoring, education and EIA in the prevention of vegetation trampling within ASPA No. 140, Site C: Caliente Hill 
Information Paper submitted by Spain and the United Kingdom
Summary
Monitoring has shown that the extremely rare plant communities located on the geothermally heated ground within Site C: Caliente Hill of ASPA No. 140 Parts of Deception have been subject to cumulative trampling impacts.  
To protect the scientific and environmental values of the plant communities on Caliente Hill, Spain and the United Kingdom encourage other Parties active in the Area to: (1) educate all scientists and logistical support personnel entering the Area on the vulnerability of the plant communities and (2) incorporate measures to mitigate potential trampling impact in the Environmental Impact Assessment for the proposed field research.  
Background
Deception Island is an active volcano that supports unique plant communities and numerous plant species that are exceptionally rare in the Antarctic terrestrial biome. There are several sites, mostly very small in area (i.e. a few 10s of m2), with active fumaroles and associated heated ash soil, many of which support communities of bryophytes unique to the Antarctic, including several species unknown elsewhere in the continent. 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 140, Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands was designated primarily to protect the exceptionally rare and vulnerable plant species found on Deception Island, including in geothermally heated soils, and is comprised of 11 sites.  ASPA No. 140 Site C: Caliente Hill is located above the northwest side of Albufera Lagoon at the southern end of Fumarole Bay and was designated to protect rare plant species growing on heated ground that surrounds a line of fumaroles along the crest of the hill.
Monitoring and reporting
Since 2012, Spanish researchers have detected and reported visual evidence of damage to the rare moss communities on Caliente Hill and highlighted the vulnerability of the site to the Deception Island Management Group and the CEP (Figure 1; see ATCMXXXVII IP58 Proposal to afford greater protection to an extremely restricted endemic plant on Caliente Hill (ASPA 140 – sub-site C), Deception Island and ATCMXXXVIII IP69 Update of the status of the rare moss formations on Caliente Hill (ASPA 140 – site C).  
Further monitoring of moss communities using photographic images, undertaken in 2015, revealed that plant communities remain sparse in nature and are easy for field workers to miss (Figure 2). Trampling damage of plant communities was recorded at several locations within the site.
Education and awareness
Since the field campaign of 2014-2015, Spain has increased the awareness of all personnel working in the area (including scientists and support staff) of the unique nature of this site and its vulnerability to human impact. This has been achieved by ensuring awareness of the contents of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, and the development of an “Interim code of conduct to develop activities in the Site C- Caliente Hill of ASPA Nº 140 Parts of Deception Island”. The “Interim code of conduct” has now been replaced by the SCAR Code of Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica (Resolution 3 (2016)).
Conclusions
General information to help protect geothermally heated sites is contained in the recently agreed SCAR Code of Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica and site-specific information on Site C: Caliente Hill is found within the Management Plan for ASPA No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.
To protect the scientific and environmental values of the plant communities at Site C: Caliente Hill, Spain and the United Kingdom encourage other Parties active in the Area to:
    • educate all scientists and logistical support personnel entering the Area on the vulnerability of the plant communities; and 
    • incorporate measures to mitigate potential trampling impact in the Environmental Impact Assessment for the proposed field research.  
Spain and the United Kingdom will continue to undertake human impact monitoring at Caliente Hill and report their findings to CEP.

Figures
Figure 1. Trampling impacts observed at ASPA No. 140 Site C: Caliente Hill (footprints in the vegetation are highlighted with white ellipses).



Figure 2 – Photographic assemblage of the heated ground within at ASPA 140 Site C: Caliente Hill.  Sections with the highest plant coverage are shown in Sections A to F.  The green lines, shown in Sections A-F, mark the extent of the extremely rare but sparsely distributed moss communities (each Section is c. 7 m across). 
