





Action taken following unauthorized presence of a French yacht in the Treaty Area during the 2015/2016 season








Action taken following unauthorized presence of a French yacht in the Treaty Area during the 2015/2016 season

The unauthorized presence of a yacht in the Antarctic Treaty area during the 2015/2016 season led to administrative and judicial proceedings being opened by the competent French authority, the Prefect, High Administrator of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands (TAAF). 
1. Background
On 5 April 2016, France was warned of the unauthorized presence of a French flag-flying yacht, the “Ch’timagine III” within the Antarctic Treaty area.
In accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the French Environment Code, the yacht's expedition leader had submitted an activity request to the competent French authority in June 2015 for the 2015/2016 season. Following scrutiny of the application, the applicant was informed that authorization for the activity had been refused1 due to unfulfilled safety conditions which were necessary for the smooth running of the expedition.
During the last Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Santiago, the Working Paper 34 "Data Collection and Reporting on Yachting Activity in Antarctica in 2015-16" fed back the information that France had indeed refused this yacht access to the Antarctic.
2. Applicable legislation and sanctions 
The French law adopted in application of the Madrid Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty sanctions non-declared activities in the Antarctic. Offenders thus risk administrative and penal sanctions.2 
The French Environment Code provides that the competent administrative authorities (the Prefect, High Administrator of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands) may give a warning (administrative sanction) to any person who has been proven to have carried out activities incompatible with the Madrid Protocol and applicable French legislation. Any applications are therefore refused for this reason for a five-year period.3
Furthermore, those carrying out unauthorized activities in the Antarctic are liable to sentences of imprisonment and fines4 (penal sanction). 
3. Administrative and judicial procedure 
On 29 April 2016, an administrative inquiry was opened by the competent French authority (the Prefect, High Administrator of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands) after being warned of a French flag-flying yacht within the Antarctic Treaty area.
When asked for his observations, the expedition leader stated that he left Noumea in New-Caledonia (French overseas community) in October 2015, to carry out his plan of touring the Antarctic and retuning to Noumea in late May 2016. He had also received authorisation from the TAAF for accessing Possession Island (Crozet archipelago) and the Kerguelen Islands as well as different clearances for accessing other subantarctic territories. 
The offender therefore recognized that he had been within the Treaty area (Port Lockroy on 2 February 2016, the Vernadsky Research Base on 12 February 2016, information visible on the offender's passport).
He informed the competent French authority that as his project had been planned a long time in advance, he left for the Antarctic without authorization because he could not delay his voyage.
In a decision made on 23 September 2016, the Prefect, High Administrator of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands, gave the leader of the “Ch’timagine III” expedition a warning preventing him from carrying out an activity within the Treaty Area for a period of five years (i.e. until 22 September 2021).
In accordance with the French Code of Criminal Procedure, the administrative procedure and the relevant evidence were transferred to the Regional Court (Tribunal de Grande Instance) in Paris which heard the case. 
However, the case was closed because another non-penal procedure or sanction had been taken (in this case, the five-year warning given by the Prefect, High Administrator of the TAAF). 
Conclusion 
In application of the provisions of the Madrid Protocol, France took legislative and regulatory provisions regulating the necessary and obligatory steps for accessing the Antarctic. With these legal instruments, France therefore intends, wherever possible and appropriate, to prosecute those who infringe on the provisions of the French Environment Code applicable to the Antarctic continent (see ATCM XXXVII IP16 Judgment of the Regional Court of Paris dated 6 February 2014 regarding the carrying out of undeclared and unauthorised non-governmental activities in the area of the Treaty and the Damage caused to the Wordie House Hut (HSM no 62)).

