





Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica








Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Italy 
    1. Background
Italy proposed the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station to increase the reliability of its National Antarctic Programme (PNRA) transportation system, allowing greater effectiveness of scientific research and a more reliable multi-year programming. 
On January 23, 2016, Italy notified the Chair of the Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) of the availability of the draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the “Construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica”.  
To consider the Italian draft CEE, an intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report). Comments and advices from ICG participants were reported in WP 21 (CEP XIX) and first comments were addressed by Italy in IP 58 (CEP XIX).
The CEP advised the ATCM that “the draft CEE generally conformed to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and that the information provided in the draft CEE supported the conclusion that the impacts of constructing and operating the proposed gravel runway were likely to be more than minor or transitory”. The draft CEE was found “generally clear, well structured, and well presented, although improvements to some of the maps and figures were recommended”.
    2. Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
2.1 	General
The draft CEE identified and discussed the majority of the impacts likely to be associated with the activity, however the ICG participants suggested providing, in the required Final CEE, additional information or clarification on some topics. 
The Final CEE has been prepared addressing the valuable comments received by the ICG on the Draft CEE, as well as other useful comments received by national experts. Appendix A enumerates the chapters that were modified. Full text may be downloaded at: 
http://www.enea.it/en/research-development/documents/climate-and-the-environment/final-cee.pdf/view.
The document was approved by the Italian Ministry of Environment and Protection of Land and Sea (MATTM) and allowed for submission by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (MAECI). 
On the 1st December 2016, the Italian Inter-ministerial Committee for the Economic Programming approved to support financially the construction of the gravel runway (G.U n.46 8/3/2017).
2.2	Response to the major comments addressed by the ICG
In WP21 (CEP XIX), major comments concerned:
    • The staff needed for the construction phase (number, accommodation etc..), as well as a clear schedule of work planed during the 4 years of construction
In Chapter 2, more indications were given on this topic and a new section 2.4.7 “Timeline of the construction activities” was added. Results from site tests provided realistic information on the expected average productivity. The construction schedule was adjusted accordingly. In particular, the totally dedicated staff should not exceed 12 units and the staff involved in the proposed activity will be accommodated at MZS. Two heated containers, suitably equipped, will be available at the construction site, during the working time; the same structures will be further used as operative and logistics buildings during the operational phase. 
    • Some aspects of initial environmental reference state, particularly invertebrates and all bird species (not only Adélie penguins and skuas)
In 4.3.1 “Observed fauna”, nematodes were added and in 6.1.2 seabirds and invertebrates were included in the Environmental Monitoring Plan. No specific study on invertebrates was performed on the Boulder Clay area, however specific attention was given to this topic during the recent investigations on lichens and mosses. Collembola and Acari have never been observed on site. According to the Bird Life International’s Report “Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015”, Snow Petrels and Wilson’s Storm-petrels have been observed only as visitors in the Terra Nova Bay area. The last research survey in the area reported one Wilson’s Storm-petrels nest at Campo Icaro in 2011. 
    • Potential direct impacts to flora and fauna, the landscape and lake environments, and non-native species risks; the impacts related to the road, the quarries, dust and noise produced by construction work should be especially detailed.
In the Final CEE, these issues have been addressed in different parts. Direct impacts to flora and fauna were evaluated while defining the path for the new road. The use of explosives was reconsidered according to the last site tests, which indicated that the use of blasting is not required. In any case, a new evaluation of potentially generated noise and vibrations has been performed, especially concerning the construction activities and operations with trucks, excavators and other noisy equipment (sections 5.1.3 and 5.1.4). The access roads were included in section 2.4.1. Concerning monitoring, the dust was included in the Environmental Monitoring Plan. Dust will be monitored both in active and passive way to enable evaluation of punctual and cumulative impacts. Specific monitoring will also be performed in blister lakes and for permafrost.
    • Cumulative and indirect impacts that might arise in light of existing activities and other known planned activities in the area, including logistical cooperation.
One major comment concerned the expected number of flights with a recommendation to take into account the potential needs of other Antarctic programs working in the region.  Detailed explanations are provided in section 2.6.1. “Airstrip operation plan”. In particular, the structural design of the runway was set on 30 flights/year, but the estimation of expected flights landing on the gravel runway is maximum 15 flights/year and includes the expected request of neighbouring Antarctic programmes. This number was the result of considerations on the needs of the PNRA and of the hosting capacity of the already existing facilities (MZS, Jang Bogo and Gondwana including cooperation with France). The new gravel runway should allow a better distribution of researchers and support staff along the summer season period, without noticeably changing the overall number of man-days in the area. An increase of personnel turnover does not generate an increase of human pressure in the area, this value being correlated with the unchanged hosting capacity of the entire area. The 15 flights per year, duly distributed along the summer season, are expected to allow a turnover of 350 people in and out of Antarctica. The first flights (mid-October to mid-November) may continue to be operated on the fast ice, as usual for practical reasons. 
Concerning cumulative and indirect impacts, these may reduce the scientific value of certain local areas and contribute to air pollution in regional or even global levels. Such cumulative impact should be monitored continuously during the construction and operation of the runway, and mitigated in a proper way once it is detected. Section 5.2.2. “Indirect and cumulative impacts” on indirect and cumulative impacts was added. Considering that this assessment is very complex and uncertain, the environmental monitoring plan was implemented for the areas of known disturbance to evaluate limits of acceptable changes in the environmental variables.
    • Mitigation measures related to fuel management, non-native species, wildlife disturbance, training of the construction crew.
The fuel spill issue was better outlined in 5.3.5 “Prevention and mitigation measures of oil spills”. There is already an oil spill contingency plan (OSCP) for ground operations at MZS, and it will be adopted during refuelling operations at the Boulder Clay gravel runway. Only double-skinned fuel tanks posed on confined structures made of impermeable layer will be used. Suitable absorbent mats, pumps and appropriate equipment will be available on site, in accordance with specific existing guidelines such as the COMNAP Fuel Manual. In the environmental Monitoring Plan, specific attention was given to this topic. Section 7.7 “Managing severe oil spill events” enumerates possible migration patterns.
Concerning non-native species introduction, PNRA already addresses this risk as intercontinental flights are currently  performed in the first part of the season and once every two/three years the multi-purpose vessel Italica is chartered for transportation of fuel, goods, personnel and for scientific research. The Non-native Species Manual is followed. Prevention focuses on pre-departure measures and specific information on the risks of non-native species introduction is currently given to Italian personnel going to Antarctica, during the training course and during the pre-departure briefing in Christchurch, NZ. Good baseline data on native fauna and flora is already available, as previously discussed, and the environmental monitoring plan will allow a rapid detection of any accidentally introduced non-native species. 
Concerning the impacts on scientific values as a result of the loss of the CALM monitoring grid, section 5.3.7 “Compensation measures for scientific values” outlines the proposed mitigation and compensation measures. 
A specific section 5.3.9. “Training workers and passengers on the environmental aspects” was dedicated to the training issue of personnel. 
Additional comments on the Draft CEE were also presented in Attachment A to the WP 21. The comments were almost entirely acknowledged in the Final CEE. Several comments were related to needed improvements in clarity, format and presentation of the CEE and to information details on impact assessment, monitoring schedule and timeline of activities. 
Some important minor comments were already included in the previously discussed major topics, such as noise impact, air quality monitoring plan, impacts on scientific value, cumulative impacts, mitigation measures against loss of wilderness etc. Several figures were modified with higher resolution.
2.3	Summary of the modifications of the Draft CEE
Appendix A enumerates all the major modifications that occurred in the Final CEE. 
    3. Conclusions
Italy is committed in realizing the gravel runway infrastructure trying to minimize as possible all environmental impacts that may be generated by its construction and operation. 
The Italian scientific community was involved in the process since the design phase, to ensure the maximum respect of all important values and to help in the design of the environmental monitoring plan.
The Final CEE was approved by the Italian Ministry of Environment and Protection of Land and Sea (MATTM) and allowed for submission by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (MAECI).
Italy believes that the proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station will likely have a “more than a minor or transitory” impact on the environment. The benefits that will be obtained from this infrastructure, in terms of more reliable and cost effective management of the Italian scientific and logistic operations and  increase of safety and cooperation with neighbouring Antarctic programs, will however outweigh the impacts of the runway on the environment thus justifying the activity proceeding.
Italy wishes to thank the Consultative Parties and all national and international experts for their contributions and valuable suggestions.
Appendix A
Major modification from Draft CEE to Final CEE
Chapter
Section 
Modifications
2
2.
Tab. 2.5 modified with new construction phases

2.3.3.
Section modified with additions on fuel deposit

2.4.1.
New Section 2.4.1. "Construction of the access road to airstrip area" 

2.4.5.
Volumes better specified in Table 2.5 

2.4.6.
Timeline of construction activities and Tab.2.7  added

2.6.
Scheduled phases modified

2.6.1
Section 2.6.1. modified in number of flights and their seasonal distribution


Assumption of 15 flights / season better outlined
3
3.2.
Modified old Sections 3.2 and 3.3, both sections merged into new Section 3.2. "Non proceeding alternatives"


Figure 3.2 with new layout

3.2.1.
Added Section 3.2.1. "Evaluation of the naval operations every year"

3.2.2.
Added Section 3.2.2. "Efficiency of intercontinental operations at MZS"

3.2.3.
Added Section 3.2.3.  "The Nansen ice sheet airstrip"

3.5.
Figure 3.5 with new layout including MZS and Runway 
4
4.
New considerations on the use of explosives

4.3.
New ASPAs included

4.3.1
Added Arthropods and Nematodes in listed fauna


Snow Petrels/Wilson's storm Petrels observations at Boulder Clay/Campo Icaro better outlined


Final paragraph relocated in Section 5.

4.3.2.
Vegetation observation spots in querry areas included in Fig. 4.26
5
5.1.1.
Tab. 5.3 modified according to the new time schedule of activities

5.1.2.
New section 5.1.2 "Evaluation of fuel transport risk" added 

5.1.3.
Noise impact modeling including also construction activities, 


New Fig. 5.1 and new Tab. 5.5 including construction activities

5.1.4.
New section 5.1.4. "Evaluation of vibration impact" added 

5.1.5.
New section 5.1.5. "Evaluation of oil spills" added 

5.1.8.
New section 5.1.8. "Impacts on scientific values  " added

5.1.10.
Chemical toilet impact added in Tab. 5.6

5.2.2.
New Section 5.2.2. "Indirect and cumulative impacts"  added 


Tab. 5.4 modified for 15 operative flights


Tab. 5.7 modified now including access road, bird strikes, noise during construction, dust, aesthetic and scientific value


Fuel need calculations corrected 

5.1.3.
Noise modeling completed with simulation also for construction phase

5.2.1.
Tab. 5.7 completed with Noise, Wilderness, Aesthetic value, Bird strike


D/C/I index description added in Tab. 5.7

5.3.3.
New Section 5.3.3. "Compensation measures for flora"   added 

5.3.5.
Fuel spills issue better outlined

5.3.6.
Transplantation as a compensation and Mitigation Measure was outlined, issue added in Tav. 5.7 and in EMOP Tab. 6.4


New mitigation measures against the loss of wilderness and aesthetic values better outlined

5.3.7.
New Section 5.3.7. "Compensation measures for scientific values"   added 

5.3.8.
Issue on Non native species introduction better outlined and added into EMOP (Tab. 6.4)

5.3.9.
New Section 5.3.9. "Training workers and passengers on the environmental aspects"  added
Major modification from Draft CEE to Final CEE (continued)
Chapter
Section 
Modifications
6
6.
New detailed breakdown of Monitoring plan actions


Introduced Organisms Monitoring better outlined (Tab. 6.1)


Sections 6.1.5. "Deformation processes and micro landslide" content moved and better outlined in the new section 6.2. "Deformation control by InSAR monitoring"

6.1.1.
Permafrost Monitoring Plan better outlined 


New Tab. 6.2 on Permafrost Monitoring Plan including blister lake monitoring 

6.1.2
Fauna Monitoring redefined including all the species  


Fast Parameters Monitoring better outlined  


Paragraph on "Bird strike" added and bird strike events better outlined 


Considerations added about Marine Wildlife,  Visitors Management and Vibration Monitoring 


New Tab. 6.3 on Fauna Monitoring Plan added 

6.1.3.
New Tab. 6.4 on Vegetation Monitoring Plan added including transplantation monitoring 

6.1.4.
Dust impact added in EMOP 


New Tab. 6.5 on Air Quality Monitoring Plan added 


New comprehensive Fig. 6.2 added with the detailed map of all the EMOP sites 


VOC, NO2 and CO added in the Air Quality Monitoring Plan and in Tab. 6.5

6.1.5.
Tab. 6.6 completed with Ecology  and  Noise/Vibrations issues  


Tab. 6.7 completed with Material issue
7
7.5.
New Sections 7.5. "Uncertainties related to the winter runway operation" added

7.6.
Paragraph on "Cumulative risks from the runway operations" added


