





Russian-Swiss Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition 2016–2017


English translation provided by the author





Russian-Swiss Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition 2016–2017
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation

In 2016, the delegation of Switzerland made presentation for representatives of the Consultative Parties at ATCM XXXIX on the Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition in the summer season 2016–2017 onboard the Russian research expedition vessel “Akademik Tryoshnikov”. The initiators of these studies were a specially created Foundation for the support of the Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition (Switzerland) and the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring (Russian Federation). The main sponsor of this project was a well-known Swiss businessman and a polar traveler Frederic Paulsen. It was planned to perform planned scientific studies on sub-Antarctic and Antarctic Islands with disembarkation of scientific groups and during marine transits between them (oceanographic, hydrobiological and meteorological studies). Much of the route of this expedition passed in sub-Antarctic waters, however in the Pacific Ocean sector of the Antarctic, this cruise was to be carried out in Antarctic waters, i.e., south of parallel 60° S. 
Taking into account that Switzerland has not yet acceded to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol), the Russian Federation as one of participants of this activity in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 8 “Environmental Impact Assessment” of the Protocol has taken on the duty to  prepare the Environmental Impact Assessment and execute all necessary documents, required by the Russian legislature for obtaining a corresponding permit for implementation of this activity in the Antarctic. Such Permit (No R/2016/014) was issued on 23 January 2016 by the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring to the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (St. Petersburg), ship-owner of the research-expedition vessel “Akademik Tryoshnikov”.
It is known that in accordance with the legislature adopted in the Russian Federation, the permits for activity in the Antarctic are granted only to the Russian citizens and Russian legal entities. In this connection, this expedition was assigned the Russian-Swiss joint status, and its scientific projects were included to the Program of observations and activities of the 62nd Russian Antarctic Expedition of 2016–2017 under the section “International cooperation”. Simultaneously our foreign scientific colleagues received a legitimate possibility to perform their research in the Antarctic under the “umbrella” of the Russian legislature. 
Organizers of the Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition Project declared an open international competition for participation in the activities of the Expedition. The competitive selection of applications was made by the international group of independent Antarctic experts. A total of 22 research projects were chosen for the program of this expedition, devoted to research of environment of the sub-Antarctic under the conditions of changing climate. The specific scientific projects were devoted to current research directions in meteorology, climatology, glaciology, paleo-geography, geomorphology, physical and chemical oceanography, hydrobiology, marine geology, geo-botany and study of sea birds and mammals. Some of the projects were submitted by international teams of scientists from different countries.
The R/V “Akademik Tryoshnikov” departed on 20 November 2016 from the German port of Bremerhaven, where additional scientific equipment was installed onboard. During ship transit from Bremerhaven to the port of Capetown, RSA (with arrival on 15 December), the international floating university which was sponsored by the Russian Geographical Society, worked on its board. Forty eight students from Australia, Great Britain, Norway, Russia, the USA, France, Switzerland and RSA participated in the work of this university, representing 37 universities and 2 teachers from the RSA. Engineering specialists, who tested during ship transit to Cape Town the new scientific equipment, intended for the expedition studies were also engaged in practical exercises. The themes of theoretical and practical training courses at the floating university were devoted to marine studies. 
The main participants of the Russian-Swiss Expedition arrived to Cape Town during the period 15 to 20 December 2016. The scientific group of this circumpolar expedition was represented by a large number of scientists from Australia – 25 people from 13 universities and research centers, Belgium – 1 person, Great Britain – 19 people from 9 scientific organizations, Denmark – 1 person, Germany – 5 people from 2 scientific organizations, Spain – 6 people from 2 scientific organizations, Italy – 5 people from 4 scientific organizations, Canada – 10 people from 6 scientific organizations, New Zealand – 3 persons from 3 scientific organizations, Norway – 2 persons from one scientific organization, Peru – 1 person, Portugal – 1 person, Russia – 4 people from one scientific organization, the USA – 11 people from 8 scientific organizations, France - 11 people from 7 scientific organizations, Czechia – 1 person, Chile – 2 persons from 2 scientific organizations, Switzerland – 13 people from 5 scientific organizations, Sweden - 1 person, RSA – 10 people from 5 scientific organizations. A total of 131 specialists from 73 universities and research centers participated. 
Their studies were divided into three stages. After the end of the next stage there was partial rotation of the scientific group of the expedition. 
The first stage from 21 December 2016 to 19 January 2017 was in the Indian Ocean sector of the Antarctic between Cape Town (RSA) and Hobart (Australia) with a visit of Marion Island (Prince Edward Islands) on 26–28 December 2016, the Krozet Islands on 31 December 2016 – 1 January 2017 and Kerguelen Island – on 6 January 2017. 
The second stage was from the port of Hobart to the port of Punta Arenas (Chile) in the Pacific Sector of the Antarctic during the period 22 January to 26 February 2017 across the Mertz glacier (George V coast, Victoria Land) and Cape Denison – 31 January to 2 February 2017, the Balleny Islands – 4 to 5 February, Scott Island - on 7 February, Cape Dart (Siple Volcano, Mary Bird Land) – on 11-13 February, Peter I Island – on 16 February and the Diego Ramirez Islands – on 20 February. 
The third stage of the circumnavigation expedition was in the Atlantic sector of the Antarctic between the port of Punta Arenas on 26 February and Cape Town on 19 March with a visit to the South Georgia Islands on 2–4 February, the South Sandwich Islands on 6–7 March and Bouvet Island on 12–13 March. 
Disembarkation of scientific groups for investigation of the islands and points of the Antarctic coast were made by means of ship helicopters and motor boats of “Zodiac” type. At first, the expedition program planned activities on the Australian Heard and Macquarie Islands, but due to reasons beyond their control, these studies were excluded from the work plan.
During the period of landing of scientific groups on sub-Antarctic and Antarctic Islands, and parts of the Antarctic coast, investigators sampled ice cores from the surface glacial layers, collected geological, botanical and zoological samples, water, snow and soil samples to be further analyzed at different research centers of the states-participants of this project. For carrying out marine studies, most advanced equipment was used including robotic underwater devices. A large number of specimens of benthic flora and fauna and samples of soils of the Antarctic Seas and oceanic space were collected. Organizers of the Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition plan to publish a collection of scientific articles on the results of studies performed and hold if possible the final scientific conference. 
The Russian-Swiss Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition carried out in the season 2016–2017 has demonstrated a large role of the international scientific and logistical cooperation in the study of the Earth’s South Polar Area. Many scientists from different countries had an opportunity to perform their studies outside the traditional regions of activity of national Antarctic programs, which, obviously has contributed to enhancement of scientific knowledge of the nature of sub-Antarctic.
The organizers of the Expedition express their sincere gratitude to the management of national Antarctic Programs for active support in holding this large international experiment.

