





The experience in using a remote unmanned underwater vehicle in the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition in      2016-2017


English translation provided by the author





The experience in using a remote unmanned underwater vehicle in the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition in 2016-2017
In terms of the consideration of issues under the item 15 of Agenda XL ATCM, The issues of science, scientific cooperation and assistance, the Republic of Belarus considers it necessary to bring to the attention of the participants of the XL ATCM the conceptual information of sections 2 and 3 of this document and to inform the world Antarctic community about the experience of using of the portable remote-controlled pilotless underwater vehicle "GNOM" in the Antarctic in 2016- 2017 for the research of marine and freshwater flora and fauna.
1. The short description and technical characteristics of the unmanned underwater vehicle "GNOM"
Remotely controlled pilotless vehicle (hereinafter referred to as TBPA) "GNOM" (manufactured by the Shirshov Institute of Oceanology, Russian Federation) is a portable research device designed to conduct scientific research on marine and freshwater flora and fauna, on distribution and structuring of aquatic assemblages in the natural environment, on the implementation of observations of peculiarities of their behavior. TBPA "GNOM" is able to dive to a depth of 150 meters and move under water at a speed of up to 5.1 km / h with an underwater module weighting about 5 kg and a total size of 360x220x200 mm. For the extraction of biological samples, the device has a vane manipulator gripper. The weight of the entire research complex of TBPA "GNOM" (with a control unit and an electric generator) is approximately 30 kg. The device differs significantly from the available analogs with its smaller weight due to the use of composite materials of increased strength, a 3 mm diameter cable instead of the usual 8 mm (the reduction of the "water sail") and the presence of a magnetic clutch, reducing the friction during the diving. As a source of power for TBPA "GNOM" we used a gasoline generator "HONDA" with a power of 1 kW. TBPA "GNOM" in our configuration is equipped with a color video camera VM32EH-B36 with a resolution of 650 TV lines in a waterproof case, LED lights, a digital compass, a depth sensor, a petal manipulator, four electric motors with propellers, power and video cables, control unit with a color video monitor                (see Picture 1).


Picture 1 – The control of TBPA "GNOM" from the surface of fast ice at Lazurnaya bay at the coast of the East Antarctic

To control TBPA "GNOM" in the surface and underwater conditions, the joystick is used; the video signal from the camera is routed through the cable to the monitor and recorded in parallel to an external electronic carrier.
2. The conducting of in-situ research of marine and freshwater ecosystems in the 2016-2017
One of the scientific tasks of the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition in the season 2016-2017 was the implementation of in-situ studies of marine and freshwater ecosystems using the TBPA "GNOM", aiming at the determination of the qualitative and quantitative characteristics of the biota of these ecosystems and their reserves. It was shown that the use of the apparatus of this design in the Antarctic is possible under conditions of negative values of the temperatures of water and air. Its ability to operate in the range of air temperature from + 3°C to - 15°C was proved, water temperature from + 3°C to – 1,8°C, both from shore and from ice. At sea the device was submerged to the depth of 35 meters, although this model of TBPA "GNOM" is capable of conducting the research up to 150 meters or more (see Picture 2).


Picture 2 – The diving of TBPA "GNOM" under the ice
To make it easier to perceive and obtain a clear transmitted image of objects, various shelters protecting from direct sunlight were used on the monitor of the above-water control unit. The recorded image was recorded on an external storage medium (see Picture 3).
In total, in the season 2016-2017, due to the early destruction of fast ice, we were able to conduct only 6 dives using TBPA "GNOM" in the coastal part of the Cosmonauts sea (the area of the field camp at Vecherniaya mountain in the East Antarctic), as well as in the coastal part of the Commonwealth sea and the freshwater lake Progress (the area of Progress station in the East Antarctic). In the course of research, the samples of sea bottom flora and fauna – holothurian (Holothuroidea), polychaetes (Polychaeta), sea worms (Nemertea), sea urchins (Echinoidea), sea stars (Asteroidea), algae and others, as well as the representatives of marine life and flora, were selected using the metal lobe manipulator (see Picture 4).


Picture 3 – The image of the seabed on the video monitor of the surface control unit of TBPA "GNOM"

Picture 4 – Starfish extracted from the sea on the surface with the help of a vane manipulator-gripper TBPA "GNOM"
In case of a small mass of the object (sea urchins (Echinoidea), polychaetes (Polychaeta), small algae), the device, due to the operation of a pair of horizontal and a pair of vertical propellers can, at the command of the operator, deliver the sample to the surface or to the shore. In the case of capturing larger objects (Holothuroidea, starfish (Asteroidea), sea worms (Nemertea)) with the engines turned off or at 25% of their power, were pulled up to the ice or to the shore for a strong 3 mm cable together with the extracted sample. In particular, during the implementation of works at the Cosmonauts sea, in the area of Vecherniaya Mountain field camp, the participants of the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition carried out not only the working dive of the TBPA "GNOM" with the recording of the video image of the observed organisms on an external medium, but also seized the samples of individual representatives of marine flora and fauna surface. Examples of holothuria (Holothuroidea), several species of marine stars (Asteroidea) and hedgehogs (Echinoidea), marine worms of nemertea (Nemertea), seaweed of laminaria (Laminaria) were obtained in the coastal part of the Commonwealth sea (Nella bay).
When TBPA "GNOM" dived in the lake Progress at a depth of about 35 meters, it was first recorded that a representative of crustaceans Daphnia studeri is concentrated in mass quantities only in the bottom layer on the surface of algal-bacterial mats covering the bottom of the Antarctic lake. It was established that the resolving capacity of the “GNOM” video camera makes it possible to recognize the objects with a size of up to 2-3 mm. Together with the study of biological objects, other observations were made. The underwater shooting in the lake Progress made it possible, in particular, to discover the so-called terraces on the bottom, which, in turn, made it possible to speak about changing the boundaries of this lake during the past time.
In general, the use of TBPA "GNOM" enables the obtaining of representative information on the marine and freshwater coastal biota of Antarctica in the areas of scientific research, which makes it possible to assess not only the species diversity of these ecosystems, but also contribute to the assessment of their qualitative and quantitative characteristics.
3. Conclusion
In this document the practical experience of using TBPA in the Antarctic for scientific purposes is considered using the example of the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition. The study of renewable living resources in Antarctic waters with the assistance of TBPA significantly expands the possibilities of scientists in carrying out hydro-biological research in the Antarctic, as the use of light-diving equipment or controlled underwater vehicles in polar latitudes for these purposes is related to certain technical difficulties and high financial costs. So, it is impossible to find a diver in the water for a long time at low temperatures of sea water. There are also restrictions concerning the depth (as a rule, using the air mixture up to 60 meters) and the time of immersion (20-40 minutes). The difficulty to conduct such studies at great depths is also important, as well as during the southern polar night, which is related with low illumination. With the increasing depth of diving and in conditions of low ambient temperatures, the human physiological and psychological capabilities get significantly reduced. The use of small and easily transportable TBPA of the type, such as "GNOM", has no above-named disadvantages. The safety of underwater works significantly increases and the cost of such activities is significantly reduced. TBPA of this type are very convenient for conducting underwater inspections in hard-to-reach places due to their compactness, which positively distinguishes them from the more bulky and heavy devices of other systems and structures, makes it possible to carry out scientific research in the seas and deep lakes of the Antarctic practically at any time of the year and day, as these devices have autonomous lighting and, which is important, small overall dimensions and weight. The use of this type of TBPA significantly reduces the time of research and exploration works, makes it possible to inspect the object of research indefinitely for a long time and at the same time it performs the most detailed inspection, makes it possible to carry out the operative deployment of equipment in the field conditions of Antarctica and conduct underwater scientific research at any time of the year and day with the possibility to see all on-line information on the monitor screen and record it on an external electronic medium in the finished (processed) form. Using TBPA research complex of "GNOM" type requires a minimum number of personnel (1-2 people), it has a small weight, compact dimensions in the packing, it is easy to transport by land, air and sea. The speed of preparing the complex for work is important; the time of its deployment takes a few minutes. TBPA of this type can be used not only in scientific research, but also in emergency situations during search and rescue operations. In many cases TBPA can replace divers and ensure the implementation of reconnaissance and research works with greater safety and in a short time. The equipment of this type are suitable for estimating the stocks of commercial hydrobionts, for studying the behavioral features, the distribution and structure of clusters of representatives of aquatic flora and fauna in the natural environment and is a good addition for the research using hydrological, hydro-chemical and hydro-biological devices.
It is important that the use of this type of TBPA for scientific purposes in the Antarctic avoids harmful interference and significant changes in terrestrial (aquatic) and marine environment, the changes in the distribution, quantity or productivity of species or populations of marine and freshwater flora and fauna.
The practical results obtained in the Antarctic by the Belarusian researchers on the use of TBPA in addition to the traditional methods of hydro-biological research make it possible to significantly expand the capabilities of scientists in studying marine and freshwater biological resources on inaccessible depths and in inaccessible places, which will help to gain new knowledge about marine and freshwater flora and fauna of the Antarctic.

