





Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections: December 2016








Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections: December 2016
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In December 2016, Australian observers conducted an on-ground inspection of Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station (United States) and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 5 Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. This paper presents the Executive Summary of the inspection team’s report. The full inspection report is attached.  
Australia draws the attention of the CEP to the inspection team’s conclusion that ASMA No. 5 is operating effectively and achieving the management objectives for which it was designated, and that Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station was operating in compliance with the provisions and objectives of the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
Executive Summary of Inspection Report
On 20 December 2016 a team of three Australian observers conducted inspections of Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station (United States) and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 5 Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station.
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station
The inspection team found that Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station was operating at a very high standard and in compliance with the provisions and objectives of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection.  In all aspects of station operations there was a strong focus on the delivery of an ambitious and important science program.  A strong culture of safety and environmental protection was evident.  Despite the remote location which poses significant logistical challenges, it was clear that the station has been built utilising sophisticated and effective infrastructure suited for the environment.  It was also noted that the operating systems and management arrangements for the station are well placed to address the needs of those using the facilities. 
ASMA No. 5 Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station
The inspection team found ASMA No. 5 Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station was operating effectively and achieving the management objectives for which it was designated. In particular, the ASMA appeared to be an appropriate means of managing potential interactions between the scientific and operational activities of the United States Antarctic Program and the significant level of private and commercial non-governmental activity in the vicinity of the station. The ASMA management arrangements are somewhat complex, although effectively applied by personnel on the ground as a result of comprehensive procedures and awareness programs. It was also noted that the United States and Norway as ASMA Parties were continuing to work with other stakeholders to enhance the clarity and effectiveness of the ASMA management arrangements and that, to this end, a review of the management plan was currently underway.
Acknowledgements
The Australian observers were welcomed with warm hospitality at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. Australia extends its gratitude to the United States for their cooperation in the conduct of this inspection, including hospitality at McMurdo Station.  

Australia also gratefully acknowledges the assistance of France and Italy, and the personnel at Concordia Station for their provision of logistical support for the inspection activity. 
