





Japan’s Antarctic Outreach Activities








Japan’s Antarctic Outreach Activities
Workshop on Outreach
An Information Paper submitted by Japan
Summary
Ministry of the Environment of Japan organised a workshop on outreach to explain obligations when visiting Antarctica and guidelines for environment protection on October 31, 2016. It was aimed at travel agencies based in Tokyo that provide Antarctic tours. Many member of travel agencies attended the workshop.
Introduction
As one of the original signatories of Antarctic Treaty and a member of the Consultative Parties, Japan has proactively taken its responsibility. After approving the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes I to V, Japan has promoted environmental protection of Antarctica by enacting the Law Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica, to ensure its full compliance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.
In compliance with the Law Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica, the Ministry of the Environment, as a national authority, receives approximately 700 notifications yearly from Japanese national and non-Japanese national residing in Japan visiting Antarctica. Most of the visitors travel for tourist purpose. Taking consideration on growing number of tourists to Antarctica globally and an increase of the diversity of tourism in Antarctica, the Ministry of the Environment organised a workshop for disseminating the outline of environmental protection in Antarctica and required domestic legal procedures to the tourism industry. Workshop contents and relevant information on the Antarctic environmental protection, including educational material for children, are available on the website of the Ministry of the Environment.
Report on a Recently Held Workshop on Outreach
The workshop on outreach was held in Tokyo, the Japanese capital, on October 31, 2016. Major travel agencies in the Kanto region that provide Antarctic tours attended the workshop. The workshop included the following components.

    • The current state of Antarctic tourism
The number of Japanese tourists to Antarctica is around 700 yearly, even though the proportion of Japanese tourists has decreased due to the growing number of tourists worldwide.
    • The tutorial of the Environmental Protocol and the Law Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica as its domestic implementation
Detailed guidance of legal procedures was provided. Based on the Japanese law, any Japanese national and any non-Japanese national residing in Japan who plans to visit the Antarctic Treaty area is basically requested to submit a notification or an application to the Minister of the Environment prior to the visit. 
Either an individual is requested to submit a notification or an application depends on whether their intended activity is subject to authorisation or a comparable regulatory process by Parties to the Environmental Protocol. 
When the activity is subject to authorisation or a comparable regulatory process by other Parties, he/she is requested to submit a notification. In other cases, an application for approval of an Antarctic Activity Plan is requested. Once it is authorised by the Minister of the Environment, a certificate is issued.
    • Guidelines on visiting Antarctica / Further dissemination
Precautions when visiting Antarctica, especially when landing or watching wildlife, were explained, utilising existing guidelines adopted by ATCM or issued by IAATO. In order to raise awareness of environmental protection, Ministry of the Environment requested further cooperation in dissemination by the attended travel agencies to their customers.

