





Summary of the major research achievements of Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Environment Comprehensive Investigation & Assessment Program for the past five years since its implementation








Summary of the major research achievements of Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Environment Comprehensive Investigation & Assessment Program for the past five years since its implementation
Information Paper submitted by China 
Summary
This paper gives a summary of the major research achievements of Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Environment Comprehensive Investigation & Assessment Program for the past five years since its implementation in 2011 and hopefully promote scientific cooperation between China and other Parties.
Introduction
The Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Environment Comprehensive Investigation & Assessment Program (hereafter referred to as “the Program”) was set up in 2011 under the leadership of the Ministry of Finance and State Oceanic Administration of China. This is the first one of such Programs being set up in polar field in China. The Program completed the said comprehensive investigation and assessment work in key sea areas surrounding the Antarctic continent, key sea areas of the Arctic and nearby areas of Chinese Antarctic stations in a planned and step by step way by making full use of the polar research platform which is called “one vessel, five stations” for short and includes R/V Xuelong, the Great Wall Station, the Zhongshan Station, the Yellow River Station (Arctic), the Kunlun Station and the Taishan Station (Camp). There have 3 Arctic cruises and 6 Antarctic expeditions which were organized and conducted successively aiming to implement the Program and proudly set a new record for Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Expeditions in almost 30 years in terms of the number of expeditions, the task and content of expeditions, the number of expeditioners, the duration of expeditions, the voyage of expeditions, the coverage of study areas as well as the materials and samples obtained. It’s believed that the implementation of the Program achieves great successes and enrich the understanding of the Arctic and Antarctic. The major research achievements are listed as below. 
1.The multidisciplinary environment comprehensive investigation in sea areas surrounding the Antarctic continent was conducted which focused in sea areas adjacent to the Antarctic Peninsula, the Prydz Bay and in sea areas forming the western part of the Ross Sea. The first-hand marine environment information of sea areas surrounding the Antarctic continent has been mastered systematically and the analysis and assessment regarding to the environment conditions of key sea areas surrounding the Antarctic continent are proceeded by collecting and consolidating field observation data at home and abroad, satellite data and reanalysis data and by aid of methods such as data analysis and numerical simulation. New knowledge has been acquired in respect to the variation trend of Antarctic bottom water, the characters of water mass in the Prydz Bay, the Southern Ocean fronts, the statistical character of the cyclone and the long-term change of greenhouse gas, and evidence has been provided with regard to the observations of warming of Antarctic water mass, rising of temperature and rapid loss of sea ice in some sea areas. The understanding of paleoproductivity and paleoclimatic changes in the Prydz Bay and the Antarctic Peninsula, Ice-Rafted Debris (IRD) events and ice-ocean interactions, bottom current records in the Southern Ocean has been deepened. The characteristics of geologic structure of the continental margin basin of the Prydz Bay, the shelf sedimentary basin of the Ross Sea and the Bransfield Basin has been analyzed and evaluated, and the resulting environmental effect of the tectonic movement of the Antarctic plate has been assessed. 
2.The Antarctic continent environment comprehensive investigation and assessment, which focused in some areas of East Antarctic and West Antarctic and based on the Great Wall Station, the Zhongshan Station, the Kunlun Station and the Taishan Station (Camp), was selectively conducted. The research deepened the systematic understanding of the Antarctic continent environment conditions and its changing trend and made some breakthroughs in the study of Antarctic ice sheet and space science and ensured the protection of the Antarctic continent environment. The spatial variability of surface mass balance on the traverse from Zhongshan to Dome A has been assessed systematically on account of the recorded field data from Chinese Antarctic Inland Expeditions, and additionally the glacier movement has been observed on the traverse from Zhongshan to Dome A and in Dome A area. The comprehensive analysis and assessment of ice thickness, internal structure and subglacial topography on the traverse from Zhongshan to Dome A and in key areas reveal the main subglacial processes. The differences and similarities of auroral observation in Southern Hemisphere and Northern Hemisphere has been analyzed comparatively by making use of auroral observation facilities in the Zhongshan Station and the South Pole Station and combining with the result of land-based auroral observation in the Arctic and the satellite auroral observation data, and the two-peak structure of dayside ovals in Northern and Southern Hemispheres has been identified.
3.The multidisciplinary environment comprehensive investigation in the Arctic, which focused in the Bering Sea, the Pacific Arctic, the Central Arctic and the Atlantic Arctic, was conducted. The research systematically mastered the first-hand marine environment information of the Arctic and provided scientific basis for the comprehensive understanding of the rapid change mechanism of the Arctic and its impact on climate and environment of China, the development prospect of the Arctic passages and its environmental effect. The major research achievements of these studies include the finding of a seasonal halocline in the Arctic subsurface water depending on the observation materials in recent years. Subsurface warm water is a kind of oceanic phenomenon which was firstly noticed by the Chinese science community. The relatively comprehensive understanding of the character and formation mechanism of subsurface warm water has been recognized by making use of the data obtained over the years for the study of its long-term change. The reduction of sea ice cover in the Arctic result in strengthening the interaction of sea-ice-air in the atmospheric boundary layer of the Arctic, in particular, causing the increasing of air-sea heat flux and the descending of the stability of boundary layer. Over the past two decades, global warming and climate change have caused rapid changes in the ocean environment of the Arctic. Based on the data from the Chinese Arctic cruises for the past 16 years, it’s observed that Ocean Acidification (OA) is intensified and spread rapidly in the Chukchi Sea. The retreat of sea ice and early ice-melting in the Bering Sea area in the context of global changes lead to exceedingly decreasing of the distribution of cold water mass which prompt the succession of marine ecological community in subarctic waters and the alternation of carbon cycle mechanism (dynamics). The Chinese scientists discover that the plates circling the Arctic ocean located in relatively low latitudes during the Palaeozoic Era but have been drifting northwards since the Carboniferous (355-300 million years) according to the study of observation materials. 
4.China’s research on polar climate and global changes has been deepened, the understanding of the interaction and driving processes between polar and global climate system has been furthered, the role of the polar area in the process of global and China’s climate change has been studied, all of which provide scientific supporting for China’s decision-making in climate security, climate change diplomacy and relevant international conventions concerning the polar area. 
5.The studies on polar geopolitics, utilization strategies of polar resources, science development in the polar area, legal system to be applied to the polar area as well as China’s national polar policies have been carried out which fill the gaps in polar soft science research by Chinese scientists and provide decision-making references for the sustainable development of China’s polar research. 
6.There have 240 study reports compiled and 6 research books published and 12 invention patents and 5 utility model patents granted and 579 papers published (158 of them are included in SCI and 18 of them in EI) during the period of 2011-2016 thanks to the implementation of the Program.

