





The U.S. Antarctic Program Antarctic Infrastructure Modernization for Science Project









The U.S. Antarctic Program
Antarctic Infrastructure Modernization for Science Project
Information Paper submitted by the United States
The Antarctic Infrastructure Modernization for Science (AIMS) project focuses on modernizing the core infrastructure of McMurdo Station, the largest of three permanent stations operated by the U.S. Antarctic Program, and the critical support link to the U.S. Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station and deep-field research sites.  
High-level reviews of the U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) have been conducted approximately every 10 to 15 years since 1970, when, by presidential mandate, the National Science Foundation (NSF) was designated to act on behalf of the U.S. government as the single-point manager of the USAP.  The USAP provides infrastructure and logistical support for U.S. federal agencies and other organizations, including international partners, conducting research in the Antarctic region.  The NSF Office of Polar Programs maintains three year-round stations (McMurdo, Amundsen–Scott South Pole, and Palmer) on the continent, two ice-classed research vessels, more than 50 distributed field sites, and other research platforms.  The USAP, operating within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System and U.S. implementing laws, provides support for a wide range of scientific research conducted by universities and research institutions, as well as by other federal agencies and often in partnership with international collaborators.
The AIMS Project arose from a two-part, independent review of the USAP conducted from 2010 to 2012.  The first part was a U.S. National Research Council (NRC) study examining likely science drivers for Antarctic and the Southern Ocean research in the United States over the coming decades.  The report, Future Science Opportunities in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, was delivered in December 2011 (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/13169/future-science-opportunities-in-antarctica-and-the-southern-ocean).  The NRC envisioned that future science activity in the Antarctic region would entail new scientific directions, a broader geographic footprint, and increased international involvement to support observations that would advance understanding, and U.S. scientific leadership, in Antarctic and Southern Ocean research.  
The second part of the review, initiated in October 2011 by the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy and NSF, was a Blue Ribbon Panel (BRP) review to examine U.S. logistical capabilities likely to be needed in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean during the coming decades to achieve the scientific vision articulated in the NRC report, and to seek ways to enhance logistical efficiency to support world-class science.  The panel’s recommendations are published in the report More and Better Science in Antarctica through Increased Logistical Effectiveness (https://www.nsf.gov/geo/plr/usap_special_review/usap_brp/rpt/index.jsp).  The BRP was asked to identify and characterize a range of options for supporting and implementing the required national scientific endeavors, international collaborations, and strong U.S. presence in Antarctica.  They recommended numerous ways to more efficiently and cost-effectively support research while maintaining high standards of safety, and increasing the flexibility to support evolving areas of science in the future.
The BRP reported that U.S. activities in Antarctica are well-managed, but suffer from aging infrastructure, lack of a capital budget, and the effects of operating in an extremely harsh environment.  Among the recommendations of the BRP was a strong validation for the continued use of McMurdo Station as a critical research support location and hub to support the Amundson-Scott South Pole Station and deep-field research.  
From its beginnings in the late 1950s, McMurdo Station has grown out of necessity.  Originally a collection of some 34 temporary buildings, McMurdo today has more than 100 structures to support research, staff and infrastructure needs.  The cost of maintaining the current facilities at McMurdo Station is escalating as the facility ages.  The BRP report highlighted the need to modernize McMurdo facilities.  Specifically, the BRP recommended a major consolidation of the station campus, to include a complete restructuring of warehousing and logistics flow, as well as substantive improvements to station efficiency and quality of life for deployed personnel.  
The AIMS Project, once complete, will enable more efficient and cost-effective support of U.S. research in Antarctica.  AIMS planning is being conducted to ensure that redevelopment of McMurdo Station is done in a manner that is environmentally sound, safe, innovative, affordable, sustainable, and consistent with the Antarctic Treaty requirements, including environmental impact assessment.
The AIMS Project includes the following major elements:	
    1) Environmental and safety upgrades through replacement of supporting systems and infrastructure including utilities distribution for Fire Protection Water, Domestic Water, Heating, Power, Communications, and Sanitary Sewer.
    2) Comprehensive redeployment of McMurdo Station into a more compact, energy and operationally efficient facility optimized for support of local and deep-field science, through development of a Core Facility (see Figure 1) that combines and modernizes critical facilities including Centralized Services, Centralized Warehousing, Fire Station, Medical Facilities, Fitness and Skills Development, Field Science Support, and Industrial Trades.
Facility improvements proposed in the AIMS Project have been designed to enhance the ability for real-time outreach and educational activities on and off the ice.  The Core Facility proposed as part of the AIMS Project was specifically designed to greatly improve collaboration and interactions between researchers, students, and members of the McMurdo community through the consolidation of buildings and services central to the AIMS effort.  In addition, improvements to IT infrastructure will greatly improve the capabilities of researchers to develop impactful, real-time education and outreach activities for students and the general public as well as enhance scientific collaborations both on and off the ice.  
The proposed timeline for acquisition and construction for AIMS is expected to last nine years and budget permitting would commence in 2019.  The AIMS project schedule allows for integrated station operation and construction with every effort to minimize interference with science support.  
Figure 1 – Architect’s rendering of the core facility of the AIMS project

