





Report of the Informal Discussions on Historic Sites and Monuments





Report of the Informal Discussions on Historic Sites and Monuments 
Summary 
The present document contains the report of the informal discussions on Historic Sites and Monuments, held during the intersessional period 2010-2011 at the CEP web-based forum, under Argentina’s leading. 
Introduction
At the XIII CEP Meeting (Punta del Este, 2010) Argentina presented Working Paper 47 “Proposal for the discussion of aspects related to the management of Historic Sites and Monument”, which was complemented by IP 22, “Additional information for the discussion of issues associated with the management and operation of HSMs”. 
During their presentation it was suggested that discussion of a change in the strategy for dealing with HSMs was needed, both to evaluate the concept of what is considered to be “historic”, and to include the more holistic concept of ‘enhancement’, which encompasses protection, conservation and dissemination. Therefore, Argentina considered that further work was needed to develop practical, specific tools to ensure the protection of Historic Sites and Monuments. 
The Committee welcomed Argentina’s offer to lead informal discussions on these issues in the intersessional period, supported by the CEP web-based forum, with a view to reporting to CEP XIV, Buenos Aires, 2011 (para 203 CEP XIII Final Report).
The following Parties and Observers have actively contributed with comments to these informal discussions: Argentina, Australia, India, Norway, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay and ASOC. 
Summary of discussions
Issues discussed
Discussions on these issues were triggered by an analysis of the different approaches used to define the term “historic heritage”, when applied to the Antarctic context. In doing so, at a first stage participants were invited to:
a) provide examples of definitions of “historic (+cultural) heritage” included in the internal legal framework of their countries;
b) comment on the approaches used in their National Antarctic Programs when defining what is considered “historic (+cultural) heritage”, particularly if these go beyond the internal legal framework of their countries;
c) include comments on the existing definitions agreed for the Antarctic context. These may include gaps, inconsistencies, need for further clarifications, advantages, etc.; and/or
d) include any other reflection on these matters.
In a second stage, in the understanding that managing historic heritage implies a process with different stages, participants were invited to reflect on how best a differential status for a particular asset can be adequately recognized through the existing mechanisms available in the ATS for area/site protection. 
Outputs of discussions
Firstly, participants recognized the importance of discussing issues related to heritage in Antarctica, and the merit of paying a broader attention to them. It was also noted the potential these discussions had to contribute to the debate on the raised questions, which could be taken as a useful starting point for further deliberations on the topic in the future. 
The exchange of information on the different approaches used (both in the national and international domains) to define the term “historic heritage”, when applied to the Antarctic context, showed that a wide range of different conceptions of heritage existed among participants. 
Thus, some national legislation seems to be more focused on the concept of “Historic Site/ Monument”, where the material nature prevails over the symbolic nature and/or its function on those who propose its designation. Such approaches usually put more emphasis on the heritage’s age. and tend to highlight the participation of key people/events in the construction of the past. These can be more easily accommodated on a “protectionist” look of the heritage management. 
On the other hand, other national legislations seem to adhere to the notion of Historic / Cultural heritage. These approaches seem to stand closer to some of the visions and debates currently being held in the academic world, and recognize the symbolic, non-intrinsic value of heritage, including, inter alia, non tangible heritage, cultural landscapes and archaeological sites.
Such a perception of heritage management focuses on its “enhancement”, where the value of heritage lies on what it adds to present times, and on the link that heritage establishes between present and future generations. It was even noted that some legislation also speaks of the enjoyment heritage can provide to the quality of life. 
In summary, although these two approaches differ on the scope and range of the notion of heritage, which may have an effect on heritage’s Management, they share a common vision: that it is necessary to define what is to be protected/enhanced.  This is supported by the fact that all examples of legislation provided, define their subject of work. 
It was noted that, becoming more familiar with these different perceptions of heritage, allows for understanding the way heritage is managed by each Party in Antarctica, and the practices used to do it.   
Concerning the existing criteria to provide additional protection to Antarctic heritage, different opinions were expressed on the pros and cons of them. While some participants considered the existing criteria are open enough to accommodate different views on heritage, others viewed such a flexibility as a limitation, given that it does not allow for clearly assessing whether the object of protection has intrinsically a historic character or not. For example, for the former position, these criteria allow for sites of any age and symbolic or commemorative objects to be listed; while for the latter, a stricter understanding should be considered used as basis for the designation of HSMs, and commemorative objects should only be considered as elements of information about the site. Also according to this latter position, the historic value of a given asset is intimately related to the symbolic meaning it has for those who are proposing its additional protection, rather than to its material value. 
Although these views are different in nature, they can live together within the existing framework. However, as there seems to be room to reach agreements on new standards for the management of historical heritage, further discussions on these issues would certainly be beneficial. 
As an additional reflection on these matters, ASOC noted that the designation of sites or monuments of recognised historic value under Annex V, Art. 8 of the Protocol ensures the protection of historic remains, but that potentially this designation may have an environmental impact in that the elements that are awarded such designation are left in situ instead of removed as per requirements of Art. III of the Protocol.  According to this view, changes in the use of a site should be considered in an EIA under Art. 8 (3) of the Protocol.
Conclusions 
Progress made on the policies and practices on the management of heritage during the latest decades have been widely recognised. This would therefore require Parties to keep a permanent update on their own policies and practices on these issues, in order to adjust to such progress. The opportunity of having a space for discussion on the ATS website constitutes a concrete response to the relevance assigned by participants to debate on issues related to heritage in Antarctica. In this sense, these deliberations have been very fruitful and promising, and it would therefore be desirable to keep the momentum and continue this initial and very productive debate on this forum. 

