





Raising awareness of non-native species introductions: Workshop results and checklists for supply chain managers





Raising awareness of non-native species introductions: Workshop results and checklists for supply chain managers
Summary
Recognizing the high priority given to reduce accidental introduction of non-native species into the Antarctic area, the preliminary results of the IPY project “Aliens in Antarctica” were presented and discussed in a joint COMNAP/SCAR Workshop held in August 2010. As a result of those discussions, it was agreed that COMNAP and SCAR would work together to prepare the voluntary checklists for supply chain managers to reduce the risk of introduction of non-native species into the Antarctic region. COMNAP and SCAR encourage the CEP to consider inclusion of the checklists into the proposed “Non-Native Species Manual” which is currently under discussion.
Background
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) organised the COMNAP/SCAR Non-Native Species Workshop on 8 August 2010, in Buenos Aires, Argentina, which was convened by Dr. Yves Frenot. A report from that workshop can be found in attachment 1 to this Working Paper.
Outcomes
COMNAP took very seriously the discussions held during the workshop and noted, especially, the need to develop simple and inexpensive awareness tools which could be used by National Antarctic Program supply chain managers. Therefore, as a result, the COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) (9 – 12 August 2010, Buenos Aires, Argentina) agreed to produce voluntary and simple guideline cards or checklists for distribution to National Antarctic Program supply chain managers. 
This Working Paper presents the checklists for supply chain managers (see attachment 2), developed jointly by COMNAP and SCAR and distributed in early December 2010 by COMNAP as an immediate result of the workshop and AGM.
Various formats (brochure, poster and PDF) have been produced for ease of use, but content is essentially the same across these formats. The checklists were produced in English originally and have now also been translated into Spanish.
Recommendations
Consistent with the CEP Non-Native Species ICG 2010-2011Terms of Reference 1, under Prevention, Operational Procedures, Point 5: Prevention should focus on pre-departure measures within the logistics and supply chains, COMNAP and SCAR:
    • Request the CEP to note the high priority that COMNAP and SCAR have placed on reducing the risks of introduction of non-native species following the preliminary research findings of the IPY project “Aliens in Antarctica”; and
    • Request the CEP to consider inclusion of the COMNAP/SCAR checklists into the proposed “Non-Native Species Manual” which is currently under discussion.

