





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 127 “HASWELL ISLAND” (Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery on Fast Ice) Revised Management Plan 





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 127 “HASWELL ISLAND” 

(Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery on Fast Ice) 
Resume
The Russian Federation, on the basis of the recently received data and analysis conducted, reviewed the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 127 “Haswell Island” (Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery on Fast Ice) and concluded that only minor changes were required.  
The Russian Federation suggests that the CEP approve the attached Revised Management Plan for this Area.
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the Russian Federation conducted a five-year review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 127 “Haswell Island” (Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery on Fast Ice).
The Plan was reviewed in accordance with Annex V and the Guide for the Preparation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas Management Plans attached to Resolution 2 (1998). The section below contains a brief description of the proposed amendments included in the Management Plan.
The changes affected the document format and structure of subsection 6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features, which now includes data from observation and zoological research conducted in the last five years. The Area boundaries were not changed.  
Description of amendments to the Management Plan:
    • Subsection 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features now includes new information obtained by monitoring in the Area: 
    • on newly registered species of migrant birds (southern giant petrel Macronectes giganteus and brown skua Catharacta Antarctica lonnbergii);
    • on comparative dynamics of the emperor penguin population over the research period from 1956 to 2011;
    • on factors of negative impact on populations of certain bird species.
    • Section 8. Bibliography was updated and now includes data from four new sources. 
    • The text and structure of the document were subjected to minor changes, as required by the Secretariat in relation to the format of documents. 
Recommendation
The Russian Federation suggests that the CEP approve the attached Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 127 “Haswell Island” (Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery on Fast Ice).


ASPA No. 127 Haswell Island (Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery on Fast Ice) 
1) Is a new ASPA proposed? Yes/No

NO
2) Is a new ASMA proposed? Yes/No
NO
3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
YES
    • First designation:
Recommendation ATCM VIII-4 (1975)  SSSI №7 
    • First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation ATCM VIII-4 (1975)  SSSI №7
    • Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 3 (2001) (E) 
Measure 4 (2005) (E) 
    • Current management plan:
Measure 1 (2006)  
    • Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Rec. X-6 (1979) E 
Rec. XII-5 (1983) E 
Rec. XIII-7 (1985) E 
Rec. XVI-7 (1991) E 
    • Renamed and renumbered as ASPA No. 127 “Haswell Island” by Decision 1 (2002):
2006 
4) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
    •  major or minor?
Minor
    • any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
NO
    • any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
NO
    • any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
NO
    • any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
NO
    • Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
In accordance with new observation and research dataf, a description was clarified: p.6(ii) Natural features and p.8 Bibliography. 
5) If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area? Yes/No
NO
6) If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)? Yes/No
N/A
7) If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? Yes/No (If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.)
N/A

