





Timely Submission of Papers in Advance of ATCMs





Timely Submission of Papers in Advance of ATCMs
Working Paper submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States

Summary
ATCM and CEP can improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their work by including in their Rules of Procedure clear rules related to submission of papers in advance of ATCMs.  The most important innovation will be to provide firm deadlines for submission of Working Papers and incentives for meeting those deadlines. Such rules will help ensure that delegations have adequate time to prepare for discussions and that decisions taken by ATCM and CEP are consequently well-informed.

In the view of Germany and the United States, the late submission of meeting documents, especially Working Papers, constrains the ability of Parties to effectively prepare for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and the Committee on Environmental Protection.  The objective of this Working Paper is to define stricter rules for the timely submission of meeting documents.

Currently the submission of documents for both the ATCM and the CEP is regulated by Decision 3 (2009) (“Revised Guidelines for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and CEP” or “Revised Document Submission Guidelines”).  The current guidelines do not provide firm deadlines for the submission of documents, which has resulted in recent years in Working Papers being submitted for consideration by the ATCM immediately prior to its opening.  Late submissions such as these do not provide the Parties with adequate time to review and analyze the papers and negatively impact the efficiency and effectiveness of the work of the ATCM. 

Additionally, the Revised Document Submission Guidelines do not take into account the different categories of representation at the ATCM and the CEP, which introduces some ambiguities as to the ability of certain entities to submit certain types of documents.

    • Categories of representation at the ATCM: 
    • Consultative Parties (CP); 
    • Non-Consultative Parties (NCP); 
    • Observers (SCAR, COMNAP and CCAMLR) and 
    • Experts (as defined by Rule 31, those international organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica that have been invited by the ATCM to attend the Meeting (e.g., ASOC; IAATO; etc.))

    • Categories of representation at the CEP: 
    • Members: each Party to the Protocol;
    • Observer Rule 4.a: any Contracting Party that is not a party to the Protocol
    • Observer Rule 4.b: SCAR, COMNAP and CCAMLR
    • Observer Rule 4.c: other relevant environmental, scientific, or technical organizations that have been invited by the ATCM

Currently, six Non-Consultative Parties are CEP Members (Canada, Greece, Czech Republic, Monaco, Romania and Belarus), and as such, they are able to present WPs to CEP Agenda items (but not to ATCM Agenda items).

Therefore, currently, 28 CPs and 3 Observers can present WPs to the ATCM and 34 Members and 3 Observers (4.b) can present WPs to the CEP.

Taking into account the objective of imposing stricter procedures for the submission of meeting documents and addressing the abovementioned ambiguities, we propose the amendment of the Rules of Procedures for the ATCM and CEP as set out below and the adoption of a new common set of procedures for technical issues related to the submission, translation and distribution of meeting documents, including, for example, deadlines, translation requirements, and word limits.
We would welcome a discussion on these issues, and request that this proposal be placed on the agenda of the Legal and Institutional Working Group at the ATCM XXXIV. 
We propose three amendments/steps:
1)  Amend the ATCM Rules of Procedure to include a new section regarding the submission, translation and distribution of meeting documents:

Meeting Documents
1.  Working Papers shall refer to papers submitted by a Consultative Party that it wishes to be discussed in substance at a Meeting, including in particular any paper containing a proposal requiring action by the Meeting, and Reports and other documents relevant to matters contained therein submitted by an Observer.  

2.  Secretariat Papers shall refer to papers prepared by the Secretariat pursuant to a mandate established at a Meeting, or which would, in the view of the Executive Secretary, help inform the Meeting or assist in its operation.

3.  Information Papers shall refer to papers submitted by a Contracting Party, an Expert or an Observer that are intended to inform the Meeting but do not require detailed discussion or action. Information papers shall also include papers from a non-Consultative Party or Expert that are intended by the non-Consultative Party or Expert for detailed discussion.

4.  Procedures for the submission, translation and distribution of documents shall be established in a Decision taken by the ATCM.

2)  Amend Part IV, Rule 12 of the CEP Rules of Procedure, and: 

Part IV Meeting Documents 
Rule 12 
Working Papers shall refer to papers submitted by a Member that it wishes to be discussed in substance at a Meeting, including in particular any paper containing a proposal requiring action by the Meeting, and Reports and other documents relevant to matters contained therein submitted by an Observer as defined in Rule 4.b.  

Secretariat Papers shall refer to papers prepared by the Secretariat pursuant to a mandate established at a Meeting, or which would, in the view of the Executive Secretary, help inform the Meeting or assist in its operation.

Information Papers shall refer to papers submitted by a Member or an Observer as defined in Rules 4.a, 4.b and 4.c that are intended to inform the Meeting but do not require detailed discussion or action.  Information Papers shall also include papers from an Observer as defined in Rule 4.a or 4.c that are intended by the Observer for detailed discussion.

Procedures for the submission, translation and distribution of documents shall be established in a Decision taken by the ATCM.

3)  Replace the Revised Guidelines for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP –Decision 3 (2009) with new Procedures to be adopted in a Decision at the 34th ATCM. 

“Procedures for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP”
1.  These procedures apply to the submission, translation and distribution of official papers for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and for the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) as defined in their Rules of Procedure. 
2.  Documents to be translated, including Working Papers and Secretariat Papers, as well as Information Papers which a Consultative Party has requested be translated, shall be received by the Secretariat no later than 45 days before the Consultative Meeting; provided that such papers if received later than 45 days before the Consultative Meeting shall be translated for consideration by the Meeting if (a) the Consultative Party, CEP Member or Observer submitting the paper elects to compensate the Secretariat for the cost of the translation, and (b) the Chairman of an ATCM Working Group or the Chairman of the CEP, based on consultations at the Meeting, decides that translation of the paper is critical for the work of the Meeting.
3.  It is understood that Rule 2 is intended to apply to papers submitted in advance of a Meeting and is not intended to affect the translation of materials that are developed in the course of discussions of the Meeting and working groups. The Meeting may, in its discretion, allow consideration of any papers or materials that it determines are important for its work.  
4.  Information Papers for which no translation is requested should be received by the Secretariat no later than 30 days before the Meeting. Information Papers shall be taken as read in ATCM or CEP meetings, and thus need not be introduced formally.  
5.  Documents to be translated, i.e. Working Papers (with the exception of reports of Intersessional Contact Groups (ICG) convoked by the ATCM or CEP and Chair Reports from Antarctic Treaty Meetings of Experts), Secretariat Papers (with the exception of the Secretariat’s Report and Programme), reports submitted to the ATCM by ATCM Observers and invited Experts according to the provisions of Recommendation XIII-2 or in relation to Article III-2 of the Antarctic Treaty, and Information Papers which a Consultative Party has requested be translated should not exceed 1500 words. When calculating the length of a paper, proposed Measures, Decisions and Resolutions and their attachments are not included. 
6.  When a revised version of a paper made after its initial submission is resubmitted to the Secretariat for translation, the revised text should indicate clearly the amendments that have been incorporated. 
7.  Papers should be transmitted to the Secretariat by electronic means, and shall be uploaded to the Secretariat website. Papers shall be uploaded initially to the password protected portion of the website, and moved to the non-password protected part once the Meeting has concluded.
8.  No Working Paper, Information Paper or Secretariat Paper submitted to the ATCM shall be used as the basis for formal discussion at the ATCM or at the CEP unless it has been translated into the four official languages. 


