





Limitation of tourism and non-governmental activities to sites under Guidelines for Site Visits only




Limitation of tourism and non-governmental activities to sites under Guidelines for Site Visits only

Summary
The increase of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic raises the question of how it would be possible to limit environmental damage and guarantee personal safety. Thus, recalling its WP18 submitted at the 29th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XXIX), France wishes to submit to the ACTM a proposal aiming at limiting the number of sites where such activities may be conducted.
From this perspective, France submits a Resolution project aimed at urging persons in charge of tourism groups to visit only sites for which Guidelines for site visits have been drawn up.
The unused tool of regions of particular interest for tourism

Recommendation VIII-9 (1975), adopted during ACTM VIII, recognizes “the necessity to limit the number of sites where tourists are allowed to land in large numbers, in order to assess the ecological effects of their presence”. 
The same text recommended Consultative Parties “to invite all persons in charge of tourism groups, except in case of emergency,
    A) to visit only those stations for which an authorization has been requested and granted in accordance with Recommendation IV-27 
    B) to land only in regions of particular interest for tourism listed or defined in Annex B of the present Recommendation”. 
The content of this Annex B was to have been discussed at the time of ACTM IX (1977). However, even though the Recommendation has been put into effect, the discussion on the annex never took place, thereby preventing the concrete application of the recommendation. 
The expansion of tourism and non-governmental activities makes new regulations necessary. 
During ACTM IV (1966), the States adopted Recommendation IV-27 (1966), effective since 1968, which recommends that every tourism or scientific expedition should request and obtain, before any visit to an Antarctic base, the authorization of the State managing it.
Since the seventies, tourism and non-governmental activities have increased significantly in the Treaty area. In order to ensure personal safety and protection of the environment, new rules, some more restrictive than others, have been adopted.
Quantitatively, it has been decided to limit the number of passengers on shore at any one time. In this way, Measure 15 (2009) – not yet effective – requires, in the case of a vessel carrying 500 passengers or fewer, the number of passengers ashore in the Treaty area to be limited to 100, unless a lower number is specified in applicable ACTM measures.
Qualitative measures have also been adopted, such as Resolution 7 (2009) which includes the following among the principles used to guide future works on tourism and non-governmental activities: that decisions taken on this matter must be based on a “pragmatic and cautious approach”; that scientific research is granted priority over tourism; that States should adopt and apply regulations creating a tourism management framework; and that operators must cooperate to coordinate their activities and share best practices.
In future, it might be of interest to apply “spatial” measures, in order to limit the increase in the number of sites receiving tourists.
Specific protection in relation to tourism for the ASPAs and ASMAs
The objective of Annex V to the Madrid Protocol is reinforced protection and management of certain areas by instituting “Antarctic Specially Protected Areas” (ASPAs) and “Antarctic Specially Managed Areas” (ASMAs).
Access to an ASPA is forbidden except when a permit has been issued in pursuance of the Management Plan (Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol). Access to ASMAs does not require a permit, but activities there are ruled by a code of conduct established in accordance with the Management Plan (articles 4 and 5 of Annex V to the Protocol).
In WP10, relating to Guidelines for the application of management spheres in Antarctic specially managed areas and Antarctic specially protected areas submitted to ATCM XXXIII (2010), the United States recalled that the Guidelines for the application of management plans for spheres included in ASMAs and ASPAs allow for the possibility of creating “tourism areas” and “visitors’ areas” in the ASMAs and ASPAs. The creation of such areas amounts to an acknowledgement that some of the listed sites have a particular interest for the organizers of tourism and non-governmental activities.
In this context, and following the reasoning which led the Parties to adopt Recommendation VIII-9 (1975), it would be interesting to identify the areas which organizers of tourism and non-governmental activities would favor.
Protection of sites subject to guidelines controlling visits
The consultative Parties have established that “some specific sites provide the principal focus for visitors” and that these “sites are, to varying degrees, visited frequently by tour operators, thereby increasing the potential for visitor-related pressures at such sites”. Upon this basis, they adopted Resolution 5 (2005) in relation to the Guidelines for site visits. Here, the States have shown their will to control the most visited and most sensitive sites. 
Then, in Resolution 1 (2010), the Consultative Parties declared that they were “convinced that the guidelines for site visits reinforce the provisions stated in Recommendation XVIII-1 related to guidelines […] for those who organize and conduct tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica”, and said they “wished to increase the number of guidelines for site visits”.
The guidelines for site visits are prepared first and foremost for the most-visited sites and must be regularly reviewed. Also, following the above-mentioned Resolutions, the landing of tourists could be restricted only to sites subject to such guidelines, the list of which would be reviewed regularly during ATCMs. This would contribute to an improvement in personal safety and a better understanding of damage to the environment, making it easier to introduce follow-up programs on all sites with guidelines.
However, restricting visits to such areas would not mean authorizing landings there automatically. It would remain indispensable to remind the organizers of tourism and non-governmental activities that they would still be required to respect the restricting rules, especially those relating to environmental impact assessments as well as the applicable national regulations.
Proposals
In view of the above, France proposes, by means of a Resolution, to urge persons in charge of tourists, except in case of emergency, to land only at sites subject to Guidelines for site visits. To this end, France also suggests that the CEP should update the list of sites benefitting, or which should benefit in the coming years, from such guidelines, and consequently work on drafting a set of guidelines.




Proposal for Resolution XX (2011)

The representatives,
Considering the increase in tourism visits to Antarctica which has occurred since the adoption of the Environmental Protocol, and which is still continuing;
Committed to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment;
Aware of the responsibilities of the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to ensure that all activities undertaken in Antarctica are pre-planned to minimize any impact on the Antarctic environment;
Committed also to ensuring that all activities undertaken in Antarctica are conducted as safely as possible;
Noting a range of previous instruments in relation to tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica, including Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994) Tourism and non-governmental activities, Measure 4 (2004) Insurance and Contingency Planning for tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, Resolution 4 (2004) Guidelines on contingency planning, insurance and other matters for tourism and other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, Resolution 4 (2007) Marine tourism in the Antarctic Treaty area, Resolution 5 (2007) Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty area and Resolution 7 (2009) General principles of tourism in Antarctica;
Recalling Recommendation IV-27 (1966) recommending that any visit to a station by a tourist or non-scientist must obtain prior authorization issued by the managing State;
Recalling that access to ASPAs is subject to a permit and that visitor access to sites of interest for tourism within an ASPA must comply with the regulations established in its Management Plan;
Recognising that properly managed tourism can enhance public appreciation of the intrinsic values of Antarctica;
Noting Resolution 5 (2005), Resolution 2 (2006), Resolution 1 (2007), Resolution 2 (2008), Resolution 4 (2009) and Resolution 1 (2010) that adopted lists of sites subject to Guidelines for site visits; 
Recognising the need to limit the number of sites where tourists are allowed to land, in order to better assess the ecological effects of their presence; 

    1) Recommend to their respective Governments to urge persons in charge of tourism groups, except in case of emergency, to land only at sites subject to “Guidelines for site visits” adopted on the basis of Resolution 5 (2005);
    2) And call on the CEP to revise the list of sites benefitting, or which should benefit in the coming years, from such guidelines. 

