





The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the Jang Bogo Antarctic Research Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica





The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the Jang Bogo Antarctic Research Station, Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica

Working Paper Submitted by the Republic of Korea

1. Introduction
The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (Draft CEE) for the construction and operation of the Korean Jang Bogo Station in Antarctica has been carried out by Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) and Korea Environment Institute. The Jang Bogo Station is proposed to be built in the coastal area of Terra Nova Bay in Northern Victoria Land along the Ross Sea. Its coordinates are 74°37.4´S and 164°13.7´E. The Draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998) and the Korean domestic law, ‘Act on Antarctic Activities and the Protection of Antarctic Environment’. The guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, ATCM XXVIII, 2005) were also consulted. The Korean government has endorsed the Draft CEE.
2. Circulation of Draft CEE
The Draft CEE was released by KOPRI and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade on 15 February 2011. The notification of the report was sent by Diplomatic Note to all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. And e-mail notification was sent to the CEP chair. CEP chair was also informed about circulation of the document to the members. For the discussions, non-technical summary (Annex A) of the document is being submitted as a Working Paper to be translated into four-treaty languages to the CEP. The English language version of the full draft CEE may also be available for download from http://www.kopri.re.kr/english/ and http://www.antarctica.go.kr. Full text on the Draft CEE for the construction and operation of the Korean Jang Bogo Station at Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica shall also be made available in CDs. In addition, the Korean delegation will provide a poster about the Draft CEE at ATCM XXXIV.
3. Non-technical summary
The non-technical summary from the draft CEE is attached at Annex A. This summary describes the need for the proposed activity, station design concept, alternatives, the local environment and the predicted environmental impact. It recommends preventive and mitigation measures and outlines gaps and uncertainties. The Republic of Korea has concluded that the global scientific importance and value to be gained by the construction and operation of Jang Bogo Station, and the operation of the research facility in the Terra Nova Bay, outweighs the more than minor and transitory impact the station will have on the Antarctic environment and fully justifies the activity proceeding.
4. Further information
The Republic of Korea welcomes comments and feedback on the Draft CEE. If you would like to make comments and requests for further information about the Jang Bogo Station, please contact:
Dr. Young-Joon Lee
CEE project manager
Korea Environment Institute
290 Jinheung-ro, Eunpyeong-gu, Seoul, 122-706, Korea
E-mail: yjlee@kei.re.kr   http://www. kei.re.kr
Tel: +82 2 380 7763      Fax: +82 2 380 7744

Dr. Yeadong Kim
Overall project manager for the Jang Bogo Station
Korea Polar Research Institute
7-50, Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon, 406-840, Korea
E-mail: ydkim@kopri.re.kr   http://www.kopri.re.kr
Tel: +82 32 260 6007        Fax: +82 32 260 6079

