





Guidelines for the north-east beach of the Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island), King George Island / Isla 25 de Mayo, South Shetland Islands





Guidelines for the north-east beach of the Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island), King George Island / Isla 25 de Mayo, South Shetland Islands


Presented by: Chile and Argentina

Abstract
After the adoption of guidelines for sites in virtue of Resolution 5 (2005), Chile and Argentina, having received and considered the comments received from the interested Parties during the last intersession period, have re-drafted the guidelines for the north-east beach of the Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island), King George Island / Isla 25 de Mayo, South Shetland Islands, presented at CPA XII and XIII for the administration of visits to this site, and recommend that they should be considered at CPA XIV for approval by ATCM XXXIV. 
Introduction
The Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island) (62º 13’ S; 58º 54’ W) is located off the south-west coast of King George Island / Isla 25 de Mayo, to the east of the Fildes Peninsula, facing Fildes Bay/ National Guard (Maxwell Bay).
The drafting of these guidelines is a response to the terms of the Management Plan of ASPA 150 (Ardley Island), approved by Measure 9 (2009), which in its “Management Activities” section indicates that “New standards for the management of tourism in the northern section of the island, not included in the boundaries of the ASPA, will be developed as Guidelines for Visitors to the Antartic Treaty Area. The objective is to ensure that the visits carried out are in strict compliance with the Management Plan and with the protection of its values, given its adjacency to ASPA No 150”.
In recent years, tourism activity at the site has increased. Recreational visits by personnel from the stations located in the vicinity of the Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island) are usually frequent during days off, principally because of the proximity of the bases to the Fildes Peninsula (approx. 1 km). 
After delegates from Argentina and Chile visited the site in the 2008/09 Antarctic Season, in order to corroborate existing information and confirm the possible measures to be considered, draft Guidelines were prepared with format and content in accordance with Resolution 2 (2006). This document was presented at ATCM XXXII, but withdrawn after various observations were received from some Parties. Something similar occurred at ATCM XXXIII, where again no consensus could be reached. On this occasion therefore a revised version is presented, after a series of exchanges with the Parties which had made observations during ATCM XXXIII. In the preparation of the present draft guidelines careful consideration has thus been given to each of the comments received in the intersession period 2010/11.
According to Resolution 5 (2005), which originally adopted the “Guidelines for site visits”, as well as the successive resolutions which have adopted guidelines for new sites in subsequent years, and bearing in mind the fact that the Final Report of CPA IX considered that it is appropriate to carry out site checks and draft guidelines for those for which none exist, as per the established formats, with the knowledge provided by tourism operators, Chile and Argentina present this revised version of guidelines for the administration of visits to the north-east beach of the Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island), King George Island/Isla 25 de Mayo, South Shetland Islands, for the consideration of CPA XIV and approval if appropriate by ATCM XXXIV.
It is therefore proposed that:
    • the north-east beach of Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula) be included in the list of sites for which Guidelines exist which have been approved by all the Parties, and 
    • that the Secretariat should publish the guidelines for the north-east beach of Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula) in its website and in print, as it has done with guidelines for sites which have already been approved by the Treaty Parties.


