





Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities (DFCA) – Impacts of underwater sound to Antarctic waters –





Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities (DFCA)
– Impacts of underwater sound to Antarctic waters –

1. Introduction
In 2005 the Netherlands and Germany developed a proposal to establish a discussion forum to promote informal contacts between competent authorities of Antarctic Treaty Parties, for the benefit of the implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Environmental Protocol, EP). That proposal was outlined at ATCM XXVIII IP15 Establishment of an Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities. 
The Committee endorsed the establishment of the ‘Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities’ (DFCA) and agreed that the DFCA could operate using the Internet, through the online CEP Discussion Forum. Since the CEP VIII meeting, a specific DFCA website has been established with the support of Australia. The DFCA started its work at the end of 2005.
In order to bring the DFCA forward as a useful working tool for all competent authorities, a Workshop was held in Berlin, Germany, in autumn 2006 (see ATCM XXIX IP43 Start of the Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities (DFCA)). This workshop dealt mainly with information exchange and addressed topics like national procedures for assessing/authorizing activities in Antarctica or possibilities to co-ordinate the assessment/authorizing process in the case of multilateral activities. Its results were presented at ATCM XXX IP19 International Workshop of Antarctic Competent Authorities.
Over the last years increasing concern on the impacts of underwater sound on the marine environment has been raised internationally, which lead to the 1st International Conference on “The Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life” in Nyborg 2007 and the 2nd in Cork 2010. Among other things they identified the importance of noise as an issue to be regulated and fostered intensive and controversial discussion about possible protection thresholds. However, the CEP did not discuss impacts of underwater sound to Antarctic waters since  2007 (see ATCM XXIX WP41 SCAR Report on Marine Acoustics and the Southern Ocean or ATCM XXX IP80 Taking Action on Marine Noise in the Southern Ocean).
To date, the DFCA did not turn out to be the anticipated working tool. Thus, it might make sense to give fresh impetus to this forum by discussing relevant aspects regarding the evaluation of activities that introduce anthropogenic underwater sound in Antarctic waters as the EP does not provide sufficient guidance regarding this issue. 
2. Background
Anthropogenic underwater sound poses a new kind of threat that raises concern for marine ecosystems worldwide. In 1991, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) recognised that noise pollution from ships may adversely affect the marine environment. The OSPAR Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic recognised noise as a form of pollution that may cause a threat to the environment in its Commission Meeting in 2004 and published a paper on this issue in 20091.
In 2006 the United Nations Secretary-General Report on Oceans and the Law of the Sea noted the increasing concern among scientists that noise pollution poses a significant and, at worst, lethal threat to marine life including fish. The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) adopted a resolution in 2005 that identified marine noise as a potential threat to cetaceans. Two European regional agreements (ASCOBANS2 and ACCOBAMS3) were concluded under the auspices of CMS. Both have identified ocean noise pollution as a major threat to cetaceans. The NATO Undersea Research Centre (NURC) developed rules and procedures to mitigate risks for marine mammals at sea trials involving underwater sound. Their procedures were developed to prevent the risk even of temporary hearing impairment (temporary threshold shift, TTS) for marine mammals.
The European Union includes underwater noise in the definition of “pollution” in its 2008 Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD). In 2010 indicators for noise were developed that consider the proportion of days in a year in which anthropogenic noise exceeds harmful levels. In addition, ocean noise pollution is covered indirectly by the Habitats Directive, which prohibits all forms of “deliberate disturbance” of protected species like e.g. cetaceans. 
Several Contracting Parties of the Antarctic Treaty have (or are in the process to have) regulations or guidelines in place to deal with this issue at the national level. Below a few examples of national regulations or guidelines are listed:
    • The Australian Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act) protects certain marine mammals. They developed guidelines under their EPBC Act, which considers e.g. interactions between offshore seismic exploration and whales (EPBC Act Policy Statement 2.1, September 2008). These define precaution zones for protected species, depending on the adherence of a threshold of 160 dB (SEL4) for a single sound event in a distance of 1 km that should prevent the onset of TTS. 
    • In the USA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is currently developing acoustic guidelines that will include procedures for assessing acoustic effects under the Marine Protection Act (MPA) and the Endangered Species Act (ESA). Interim thresholds have hitherto been used as a mitigation standard to protect whales from sound levels that may cause behavioural disturbance (160 dB (SPL5)) or injury (180 dB (SPL)). These interim thresholds are for the time being applied in domestic permits and consultations.
    • The UK developed the first national guidelines for seismic surveys. They first came in place in 1995 and have last been updated in 20106 to include recent amendments of the EU Habitat Directive. According to this Directive injury and significant disturbance need to be avoided. 
    • The Netherlands use temporal restriction and introduced a ban on pile-driving during key reproductive periods to prevent interference to vital habitats and to avoid detrimental impacts at sensitive times of year.
    • In Germany permits for pile-driving demand that a threshold of 160 dB (SEL) is met for a single sound event in a distance of 750 m to prevent harmful interference as is manifested in behavioural change or hearing impairment like TTS.
The discussions in previous years made clear that globally thresholds and procedures to protect marine species from harmful underwater sound vary noticeably and are debated controversially within the scientific community. However recent findings as e.g. discussed at the 2nd International Conference on “The Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life” in Cork 2010 showed that considerable progress has been made in understanding the impacts of underwater noise in the last years. 
Any activity in the Antarctic authorised by a competent authority of a Contracting Party needs to be in compliance with domestic law; hence the development of national policies, guidelines and regulations referring to the impacts of underwater sound will affect the implementation of the provisions of the EP and might lead to nationally different conclusions as to how an activity is evaluated. 
3. Cause for action 
Following an extensive discussion about the use of hydroacoustic devices in the previous years, Germany issued for the first time in the Antarctic season 2009/2010 a permit for the use of airguns in the Antarctic Treaty area. The permitting process raised several questions regarding the evaluation of the significance of their possible impacts and therefore, would have been a prime example to discuss within the DFCA. Germany would have regarded an informal consultation about this evaluation in the DFCA as a valuable opportunity to compare and learn from each other interpretations and approaches. 
4. Invitation to the second Workshop of the DFCA
In order to bring the DFCA forward as a working tool in general and in its evaluation of anthropogenic underwater noise in particular a meeting of representatives for competent authorities could be of value. 
Therefore Germany offers to host a 2nd Workshop of the DFCA in Berlin, Germany, in autumn 2011. The purpose of this event is to better consider Parties’ individual opinions on the impact of anthropogenic underwater sound on the assets to be protected under the EP of the Antarctic Treaty. The workshop should foster the information exchange and could address the following topics: 
    • National procedures for assessing and/or authorizing activities in the course of which anthropogenic underwater sound (e.g. by ships or scientific procedures) is introduced into Antarctic waters, 
    • National experience with mitigation measures: What measures do other Parties take? Which impacts have to be mitigated domestically? 
    • Co-ordination of the assessment and/or authorizing process in the case of multilateral activities in the course of which anthropogenic underwater sound is introduced into Antarctic waters. 
    • How is the term ‘molest’, as included in the definition of ‘taking’ of native individual mammals or birds or ‘disturb’ as referred to in Annex 2 of the EP, implemented nationally by the individual parties? Are there concerns related to possible cumulative impacts of anthropogenic underwater sound and are there approaches to integrate this aspect in the national assessment process? 
In addition to clarify regulatory considerations, the workshop could also identify further scientific and technical aspects that would be beneficial for competent authorities to evaluate acoustic activities in compliance with the EP. Subsequently these aspects could be discussed in depth in 2012 (e.g. at a workshop with experts of SCAR’s acoustic group, CCAMLR’s scientific Committee or ASOC).
5. Recommendations
We recommend that the Meeting:
    1. accepts Germany’s offer to organise the Workshop of Competent Authorities as outlined above. 
    2. invites Germany to present the results of this Workshop at the next CEP meeting as well as up-load it at the web-based DFCA.


