





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land



Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand conducted a five yearly review of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley. 

In the 2010/2011 season, a site visit was conducted to ensure the reason for which the Area was designated continues to serve its purpose.  In addition, the glacier boundary location, lake edge and meltwater streams were assessed in relation to potential changes due to climate change, and in collaboration with Antarctic freshwater ecologists, a vegetation survey was also conducted to ensure the algal biodiversity of the Area is well characterized. 

The revised draft Management Plan was circulated for comment to scientists with both the United States Antarctic Programme (USAP) and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme who conduct research in the Area and have visited the site recently. In addition, the USAP environmental team was consulted.

The input received was used with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998), when considering revisions to the Management Plan. 

The revisions are outlined in the table below.
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley.

ASPA No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 12 Canada Glacier
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 3 (1997) SSSI No. 12 Canada Glacier management plan revised
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2006)  
Current management plan: 
Measure 1 (2006)  
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-7 (1991) Extension of expiry date of SSSI No. 12 Canada Glacier be extended to 31 December, 2001.  
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes, only minor. 
The northwest corner of the Area was previously described as the point where, ‘a large rock marks the northwest corner of the Area (77° 36.434' S 162° 59.772' E: Map B). The rock is situated on a small knoll at an elevation of 220m, approximately 300m from where the glacier emerges into the Taylor Valley.’  
A site visit could not locate the large rock. Instead, this boundary coordinate was revised to be, ‘the point where the stream flows from the glacier and snow field, through a conspicuously narrow gap in the moraine (77° 36.42’ S, 162° 59.69’ E).’
This point is obvious from either an uphill or downhill perspective, as the area must be crossed in order to follow the track over the glacier to the Lake Hoare Camp Facilities Zone. Anyone walking over the Area at this point avoids inadvertent entry to the area and is able to cross the stream without entering the stream by following the moraine.
All other coordinates are now defined and included in to the management plan text.


One boundary of the Area is the Canada Glacier. This boundary was mapped and is not expected to change over the next 5 years. Another boundary is defined as the shore line of Lake Fryxell. All lakes in the Dry Valleys are rising and we are keeping this under review.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes
Map A - revised to provide regional reference to nearby ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys Facilities and Visitor Zones and alternative helicopter landing sites.
Map B – removed from management plan and replaced with revised Map C.
Map C – revised to include boundary changes, cairn locations and other site features (e.g. mummified seals, old hut sites, walking tracks, stream course, etc.)
Figure 1 - removed from the management plan as the image does not show any more information than what is show in Map A and B.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
A more complete description of the boundary has been provided, including GPS reference points for boundary cairns and other significant locations.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
Minor editorial amendments have been made throughout the Management Plan. 
Under Section 3 Management Activities the wording of some bullet points have been revised to be more concise and two bullet points regarding marking of the helicopter landing pad have been removed to discourage helicopter activity within the ASPA.
A site visit in the 2010/2011 season by a freshwater botanist resulted in a revised description of the vegetation within the flush area and evidence of past human activity in the area.
Section 6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area and Section 7(i) Access and movement within or over the Area has been reworded and reference to nearby ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys Facilities and Visitor Zones and alternative helicopter landing sites has been included within the text to discourage helicopter landings and camping within the ASPA when nearby localities are available.
Under Section 7(ix) provisions have been included to encourage lodging of metadata into the Antarctic Master Directory System. 
A literature review as well as a site visit was conducted to update the information within the Management Plan. In addition, scientists who frequently visit the Area and the USAP environment team were consulted in the review process.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a 
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a 
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a

