





Report of the CEP Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas. Montevideo, Uruguay, 16-17 June 2011





Report of the CEP Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
Montevideo, Uruguay, 16-17 June 2011
Working Paper submitted by Australia and Uruguay
Summary
The CEP Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas was held at Club Naval in Montevideo, Uruguay, from 16-17 June 2011. The Committee is invited to consider the recommendations arising, which are outlined in this Working Paper. The full workshop report is presented separately as an Information Paper. 
    1. Background
At CEP XIII (2010) the Committee endorsed a proposal by its Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) to convene a workshop to exchange best practice and work towards producing guidelines for preparing management plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs).
The CEP Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas was hosted by the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute at Club Naval in Montevideo, Uruguay, from 16-17 June 2011. It was co-convened by Juan Abdala (Uruguay) and Ewan McIvor (Australia), and involved seventeen participants representing eight CEP Members and two CEP Observers1. 
The aim of the workshop was to review how the ASMA designation is currently working, with a view to exchanging best practice and developing guidelines for the preparation of marine and terrestrial ASMA management plans.
The terms of reference for the workshop were:
    1) Share good practice by examining common issues arising and lessons learnt from different approaches to site management in Antarctica, and drawing upon relevant approaches to the management of multiple use areas elsewhere.
    2) Develop guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans.
    3) ScopeIdentify the characteristics of potential new ASMAs.
    4) Prepare a report for CEP XIV.
The workshop addressed these terms of reference through a series of presentations, break out groups, and open discussion sessions. Related documents and presentations can be accessed from the workshop page on the CEP workspace: http://www.ats.aq/e/cep_workspace/cep_workspace.htm
    2. Outcomes and recommendations
The full workshop report is presented separately as an Information Paper.
Participants agreed that the ASMA mechanism plays an important and useful role in the framework established under the Protocol to achieve comprehensive environmental protection in Antarctica. The workshop was a useful first step in considering a range of matters relating to the use of ASMAs as a management tool, and to good practice in the management of ASMAs.
Discussions touched on a range of matters of interest to the CEP including, but not limited to: non-native species; cumulative impacts; human footprint; environmental monitoring; cooperation between Parties and cooperation with other organisations; management of historic sites; visitor management; marine spatial management; and education and outreach. 
The following recommendations were developed for consideration by the CEP, with a view to assisting to enhancing the management of existing ASMAs and the further application of the ASMA mechanism, as appropriate:
    1) To help disseminate information about existing ASMAs, the CEP should request the Secretariat to establish links from the ATS website to ASMA websites, where available.
    2) The CEP should promote further exchange of information on good practice in ASMA management. In particular, ASMA Management Groups could be encouraged to share information regarding initiatives that may be of broader interest for application in other ASMAs.
    3) The CEP should seek to identify opportunities to draw on COMNAP’s broader experience and responsibilities to help facilitate cooperation and coordination in the development, implementation and management of ASMAs. In addition, the CEP could seek to draw on SCAR with respect to scientific activities, IAATO with respect to tourism activities, and SC-CAMLR with respect to good practice in the identification, management and monitoring of marine areas.
    4) The CEP should encourage interested Members to review the provisions of existing ASMA management plans, with a view to preparing a suggested work plan and supporting materials to support work by the SGMP to develop guidance for establishing ASMAs and for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans.

