





Early Warning System for Antarctica of the arrival of waves generated by earthquakes



Early Warning System for Antarctica of the arrival of waves generated by earthquakes

The world has recently suffered a number of large-magnitude seismic events (earthquakes), some of which have generated large waves (tsunamis) which are propagated across oceans for thousands of kilometres, reaching the coasts of distant continents.
Although the areas of high seismic activity and the conditions under which earthquakes generate tsunamis are well known by scientists, it is nevertheless impossible to predict exactly when and where earthquakes will occur.
Today there is a system of buoys which serves to establish an early warning system when tsunamis are generated. In addition, scientific institutions such as NOAA produce and publish numerical models for calculating the estimated arrival time of these waves for every point on the planet. However, the graphic representation of these models on planispheres does not usually show Antarctica, probably because it is considered that the coastal population density there is very low.
Considering that the majority of the bases in Antarctica are coastal, and that a broad spectrum of scientific, logistical and even tourism activities are being carried out, generally in coastal areas, it is very important to make available information from the models of the arrival time of tsunamis along the Antarctic coast. 
 It is likewise a known and surprising fact that Antarctica is not considered to be a highly seismic continent. Nevertheless high-magnitude earthquakes have been recorded in recent years with their hypocentres below the seabed in the Antarctic region (e.g. earthquake in the South Orkney Islands in 2007), or close to it (e.g. earthquake in the region of the South Sandwich Islands in March 2011) which generated or had the potential to generate tsunamis. For this reason it would be desirable to have precise information on the areas of seismic risk in Antarctica and a risk assessment for the arrival of tsunamis along the Antarctic coast, both those generated by earthquakes in other parts of the planet and those occurring in Antarctica itself.
With respect to the record of seismic activity in Antarctica, the Argentine Republic together with Italy operates ASAIN (Antarctic Seismological Argentine-Italian Network), which supplies data in real time (ORFEUS system) to the Global Seismographic Network; these data could be used in a system such as is proposed.
Proposal:
    • It is therefore proposed that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat should contact the institutions which produce the numerical models on the possible arrival times of tsunamis to request that they extend their information to the coast of Antarctica.
    • At the same time, a request should be made to SCAR to draw up a report on the risks associated with earthquakes and tsunamis on the coast of Antarctica.
    • Finally, COMNAP could be asked to provide an analysis of the risks to Antarctic bases and operations and to establish an early warning system for the arrival of tsunamis along the coasts of Antarctica.


