





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Supervision of Antarctic Tourism





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on 
Supervision of Antarctic Tourism
Summary 
The present document contains the Final Report of the ATCM Intersessional Contact Group, convened by Argentina, tasked by ATCM XXXIII (Punta del Este, 2010) to reflect the various concerns raised by the Meeting in relation to the variety of mechanisms currently available within the Antarctic Treaty system (ATS), and their implementation by Parties, for ensuring more appropriate supervision of tourism on board cruise ships, small vessels and yachts, taking into account the existing varying conditions across Antarctica.
Background
After the presentation of WP 48 Supervision of Antarctic Tourism, by Argentina, the ATCM XXXIII decided to establish an open-ended ICG based on the ATCM Discussion Forum on the Secretariat website. 
The following terms of reference were agreed for this group: 
    • Considering recommendation 2 from the ATME on ship-borne tourism and drawing on existing checklists for inspections set out in Resolution 5 (1995) and Resolution 4 (2008) and any relevant practical experience, consider the development of a separate checklist to support inspections under Art. VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol, regarding tourism and non-governmental activities;
    • Identify any issues related to the inspection of tourism and non-governmental activities, under Art. VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol, and suggest likely ways to facilitate more such inspections in the future; 
    • Gather and analyse information about existing and previous tourism and non-governmental “observer programmes” in the Antarctic Treaty area, and examine the need and identify potential options to enhance the observation of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica; and 
    • Submit a report to the ATCM XXXIV (Buenos Aires, 2011).
Argentina agreed to be the convenor of the ICG and to submit a report to the ATCM XXXIV (Buenos Aires, 2011). 
The ATCM invited interested Observers and invited experts to the ATCM, to submit information documents to the ICG (para 240-241 ATCM XXXIII Final report).
The following Parties and observers have actively contributed with comments to this ICG: Argentina, Australia, Japan, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, IAATO and ASOC. 
Summary of Discussions’ outputs
Term of Reference #1: 
- Consider the development of a separate checklist to support inspections, regarding tourism and non-governmental activities
There was agreement within the ICG that the primary aim of an inspection of a tourist activity should be to assess whether the activity is being conducted in a manner consistent with the Treaty, the Madrid Protocol and related instruments agreed at ATCMs. 
The ICG recognized the value of Checklists A and B to support the conduct of inspections. Regarding the latter, the ICG particularly noted that it was valuable for guiding inspections of vessel operations, irrespective of their type (logistic, tourism), as all vessel-based activities in Antarctica should be inspected on a consistent basis. Some participants also considered that minor adjustments to Checklist B would contribute to more adequately cover yacht Antarctic operations. Given the limited time available for the ICG to discuss this issue, it was proposed that one option might be to defer consideration of this issue to any future review of checklist B.
Concerning Checklist A, some noted that it already addresses tourist and other non-governmental activities conducted at or very near stations. Others considered that such a section is primarily aimed to National Operators running Antarctic stations, rather than to Tourist operators. 
Several participants have provided sound reasons to consider the need of having a separate checklist to support inspections under Art. VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol, regarding tourism and non-governmental activities. These were mainly focused on the fact that the existing suite of inspection checklists agreed within the ATS (i.e. Resolution 5,1995; Resolution 4, 2008; and Resolution 3, 2010) is not entirely suitable for assessing a range of in-field tour activities. In particular, some participants stated that little guidance is available with respect to inspecting landings ashore, and activities that are not ship-based.
In this sense, it was pointed out that observers of recent tourism inspections had actually requested complementary information pertinent to tourism activities beyond existing checklists.
These opinions therefore concluded that given that the idea of a checklist is to assist (but not prescribe) the conduct of an inspection, a discrete module for the inspection of in-field activities would be a useful addition to the existing suite of inspection checklists. 
However, other participants remained unconvinced of the need for a new, separate checklist for inspecting tourist and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica, basically because, in their opinion, Inspection Checklist A and B already cover ship-borne tourist and other non-governmental activities. 
Despite these diverging opinions, a draft module of questions covering visitors’ activities from ships and yachts in landing sites was prepared based on models provided by Parties and on existing IAATO internal provisions. This draft module, attached to this document, considers those regulations in place under the Treaty, the Madrid Protocol and related instruments agreed at ATCMs. Some participants also think that there would be value in recording any other (non-ATCM endorsed) strategies or practices used by tour operators to support safety and environmental protection, apart from those stemming from the ATCM. Such records would help Parties to better understand how tourism activities are being conducted.
IAATO highlighted that any likely further agreement on tourist checklists should take into account that visits to sites can be performed by all kind of visitors, including tourists, NGOs, and National Antarctic Programs.
Further work would be needed to ensure these questions are appropriately targeted and clear, which could perhaps be pursued if this approach found favor within the Plenary. Although agreement on this issue is yet to be achieved, the inclusion of this module on this document would in the meantime help those Parties planning to undertake inspections or observations to sites visited by tourism in the future. Finally, it was also recognised that further work would be needed to adequately address inland, non-ship activities, as these have to deal with a very different set of circumstances, compared to those associated to landings from ships and yachts.
Term of Reference #2: 
- Issues related to the inspection of tourism and NGO activities and how to facilitate more such inspections in the future
Some participants stated that, given the current magnitude of Antarctic tourism in terms of the number of people, ships, and sites involved, it would make sense that tourism became the focus of inspections to a greater degree than hitherto. It was noted that if Parties conducted more in situ observations of tour activities, a reliable database on these activities would be gradually built up. However, the limitations of existing inspection mechanisms to achieve a comprehensive coverage of activities at all sites used by tourists were also noted. A specific limitation was related to the fact that accessing in-field activities for inspections is logistically challenging. In this sense, a participant pointed out that deploying tourism-only inspection teams would not be an effective use of increasingly scarce national resources, given the financial cost of undertaking an inspection.
Finally, the distinct nature of inspections/observations and environmental monitoring was highlighted. 
- Likely ways to facilitate more such inspections in the future
A number of suggestions for enhancing and increasing the number of tourism inspections/observations were presented during the ICG discussions. These included, inter alia, deployment of inspection teams to focus solely on tourism activities, deployment of inspectors to one site to conduct repeated inspections of tourism landings, and designation as inspectors of people who are on-site for other reasons. 
In this respect, a participant considered that using station personnel to observe/inspect tourist activities/operations does not seem feasible since these personnel are already fully engaged in the work of the station and undertaking this role. It was also admitted that collecting information in this way would be restricted to some sites only. 
Finally, it was recognized that collecting representative data at one site to conduct repeated inspections of tourism landings would be highly resource demanding, especially considering the fact that one would require a data series covering at least 10 years to ensure a representative monitoring. 
Term of Reference #3: 
- Gather and analyze information about existing and previous tourism and non-governmental “observer programmes”
Participants provided useful information on their own experiences on tourism and NGO “observer programmes” in Antarctica. Thus, placing National Antarctic Program (NAP) observers on tour ships (in cooperation with the operator) under their supervision was regarded to be a very positive experience. In particular, IAATO noted that they believe strongly in the observer process, indeed they are in the process of enhancing their own observer program. It was mentioned that such programs allow Parties to fully assess tourist activities during a complete trip (covering both on board and in-field activities), provided in situ management feedback and promoted mutual understanding between the tour operator and the National Antarctic Program. 
In the other hand, it was pointed out that a 4-year observer program for regulated tourist vessels was eventually discontinued because it was viewed as non-cost effective, given that tourist misbehavior was rarely observed and no gross violations were noted. 
Examples of single and joint inspections of tourist activities (vessel and yacht-based) in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty and Protocol were also provided. 
Finally, the use of existing agreed tools (including inspection checklists, ASMA and ASPA management plans, and EIAs conducted as part of the authorisation process) has been considered useful to guide such observers programs. 
- Examine the need and identify potential options to enhance the observation of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica
Potential options to enhance the observation of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica were identified within the ICG. These included, for instance, arrangements between IAATO members and individual NAPs, through “observation by invitation” schemes; and bilateral agreements between NAPs, which may comprise mutual exchange of observers, and invitation to join observation schemes in place. 
In this respect, it was noted that no impediments exist either to any Party (or group of Parties) choosing to conduct inspection/observation activities in these ways, or for tourism operators and Parties to make arrangements between themselves for the placement of observers on vessels. These approaches would seem to require no ATCM endorsement, as Parties can proceed to pursue them if they regard them as a priority. 
Conclusions 
The ICG recognized the importance of inspection and observation schemes, as they can provide Parties with independent information about the on-ground conduct of activities, which will supplement (but not be a substitute for) information obtained from environmental assessment processes, information exchange, reports by Parties and Experts to the ATCM and CEP, and from documented industry practices and procedures (where applicable). Such schemes would also allow for mutual learning experiences for those being inspected and for the Parties conducting the inspection, which would eventually result in the achievement of higher standards for both regulation and management of Antarctic tourism. Notwithstanding this, the ICG acknowledged that the implementation of these inspection and observation schemes poses a variety of challenges for National Antarctic Programs. 
Participants of the ICG value the opportunity to discuss issues connected to supervision of Antarctic Tourism and remain open to further discussions on these.  


