




Follow-up to the unauthorized presence of French yachts within the Treaty area and damage caused to the hut known as Wordie House 

*	*
*
Observations on the consequences of the affair

Follow-up to the unauthorized presence of French yachts within the Treaty area and damage caused to the hut known as Wordie House 

Damage caused in 2010 to Wordie House hut led to the launch of administrative and legal proceedings which will end in sanctions being taken against the perpetrators. This affair has also resulted in the French authorities examining ways to improve the Antarctic information system so as to limit the risk of unauthorized activity being carried out within the Treaty area, as well as questions of jurisdiction and evidence-gathering in Antarctica.
1. Background

On 11 January 2010, two French nationals were discovered in Wordie House hut (HSM 62, Argentine Islands)1 by British workers from the United Kingdom Antarctic Heritage Trust (UKAHT). The British workers noted that damage had been caused there, apparently by the French nationals. 
They were crew-members from two vessels sailing under the French flag (the Esprit d’Equipe and the Eclipse) moored off the site.
It transpired that these vessels had not submitted a preliminary environmental impact assessment, either with the competent French authority or with any other national authority, thereby infringing Article 8 and Annex 1 of the Madrid Protocol. 
French law brought in to implement the Antarctic Treaty penalizes the carrying-out of any undeclared activities in the Antarctic. Offenders are liable to administrative and criminal sanctions2. 
2. Applicable law and sanctions incurred 

The French Environmental Code provides that the competent administrative authority (the Préfet of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands) may give a warning (administrative sanction) to any person who is shown to have carried out activities incompatible with the Madrid Protocol and with French law. All authorizations are then refused on these grounds for a period of five years.3
Carrying out an unauthorized activity in Antarctica is punishable by imprisonment and fine4 (criminal sanction). 
3. Progress made - administrative procedure 

An administrative inquiry was launched by the competent French authority (TAAF - French Southern and Antarctic Lands) :

    • The Esprit d’Equipe : the skipper was within the Antarctic Treaty area for commercial purposes. According to him, this was the second year he had been in the area for this reason.  This crew was heard in person.
    • The Eclipse : the boat is on a round-the-world trip over several years. Touring the Antarctic peninsula was one stage of this voyage.  The skipper confirmed he has no intention of returning. 

After this inquiry, the Préfet of the TAAF issued a warning to the skipper of the Esprit d’Equipe, by letter dated 29 October 2010. The organizer of expeditions on the Esprit d’Equipe will be unable to obtain an Antarctica activity authorization from France for a period of five years. 
No administrative measures have been taken against the Eclipse at this stage as the captain has not been able to attend an inter partes hearing, owing to his round-the-world trip. 
4. Progress made - legal procedure

In accordance with the French Code of Criminal Procedure, the administrative inquiries and the evidence relating to them were transferred to the Regional Court in Paris which is hearing this case. The case is currently awaiting judgment and France will inform the ATCM of the outcome.
5.	Confusion stemming from Chile issuing “Formulario condiciones de Zarpe de la embarcacion”

The skipper of the Esprit d’Equipe maintained in his defence that he had received from the Chilean authorities in Puerto Williams (Directemar-Armada de Chile) a document entitled Formulario condiciones de Zarpe de la embarcacion.
This document cannot replace an authorization for activity within the Treaty area as stipulated in the Madrid Protocol, as it appears to be simply a cruising permit to depart Chile. Its issue seems likely to cause a degree of confusion on the part of skippers. Clarification of the scope of the authorization afforded by this document at the time of its issue would eliminate this uncertainty. 
6. Recent developments in the affair

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office has informed the French authorities that the Esprit d’Equipe has apparently again been active  in Antarctica. The yacht is said to have put in at Port Lockroy at the beginning of 2011, as reported by the UKAHT on the internet (http://www.ukaht.org/diaries/11Jan15.html):
“Port Lockroy is a natural sheltered harbour, and we have seen an incredible number of yachts here in the bay […] Amongst the yachts visiting this week, we welcomed […] Esprit d'Equipe […]”.
In light of this information, a new administrative inquiry is underway. It is likely to lead to a renewed reference to the Regional Court in Paris. The penalties incurred (imprisonment and fines) are set out in Article L.713-5 of the Environmental Code.

In the event of a repeat offence, French law (Article 132-8 ff of the Penal Code) provides for more severe criminal sanctions. 


Conclusions

1)	The Wordie House incident has shown that national authorities can struggle to stay informed about whether the same operator has been granted or refused an authorization for activity within the Treaty area by the authorities in one or several other States. 

Certain information is available on the Secretariat website. Searching by the criteria listed on the ‘summarized reports’ page is an efficient means of identifying impact assessments submitted under Article 8 of the Madrid Protocol. This allows declared activities to be searched on the basis of three criteria: Complete List, where activities are listed by State, operator, or finally by landing site. 

However, the ‘summarized reports’ page would be usefully enhanced by further search criteria by vessel and by aircraft, allowing a Party to readily satisfy itself as to the conformity or otherwise of the activity of a vessel or aircraft in terms of declaration and authorization requirements. 

Even so, this process only covers activities which have been declared by the Parties via direct input onto the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES). Several consultative Parties continue to fulfil the requirements by entering a hypertext link to a file.  The information contained in this file cannot be integrated into the EIES and so cannot be retrieved by a search using the criteria referred to above.

This limits the usefulness of searches undertaken to establish whether the activities of an operator comply with the obligations arising from Article 8 of the Madrid Protocol. In the absence of a procedure being put in place such as that proposed by France in WP 34 presented to the ATCM XXXI (Kiev), it would therefore be helpful if these Parties were encouraged to use the EIES by directly inputting onto the ATS website in order that activity authorizations granted to operators are regularly updated online. The ATCM might also consider introducing the inclusion on the SEEI of authorizations refused to operators.

2)	The French judge trying the Wordie House case must be able to base his judgment on an official record and legally-binding evidence, that is to say that has been gathered by persons legally authorized to do so. Testimonies from the UKAHT employees who discovered the French nationals and the damage caused were taken by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, who then sent them to the French authorities. These testimonies do not constitute binding evidence and may be challenged by the accused. In this particular instance, the persons concerned spontaneously acknowledged the facts before the administrative hearing, which gets around this difficulty. If this had not been the case and/or if the persons in question were now to renege on their statements, the judge would need to be able to officially gather the testimonies of the British employees, even though the facts occurred a year and a half ago.

A question therefore arises with regard to evidence-gathering (testimonies and other types of evidence) in the particular conditions of Antarctica and, should the need arise, the possibility of the courts of a State recognizing official documents drawn up by agents of a third party State. 

If the Consultative Parties deemed it appropriate, the ATCM would have the legal means to adopt measures relating to questions of jurisdiction, based on Article IX 1(e) of the Antarctic Treaty which gives it the ability to adopt “measures regarding […] questions relating to the exercise of jurisdiction in Antarctica”. 

Recommendations to the ATCM

Based on the above, France recommends to the ATCM:
    • That the EIES includes a ‘by vessel’ and ‘by aircraft’ search facility to allow for swift determination of whether or not an activity has received an authorization;
    • That the EIES includes refusals of authorization; 
    • That grants and refusals of authorization are updated regularly online on the EIES so that this information is available to the other Consultative Parties practically in real time;
    • That the Consultative Parties engage in discussions about the difficulties stemming from the exercise of jurisdiction in Antarctica and in particular the gathering of legally-binding evidence and testimonies. 
