





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island




ASPA No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 2
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 2
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2004)
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 122, Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XIV-4 (1987), Resolution 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000) 
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 122, Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
SCAR Recommendation XXIII-6 (1994)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. Minor corrections to ensure consistency between maps and text.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A



Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 122
Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island

    1. Arrival Heights was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 2 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) due to its value as an electromagnetically quiet site for the study of the upper atmosphere. The current Management Plan reaffirms the high scientific value of the Area for study of the upper atmosphere and for other scientific programs. Despite some increases in electromagnetic interference (EMI) from activities in the vicinity, research within the Area appears to operate within acceptably low levels of EMI and the aims and objectives set out in the management plan for Arrival Heights therefore remain relevant.
    2. Several minor revisions to the boundaries of the Area are made in the current Management Plan. The south-eastern corner of the Area is now defined Trig T510 No.2, which replaces, and is 0.7 m from, the former boundary survey marker (T510) which no longer exists. The western boundary has been revised to follow the 150 m contour more precisely, which is based on improved contour data for the Area. The northern boundary has been revised on the maps so that it now follows the rim of Second Crater.
    3. The changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    a. A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area and the reasons for designation.
    b. (Section 1) New values related to relatively undisturbed landscape features were identified and added to the description of Values. Scientific values related to the electromagnetically quiet conditions were expanded. Updated information on potential sources of EMI within the Area was added, and it is noted that EMI studies are on-going.
    c. (Section 3) A requirement was added that the relevant national authority should be notified in advance if potentially disruptive activities are planned close to the Area.
    d.  (Section 5 – Maps) Recent installations (SuperDARN and satellite receptors), permanent ice extent and recreational trails were added to Maps 1 and 2, and the protected Area boundary was updated for consistency with the boundary description. The Crater Hill wind turbines were added to Map 1. Scientific installations (antennae, scientific equipment and meteorological stations), survey markers and air access guidance were updated in Map 2.
    e.  (Section 6 (i)) The south-eastern corner of the boundary was revised to Trig T510 No.2 (77° 50' 08.4" S, 166° 40' 16.4" E) as the former boundary point (T510) no longer exists. 
    f. The description of the Area was comprehensively revised and updated to reflect changes in activities, recent scientific research, and the installation and removal of structures.
    g. (Section 6 (ii)) A new section was added to describe access to the Area, to maintain consistency with other recently adopted management plans.
    h.  (Section 6 (iv)) Updates were made to reflect the structures that currently exist within the Area. The old New Zealand laboratory was recently removed and replaced, and a new VLF antennae was added. The SuperDARN Antennae Array and several satellite receptors have recently been installed close to the Area.
    i.  (Section 7) Minor revisions were made to the wording of the permit conditions in order to maintain consistency with other recent management plans.
    j. (Section 7 (i)) The requirement for visitors to leave vehicles at the ‘Glacier Road’ intersection was removed and specific guidance was added on vehicle headlights and cabling within the Area.
    k. (Section 7 (ii)) Activities with educational aims have been included.
    l. (Section 7 (iii)) A clause has been added that the planning, installation or modification of nearby structures or equipment outside of the Area that emit electromagnetic radiation should take into account their potential effects on the values of the Area. To maintain consistency with other recent management plans, text has been added placing the responsibility for removal of redundant structures on the authority granting the permit for their installation.
    m.  (Section 7 (v)) The wording on taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna has been updated to maintain consistency with recently adopted management plans.
    n. (Section 7 (vii)) To maintain consistency with other recent management plans, a provision was added to notify the appropriate authority of items removed from the Area that were not introduced by permit holder.
    o. (Section 7 (x)) To maintain consistency with other recent management plans, a provision was added that the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken, and / or of any materials released and not removed, that were not included in the authorized permit.
    p. Recent relevant references were added to the plan.
    4. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.


