





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Terms of Reference #1 to #3: Review of Draft Management Plans





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Terms of Reference #1 to #3: Review of Draft Management Plans
Working Paper submitted by Australia on behalf of the SGMP
Summary
In accordance with its Terms of Reference #1 to #3, the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) reviewed one draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) management plan referred by the CEP for intersessional review. The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan prepared by the United Kingdom, Chile and Spain for ASPA 126 Byers Peninsula.
    1. Background
During the 2010/11 intersessional period the SGMP was comprised of 19 members, including representatives from Argentina, ASOC, Brazil, Chile, China, Germany, IAATO, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Netherlands, Norway, Romania, SCAR, South Africa, United Kingdom and United States. The group was convened by the CEP first Vice-chair, Ewan McIvor from Australia.
Discussions took place by correspondence, using the CEP Discussion Forum and email.
This Working Paper reports on the SGMP’s activities under Terms of Reference #1 to #3:
    1) Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan to consider, in consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
    • whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5, and with relevant CEP guidelines;
    • its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness;
    • whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation; and
    • whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole. 
    2) Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.
    3) Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing so. The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans and the information required by the ATCM’s Legal and Institutional Working Group.
The SGMP’s activities under Terms of Reference #4 and #5 are detailed in a separate Working Paper Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Terms of Reference #4 & #5: Improving Management Plans and the Process for Their Intersessional Review.
    2. Review of the revised draft management plan for ASPA 126, Byers Peninsula
At CEP XIII (2010) the United Kingdom, Chile and Spain presented WP43 Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 126, Byers Peninsula, Livingstone Island, South Shetland Islands. As reflected in paragraphs 150 and 151 of the Final Report, the CEP agreed with the proponents’ proposal to refer the revised draft management plan to the SGMP for intersessional review. The SGMP’s review of the management plan was coordinated by SGMP members from the United States.
On 18 June 2010, the SGMP convener issued an invitation to all CEP contact points to submit comments on the draft management plan. No comments were received.
In its initial advice to the proponents, in September 2010, the SGMP noted that special protection has been afforded to components of the Byers Peninsula area since the 1960s, and that the management provisions have evolved over time. The SGMP concluded that, with the modifications proposed, the management plan submitted to CEP XIII as WP 43 would adequately address the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines, and was likely to be effective in guiding management of the Area.
The SGMP’s full advice is available on the Discussion Forum. In particular, the group recommended a number of structural amendments to the management plan, and improvements to the maps, and sought clarification regarding:
    • the functions and operation of the proposed International Coordination Committee;
    • the description and location of key features, including restricted areas/zones, vegetated areas, wildlife colonies, sites of historic significance, the location of the International Field Camp, the helicopter landing site, and access routes between these sites;
    • the primary reason for designation; and
    • options other than a moving boundary to provide for possible climate change implications for protecting the values of the Area.
In April 2011 the proponents provided an updated draft management plan and a separate document explaining its responses to the SGMP’s advice. The SGMP concluded that the updated draft management plan was well written, of high quality, and adequately addressed most of the points raised in its earlier advice. The proponents made further changes to the text and maps to address minor outstanding issues.
The resulting final revised draft management plan is presented in Attachment A to this Working Paper. Introductory comments and a coversheet prepared by the proponents are presented at Appendix 1.
    3. Advice to the CEP
The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the revised management plan prepared by the United Kingdom, Chile and Spain for ASPA 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingstone Island, South Shetland Islands (Attachment A).
Appendix 1. Introductory comments by the United Kingdom, Chile and Spain
Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 126
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands 
    1. Byers Peninsula was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No.10 through Recommendation IV-10 (1966). The primary reason for the designation of Byers Peninsula as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) is to protect the terrestrial and lacustrine habitats within the Area.  
    2. Designation as an SPA was terminated through Recommendation VIII-2 and revision of the boundaries and re-designation as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) was made through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975, SSSI No. 6).  Following a proposal by Chile and the United Kingdom, the SSSI was subsequently extended through Recommendation XVI-5 (1991) to include boundaries similar to those of the original SPA. The Management Plan was further revised through Decision 1 (2002), which re-numbered the Area as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.126, and Measure 1 (2002). The grounds for protection described in the existing management plan remain valid. 
    3. The substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    i. Introduction. An introduction was added to outline key features of the Area, including the location, the reasons for designation and information on the protection of the Areas since 1966.
    ii. Description of values to be protected.  This section has been revised and values relating to archaeological remains and Jurassic and Cretaceous strata for palaeontological research have been added.
    iii. Aims and objectives. Addition of the aim to prevent or minimise the introduction to the Area of alien plants, animals and microbes.
    iv. Management activities.  A paragraph has been added describing the vulnerability of the Area to cumulative human impact.  Nations working within the ASPA are strongly encouraged to liaise with one another to ensure cumulative environmental impact is kept to a minimum. Parties are also strongly encouraged to use the established International Field Camp to reduce the creation of new camping sites that would increase levels of human impacts within the Area
    v. Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features. In this section, the boundary has been revised to include a substantial area of Rotch Dome, to ensure scientifically important newly exposed ice-free ground resulting from any retreat of Rotch Dome, will be within the boundaries of the ASPA.  The coastal boundary has been changed to include the near-shore marine environment extending 10 m offshore from the low tide water line, to prevent disposal of solid human waste in the sea below the low tide mark.
    vi. General description.  Information has been included to explain how the area fits within the wider Antarctic protected area systems and the Environmental Domains analysis.
    vii. Access to the Area. This section has been added to the Management Plan.  In particular, aircraft access guidelines have been clarified in line with the ‘Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds’ contained in Resolution 2 (2004).  A helicopter landing site has been designated.
    viii. Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area. An International Field Camp has been designated on South Beaches, and visitors to the Area are strongly encouraged to camp here to avoid environmental impact at other locations.
    ix. Restricted and managed zones within the Area. Two new restricted zones have been designated to permit future metagenomic studies of microbial diversity and colonization processes.  The restricted zones are (i) Ray Promontory and (ii) northwest Rotch Dome including adjacent de-glaciated ground.  Within these zones, higher standards of quarantine measures are to be employed. 
    x. Access to and movement within the Area.  Aircraft access guidelines have been moved to the section on Access to the area.  A requirement has been added that pedestrian traffic be managed to ensure minimum impact upon vegetation. In particular, creation of new tracks should be avoided by careful management of numbers of people transiting over the Area.
    xi. Activities which may be conducted in the Area.  Archaeological research has been added to the list of activities that may be conducted in the Area.
    xii. Installation, modification or removal of structures.   This section has undergone general revisions including the requirement that structures or scientific equipment brought into the Area should be free of organisms, propagules and non-sterile soil, and be made of materials that can withstand the environmental conditions and pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. It also contains the requirement that structures and scientific equipment installed within the Areas shall be clearly labelled and be free of non-native organisms to the maximum extent practicable.
    xiii. Location of field camps.  Parties are encouraged to camp within the immediate vicinity of the International Field Camp.
    xiv. Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area.  Requirement that release of radio-nuclides or stable isotopes directly into the environment in a way that renders them unrecoverable is to be avoided.  The biosecurity requirements have also been updated, including the need to take precautions to prevent the accidental introduction of animals, plant material, micro-organisms and non-sterile soil from other biologically distinct regions (within or beyond the Antarctic Treaty area).  
    xv. The collection or removal of materials not brought into the Area by the Permit holder.  The requirement has been added that removal of artefacts from the Area is only allowable under permit and that the appropriate national authority should be notified of any newly discovered artefacts.
    i. Disposal of waste.  All solid human waste is to be removed from the Area and liquid human waste must only be disposed of in the sea. 
    ii. Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan can continue to be met.  A requirement has been added that the GPS positions of long-term monitoring sites should be submitted to the Antarctic Data Directory Service through the appropriate national authority and that footwear, clothing and equipment should be thoroughly cleaned to reduce the risk of non-native species introductions.
    xvi. Maps.  Map 2 has been completely revised to show new features including the new ASPA boundary, restricted zones, International Field Camp and designated helicopter landing site. 
    xvii. Requirements for reports.  This section has undergone general revision, including the inclusion of the request that the national authority should also forward a copy of the visit report to the Parties that proposed the Management Plan, to assist in managing the Area and reviewing the Management Plan.
    xviii. The management plan has been reformatted to conform with the draft revised ‘Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’ and to maintain consistency with wording in plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
    xix. Supporting information Revisions have been made to most sections (Annex 1).

Minor changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    i. Renaming of the Bibliography as Supporting documentation.
    ii. Numerous minor typographical corrections
    iii. Supporting documentation.  Several new references have been added
Appendix 2. Coversheet prepared by the United Kingdom, Chile and Spain

ASPA No. 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 10 through Recommendation IV-10 in 1966
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 1 (2002)
Any revisions to management plan:
Rec. VIII-4 (1975)
Rec. X-6 (1979) (E) 
Rec. XII-5 (1983) (E) 
Rec. XIII-7 (1985) (E) 
Rec. XVI-5 (1991) 
Measure 3 (2001) (E) 
Measure 1 (2002) 
Current management plan: 
Measure 1 (2002)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands 
ASPA 126
Other relevant measures:

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Map 2 redrawn
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The description has been updated to reflect new boundaries.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Two Restricted Zones have been added within ASPA No. 126.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A


