





Report of the open-ended intersessional contact group on revision of environmental elements of Recommendation XVIII-1




Report of the open-ended intersessional contact group on revision of environmental elements of Recommendation XVIII-1 
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
CEP XIII established an open-ended intersessional contact group, convened by Australia, to: review existing environmental advice to visitors; develop revised and updated guidance; and consider how the CEP might best assess new site guidelines and periodically review existing guidelines.  This ICG continued the work of an ICG established by CEP XII.  The ICG developed updated guidelines for visitors based on Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994), but in a format suitable for use as a generic cover to accompany site specific guidelines.  The guidelines are presented for consideration by the CEP, together with a draft Resolution for adoption by ATCM.  Several issues left unresolved in the ICG’s discussions are identified. Recommendations on how the CEP might effectively and efficiently consider new guidelines and review existing guidelines are provided.
Background
At CEP XI (Kyiv, 2008), the Committee discussed the occurrence of elements in some site guidelines which could be considered generic rather than site-specific.  The Committee also discussed the possibility of developing a generic cover sheet of advice for visitors, to complement site specific guidelines.  France offered to coordinate an intersessional discussion on this topic with interested Members.  
France reported to CEP XII (Baltimore, 2009) in ATCM XXXII/WP9 Report on informal discussions about the non-specific information contained in the Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica, which presented a tabulation of existing environmental advice contained in site guidelines, Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994), and Resolution 4 (2007).  The Committee agreed to establish an ICG, convened by Chile, to work on the topic of generic guidelines. 
The ICG reviewed existing environmental advice, and considered a draft revised ‘Guidance for visitors to the Antarctic’ prepared by New Zealand.  At CEP XIII the Committee noted the progress made by the ICG, and agreed that this work should continue. It established a further ICG, with Australia as convener, to report to CEP XIV (CEP XIII Final Report, paragraphs 226-227). 
Terms of reference
The Terms of Reference (TOR) for the ICG were to:
    1) Review the environmental elements of Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994) Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic, and Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic and other advice to visitors including in Site Guidelines, Recommendations and Resolutions;
    2) Develop revised and updated guidance for visitors based on Recommendation XVIII-1 in a format that can also be used as a generic cover to accompany site specific guidelines;
    3) Consider options for how the CEP might most effectively assess new site guidelines and periodically review existing guidelines; and
    4) Report to CEP XIV on the outcomes of this work.


Report of the ICG
Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, Norway, USA, ASOC and IAATO participated in the 2010/2011 ICG.  Argentina, Australia, Chile, Germany, New Zealand and ASOC participated in the 2009/2010 ICG convened by Chile. 
TOR 1: Review the environmental elements of Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994) Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic, and Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic and other advice to visitors including in Site Guidelines, Recommendations and Resolutions
The ICG reviewed environmental elements of Recommendation XVIII-I, and drew also on ATCM XXXII/WP9 Report on informal discussions about the non-specific information contained in the Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica (France), which provided a comprehensive tabulation of environmental advice contained in site guidelines, Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994), and Resolution 4 (2007).  
TOR 2: Develop revised and updated guidance for visitors based on Recommendation XVIII-1 in a format that can also be used as a generic cover to accompany site specific guidelines
For this term of reference, discussion focussed on the draft revised ‘Guidance for visitors to the Antarctic’ submitted by New Zealand to the 2009/2010 ICG.  Comments received during a first round of discussion, along with those from the 2009/2010 ICG, were taken into account in developing a second draft.  This was circulated for a final round of comment.  There was broad support among participants for a generic guideline to accompany site specific guidelines, and to provide up-to-date advice for all sites including those without site specific guidelines. The attached guidelines represent the items on which the ICG reached general agreement.

The following matters remained unresolved in the time available:

    • The ICG was not able to reach agreement on including specific minimum distances for approaches to wildlife.  Some participants expressed a view that specific minimum approach distances should be identified, advocating a precautionary approach.  Others noted that, given the range of variables likely to have influence on susceptibility to disturbance (place, time, stage of life cycle and so on), it is difficult to identify specific distances.  The ICG noted the most recent advice from SCAR, presented in ATCM XXXI WP12 Human disturbance to wildlife in the broader Antarctic region: a review of findings.  Further discussion would be needed to agree appropriately precautionary advice on approach distances for wildlife (or for individual species) should the CEP wish to include such advice in generic visitor guidelines.

    • The ICG discussed whether it was appropriate to include reference to the limits applicable to landings from passenger vessels covered by Resolution 4 (2007) and Measure 15 (2009), namely one ship per site, no landings from vessels with more than 500 passengers, no more than 100 passengers ashore at a time, and a guide to passenger ratio of 1 to 20.  It was suggested that this information need not be included as it is specified elsewhere, and because Measure 15 (2009) is not yet in force.  The alternate view was that guidelines are an appropriate place to include voluntary provisions that have been agreed by the ATCM, that these provisions have an acknowledged environmental dimension, and that they apply to all sites, including sites where no site specific guidelines are in place (and as such are generic).  The CEP is requested to consider the appropriateness of including these provisions in the guidelines, as presented in the attachment.
TOR 3: Consider options for how the CEP might most effectively assess new site guidelines and periodically review existing guidelines
New site guidelines
Some participants suggested that a formal intersessional group (for example a standing group) should be established to consider new site guidelines, noting that the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans has worked well.  Others noted that many proposed guidelines have in the past been adopted rapidly and with little need for discussion by the CEP, and suggested that an intersessional group (for example, an ICG) could be established, as needed, for any site guidelines that might require detailed discussion.  The non-binding status of site guidelines as voluntary guidelines, as compared to legally binding management plans, was noted as a consideration in determining whether a standing group would be justified.   
In summary, participants supported the idea of intersessional consideration, through an ICG, of guidelines where detailed discussion was required.   
Review of existing guidelines
The ICG discussed a process of rolling review, on a periodic basis, of site guidelines.  A five-yearly review period, as applies to area management plans, was suggested as a reasonable review time frame.  It was noted that consideration would need to be given to earlier review if circumstances changed significantly (such as changes in the site, or changes in the type and level of visitation).  It was suggested that, if required, a review could include site visits, or could be informed by feedback from industry, for example information reported by guides.  
It was pointed out that any review schedule might need to be staggered, to ensure the CEP (or subgroup) workload was not excessive in any one year.  It was suggested that reviews be led by the original proponent(s) of the site guideline, with the proponent(s) recommending to the CEP whether changes are necessary, and providing a revised site guideline if so.  It was further suggested that the Secretariat could maintain a review schedule of site guidelines, and report to the CEP on review status.
One participant suggested that an ICG might be needed to review existing site guidelines to ensure consistency with the generic guidelines for visitors.  
In summary, the participants were in general agreement that a process of periodic review, possibly at a five yearly interval, would be appropriate.  The participants noted that reviews might best be conducted by the original proponents.  Participants agreed that in some cases no changes would be required, further reducing the workload of the CEP.  The participants noted that review and revision could occur whenever circumstances required, triggered for example by changes in the site characteristics or sensitivity, or changes in the type or level of visitation.   The participants noted that there would be value in requesting the Secretariat to provide support for a process of scheduled review, by maintaining a schedule of guidelines and their notional review date. 
Recommendations:
The ICG recommends that the CEP:
    1. endorses the attached guidelines, and forwards them to the ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution (Attachment A);
    2. agrees that an ICG be convened to consider new site guidelines requiring detailed discussion;
    3. decides that, in general, site guidelines should be periodically reviewed at least every five years;
    4. requests the Secretariat to develop a review schedule for site guidelines based on a five-yearly review period, for consideration by CEP XV;
    5. encourages Members bringing forward new site guidelines to give consideration to the generic guidelines, and to focus on matters specific to the circumstances of each site.

