





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 149 
Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands





ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-11 (1966) SPA No. 11
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XV-7 (1989) SSSI No. 32
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005)
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Resolution 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A


Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 149
Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
    1. Cape Sheriff and San Telmo Island was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 11 through Recommendation IV-11 (1966) in the light of results from the first census of Pinnipedia carried out in the South Shetland Islands (Aguayo and Torres, 1966). The Area was re-designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 32 through Recommendation XV-7 (1989). The current Management Plan reaffirms the exceptional scientific and monitoring values associated with the large and diverse populations of seabirds and pinnipeds which breed within the Area, and in particular those of the Antarctic fur seal colony.
    2. Protection was also provided by CCAMLR Conservation Measure (CM) 91/02 (2004) which endorsed a management plan. CM 91/02 was rescinded in 2009 with the aim of harmonizing protection under both CCAMLR and the Madrid Protocol and to eliminate any potential duplication in permitting, reporting and monitoring procedures. Special protection continues under ASPA No. 149, which simplifies procedures for permitting and management plan revision.
    3. The boundary of the Area was revised through Measure 2 (2005) to include a larger marine component and to incorporate plant fossil sites. The boundaries of the Area have not been changed in the current Management Plan, and the grounds for designation of the Area remain valid.
    4. The changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    a. A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area and the reasons for designation.
    b. (Section 1) Updates to provisions agreed under CCAMLR have been included.  Reference to historical values has been added in this section.
    c. (Section 3) A requirement was added that National Antarctic programs operating within the Area should record all new markers, signs and structures in the Area and shall consult together to ensure that plan provisions are implemented.
    d. (Section 5 – Maps) Updates to titles, legends, geographic place names, and to air access guidance including the new zoning scheme. The orientation of Map 2 has been changed to landscape to show the revised air access guidelines more effectively.
    e. (Section 6 (i)) A boundary coordinate error in the previous management plan text is corrected from 62°28'30"S to 62°29'30"S.
    f. The text and tables throughout Section 6(i) were updated to include recent literature and observations. Editorial improvements were made to the text to improve expression, structure and flow.
    g. (Section 6 (ii)) A new section was added to describe access to the Area, to maintain consistency with other recently adopted management plans.
    h. (Section 6 ((iii)) A Restricted Zone in the northwestern part of the Area and a Helicopter Access Zone extending from the south to the site of the facilities have been designated. These zones together provide clear guidance for air access to the Area.
    i. (Section 6 ((iv)) Updates have been made to reflect the structures that currently exist within the Area, and the name of the Chilean camp has been changed to “Dr Guillermo Mann-Fischer”. A small vehicle shed has been constructed at the US camp, and a ‘Weatherport’ is available on-site which is erected as needed.
    j. (Section 7 (i)) New guidance consistent with Resolution 2 (2004) has been added recommending that aircraft maintain a horizontal and vertical separation distance of 2000 ft from the ASPA boundary unless accessing the site by permit.
    k. (Section 7 (ii)) Activities with educational aims and activities protecting historic resources have been included.
    l. (Section 7 (iii)) The definition of the end of the main breeding season has been extended from 1 March to 31 March. To maintain consistency with other recent management plans,  text has been added placing the responsibility for removal of redundant structures on the authority granting the permit for their installation.
    m. (Section 7 (iv)) A temporary camping site to support fieldwork has been designated at the northern extremity of Yamama beach.
    n. (Section 7 (v)) Biosecurity guidelines have been updated to include cleaning equipment and the wording on restrictions on the use and / or release of certain food products has been updated to maintain consistency with recently adopted management plans.
    o. (Section 7 (vii)) To maintain consistency with other recent management plans, a provision was added to avoid disturbance or damage to historic values. A provision was added to notify the appropriate authority of items removed from the Area that were not introduced by permit holder.
    p. (Section 7 (x)) To maintain consistency with other recent management plans, a provision was added that the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken, and / or of any materials released and not removed, that were not included in the permit.
    q. Recent relevant references were added.
    5. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.


