







Review of the management plan for ASPA 
No. 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie



Review of the management plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie
Summary
France has conducted the five-yearly review of the management plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie. Minor changes, mostly in form, have been made in order to clarify the text and to remove some of the ambiguities present in the previous version. It is recommended that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for this Area.
Introduction
In 1995, four islands, a nunatak and a breeding ground for emperor penguins were classified as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (Measure 3 (1995), ATCM XIX, Seoul) because they were a representative example of terrestrial Antarctic ecosystems from a biological, geological and aesthetics perspective. The management plan has been revised in 2005 (Measure 2 - ATCM XXVIII, Stockholm). In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the management plan has been reviewed again in order to clarify certain aspects, specify the access restrictions and update the data relating to the bird populations in the Area.

The following section briefly describes the proposed amendments arising from the review of the management plan.
Revisions
The appended table summarises the status of the current management plan and the main revisions considered. In essence, the following amendments have been made to the existing management plan provisions (purely editorial modifications which do not result in any subsequent changes of meaning are not included here):

Section 1 - Additional information on the number of people visiting the ASPA for scientific purposes and reminder of the institutional context.

Section 2 - Removal of the reference to cruise tourism as it is a very marginal activity in Terre Adélie. Moreover, the management plan does not permit access to the ASPA except for scientific, logistic or management activities duly authorised by a Permit. 
Clarification has been provided on the nature of scientific research which may take place within the ASPA. 
Logistic activities linked with the Dumont d’Urville station, on Petrel Island, had not been taken into account in the previous management plan. Some of these activities can interfere with the movements of the emperor penguin colony across the pack ice in winter. This management plan specifies the conditions for such activities requiring temporary access to the ASPA. 

Section 3 - This includes a reference to the dissemination of information in the management plan to the members of staff of the Dumont d’Urville station and to occasional visitors. It contains details of how this will be achieved.

Section 6 (i) - The presentation of what constitutes the ASPA has been reworded for better clarity.
Table 1 has been updated and completed in order to integrate recent data (2010/1011) on numbers of the various bird species found in the ASPA and in the rest of Pointe-Géologie Archipelago.
Section 6 (ii) - This section, as well as Tables 2 and 3, has been revised to identify the ASPA sectors and their access restrictions more clearly. 
Section 6 (iv) - Section missing in the previous version but required by the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for ASPAs.

Section 7 - The introduction of this section gives a summary of the list of activities for which a Permit can be issued.
Section 7 (i) - Travelling arrangements within the ASPA are dealt with in a more general way than they were in the previous version which only concerned ornithologists.
Details have been added to the conditions for very exceptional transit using land vehicles along the edge of the Bon Docteur Nunatak.

Section 7 (ii) - Addition of logistic activities and of educational and scientific outreach activities. 
These activities, like all the others, must take into consideration measures to protect the flora and fauna, which is the point of this management plan. The reference to these measures in this section has therefore been removed.
Section 7 (iii) - Addition of a reference to the conditions for the modification or dismantling of installations on Rostand Island.
Generally, minor editorial changes were made to the management plan to ensure better understanding.
Section 7 (vi) - Includes a reminder that in the case of authorised taking or interference with the fauna, the requirements of article 3 of Annex II of the Protocol must be respected.
Section 7 (x) - States that a report for a visit to the Area must be submitted to the appropriate Authority issuing the Permit within a maximum of six months following a visit to the Area.
Recommendations
France recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie.


ASPA No. 120 – Pointe-Géologie Archipelago
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation
Specially Protected Area (SPA No. 24) under Measure XIX-3 (Seoul 1995)
First adoption of management plan 
Measure XIX-3 (1995)
Any revisions to management plan
Measure XXVIII-2 (2005)
Current management plan 
Measure XXVIII-2 (2005)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
n/a
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as
ASPA  No. 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie 
Other relevant measures

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Changes have been made to clarify the limited access restrictions applying to various sectors of the ASPA; the boundaries of the terrestrial sectors have been maintained. 
Regarding emperor penguins, the protected zone on the winter pack ice has been defined as sites where birds are present (colony or groups of individuals), with an additional 40 m buffer zone.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
 See main working document for a complete list of amendments.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a

