





A proposed new approach to the handling of Information Papers





A proposed new approach to the handling of Information Papers
Working Paper submitted by Australia, France and New Zealand
Summary
The procedures for handling of Information Papers could be improved to streamline the conduct of meeting business, to reduce meeting running costs and to reduce the use of paper. This paper proposes modifications to the categories of official document for the ATCM and CEP, with the objective of ensuring a focus on Working Papers raising substantive matter for discussion and/or decision, while also retaining a formal means for sharing valuable information between Parties and other meeting participants. A draft Decision and suggested revision to the Guidelines for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP are presented.
Background
Over the last decade Information Papers have represented a significant proportion of all papers submitted to the ATCM and CEP (see Figure 1). A steady increase in the number of Information Papers (see Figure 2) has contributed to increases in the costs of running meetings, the consumption of paper, and difficulties in getting through the agenda in the time available. Such issues could be exacerbated when the length of the ATCM is reduced to eight days commencing at ATCM XXXV in 2012. The Parties have acknowledged the need to find solutions to these problems.
Most recently, it was noted at ATCM XXXIII (2010) that ‘[t]ime used for presentation could be significantly reduced by assuming that IPs had been read in advance of the meeting, and that IPs were presented to the meetings only when considered necessary to inform the discussions at hand’ and ‘[s]ome IPs may be circulated intersessionally with no need to be considered at the ATCM’ (para 522). Another idea raised was to work ‘towards paperless meetings, for example, starting from not printing those ATCM papers posted on the website in advance of an ATCM’ (para 525). 
Similarly, CEP XI (2008) discussed a suggestion by France that making some papers available online only could help address ‘the large and increasing number of papers presented to the Committee’ (paras. 15-17). CEP XIII also noted that ‘[f]urther opportunities to improve the efficiency of the CEP meetings can be considered including the manner in which Information Papers are handled and the amount of time that might be devoted to their consideration’ (para 434).
Information Papers currently play an important role by providing a formal, documented means of sharing important information among Parties and relevant organisations. Some of this information is material to discussions under the agendas of the ATCM and CEP. Other information is not directly linked to discussion during the meetings.
The handling of Information Papers by the ATCM and CEP has evolved in recent years to the point where there are, in practice, three distinct sub-categories:
    1) Information Papers that present information in direct support of a Working Paper (e.g. detailed reports, or the full version of a comprehensive environmental evaluation). These papers are often presented during the meeting.
    2) Information Papers submitted by expert organisations (that are not entitled to submit Working Papers). These papers are often presented during the meeting.
    3) Information Papers that contain useful information to be shared among Parties and relevant organisations but which is not material to discussions under the ATCM or CEP agenda. These papers are often introduced which can take up meeting time.

Figure 1. Information Papers as a percentage of all papers submitted to the ATCM and CEP 2001-2010


Figure 1. Numbers of Information Papers submitted to the ATCM and CEP 2001-2010
Proposed new categories of document for the ATCM and CEP
Codifying the current practice of the ATCM and CEP regarding the three different types of Information Papers, through modifications to the Guidelines for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP, could help to streamline the conduct of meeting business, reduce meeting running costs and reduce the use of paper. This could involve establishing two new categories of document, an Expert Paper and a Background Paper, based on the present three types of Information Paper, as outlined below in Table 1.

Table 1. Outline of suggested new approach to the submission, translation and distribution of documents for the ATCM and CEP
Category
Purpose
Translated
Introduced
Printed
Recorded1
Working Paper
Submitted by Parties / CEP Members / ‘Observers’ (defined by Rule 2 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure, and Rule 4(b) of the CEP Rules of Procedure), for the purpose of presenting substantive issues on which discussion or decisions are required (no change)
ü
ü
ü
ü
Secretariat Paper
Submitted by the Secretariat for the purposes of providing key meeting information and information on Secretariat tasking and activities (no change)
ü
ü
ü
ü
Information Paper
Submitted by Parties / CEP Members / ‘Observers’ only in direct support of a Working Paper  

ü2
ü
ü
Expert Paper
Submitted to the ATCM by Experts from International Organisations as defined by Rules 39 - 45 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure, and to the CEP by Observers as approved under Rule 4(c) of the CEP Rules of Procedure

ü
ü
ü
Background Paper
Submitted by any participant for the purpose of formally providing to the Parties and other meeting participants information that is not directly linked to meeting discussions.



ü

This proposed approach would have the following advantages:
    • no change would be required to the submission, distribution or handling of Working Papers, Secretariat Papers, or Information Papers submitted in direct support of a Working Paper;
    • the efficiency of meeting business would be enhanced by providing that certain papers that do not directly support a Working Paper would not be introduced (i.e. Background Papers);
    • enhanced clarity would be provided with regard to the handling of papers submitted by invited expert bodies;
    • cost and environmental benefits would be achieved by not printing papers that are not directly linked to matters under discussion on the ATCM or CEP agenda (i.e. Background Papers); 
    • a formal mechanism for sharing valuable information that is not directly linked to meeting discussions would be retained (i.e. Background Papers); and
    • drawing on the value of the Secretariat website as a document source and database, valuable information that is not directly linked to meeting discussions (i.e. Background Papers) could be made available for access by Parties and other meeting at participants any time during the year2.
Modifications to the Secretariat’s document management system would be required to allow for handling of Expert Papers and Background Papers. The proposed changes would also need to be reflected in the Guidelines for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP appended to Decision 3 (2009). A draft Decision and revised Guidelines are presented at Attachment A.
Recommendations
Australia, France and New Zealand recommend that the Parties:
    • adopt a Decision reflecting the agreement to establish two new categories of document for the ATCM and CEP, consistent with the proposal outlined above; and
    • request that the Secretariat take the necessary steps to provide for the submission and handling of such documents.
Attachment A
Draft Decision XX (2011)
Revised Guidelines for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP

The Representatives, 
Acknowledging the value of information exchanged in official documents circulated between participants in the ATCM and the CEP;
Recalling the Guidelines for the Submission and Handling of Documents for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) adopted in Decision 3 (2009);
Considering that the efficiency of meetings could be enhanced by the establishment of a new category of official document to allow the formal exchange of information that does not require presentation or discussion during meetings;
Desiring to codify the accepted practice of allowing invited expert organisations to provide and present to the ATCM and CEP papers containing valuable information;
Noting the need to update the Guidelines to reflect changes to the submission and handling of official documents;
Decide to: 
    1) replace the Revised Guidelines for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP appended to Decision 3 (2009) with the Revised Guidelines appended to this Decision.


Revised Guidelines for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP
    1) These guidelines apply to the distribution and translation of official papers for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and for the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP). These papers consist of:
        a) Working Papers: submitted by Parties / CEP Members / ‘Observers’ (defined by Rule 2 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure, and Rule 4(b) of the CEP Rules of Procedure), for the purpose of presenting substantive issues on which discussion or decisions are required;
        b) Secretariat Papers: submitted by the Secretariat for the purposes of providing key meeting information and information on Secretariat tasking and activities;
        c) Information Papers: submitted by Parties / CEP Members / ‘Observers’ only in direct support of a Working Paper;
        d) Expert Papers: submitted to the ATCM by Experts from International Organisations as defined by Rules 39 - 45 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure, and to the CEP by Observers as approved under Rule 4(c) of the CEP Rules of Procedure; and
        e) Background Papers: submitted by any participant for the purpose of formally providing to the Parties and other meeting participants information that is not directly linked to meeting discussions.
    2) Documents to be translated (i.e. Working Papers, Secretariat Papers (with the exception of the Secretariat’s Report and Programme), reports submitted to the ATCM by ATCM Observers and invited Experts according to the provisions of Recommendation XIII-2 or in relation to Article III-2 of the Antarctic Treaty) should not exceed 1500 words. When calculating the length of a paper, proposed Measures, Decisions and Resolutions and their attachments are not included.
    3) Working Papers should be received by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (“the Secretariat”) no later than 45 days before the Consultative Meeting.
    4) The Secretariat should receive Information Papers and Expert Papers no later than 30 days before the Meeting.
    5) When a revised version of a Paper made after its initial submission is resubmitted to the Secretariat for translation, the revised text should indicate clearly the amendments that have been incorporated.
    6) The Papers should be transmitted to the Secretariat by electronic means.
    7) Papers will be uploaded to the ATCM Home Page established by the Secretariat for the ATCM in question. Working Papers which were received before the 45 days limit should be uploaded as soon as possible and in any case not later than 30 days before the Meeting.
    8) Parties may agree to Working Papers to be presented to the Secretariat during the Meeting for translation.
    9) No Working Paper submitted to the ATCM will be used as the basis for discussion at the ATCM unless it has been translated into the four official languages.
    10) Background Papers will not be printed or circulated for discussion at the Meeting. Background Papers may be submitted at any time, and will be made available via the ATCM Home Page established by the Secretariat for the ATCM in question as soon as possible after their submission. A list of the Background Papers submitted no later than 30 days before the Meeting will be appended to the Final Report. Background Papers submitted less than 30 days before the Meeting will be listed in Final Report of the next Meeting.
    11) Within six months of the end of the Consultative Meeting the Secretariat should circulate through diplomatic channels and also post on the ATCM Home Page the Final Report of that Meeting in the four official languages.

