





Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth, Antarctica





Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth, Antarctica 
A working paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom has prepared a draft CEE for the proposed exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth which has been circulated to Treaty Parties and Observers for review.  The draft CEE fully describes the programme and concludes that the global scientific importance and value to be gained by the exploration of Lake Ellsworth outweighs the impact the proposal has on the environment and justifies the activity proceeding.  The UK is grateful to all participants of the Intersessional Contact Group established to review the draft CEE,  and will address all comments made when producing the final CEE.
Circulation and translation of the CEE
In accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, UK notified Parties (through ATS Circular 8/2011) of the availability of the draft CEE for the “Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth, Antarctica” that had been prepared by the Lake Ellsworth Consortium and was available for download from http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/ellsworthcee.  
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report) an ICG was established, convened by Norway, to review the draft CEE.  ICG correspondence was available to CEP members and Observers via the CEP discussion Forum, which also provided the Non Technical Summary translated into the official Treaty languages.
CEE findings
The CEE describes the proposed programme of exploration of subglacial Lake Ellsworth which sets out to satisfy two scientific aims: 
(1) to determine the presence, origin, evolution and maintenance of life in an Antarctic subglacial lake through direct measurement, sampling and analysis of this extreme environment, establishing whether, and in what form, microbial life exists in Antarctic subglacial lakes, and 
(2) to reveal the palaeoenvironment and glacial history of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) including, potentially, the date of its last decay, by recovering a sedimentary record from the lake floor.  This is critical to assessing the present-day risk of ice sheet collapse and consequent sea-level rise.  
This programme has been in a planning and design stage for six years, throughout which environmental protection has been a central and dominant feature.  Extensive information has been gathered on the baseline conditions to inform the CEE, and robust mitigation measures have been incorporated.  
The proposed exploration programme involves a main field season of 8 weeks during which time 10 staff will be on site to establish a drill camp and run a hot water drill for 3 days through 3.1 km ice to penetrate the subglacial lake.  A probe and corer will then be deployed to allow water and sediment sample collection.
A full assessment of potential environmental impacts is included in the draft CEE.  The most significant impact predicted is the potential for contamination of the lake and subsequent impact on microbial function.  The lake’s microbial populations are currently unknown (and can only be determined through the exploration).  This impact will be mitigated through the use of the hot water drill methodology (using melted ice water heated to 90 °C,  filtered to 0.2 µm,  and UV treated),  and thorough microbial control contamination methods.
Having prepared the draft CEE and adopted rigorous preventative and mitigation measures, the UK considers that the exploration of Lake Ellsworth will have a less than minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.  However, due to the uncertainties inherent in such exploratory science, there is a risk of greater impacts (more than minor or transitory). As the actual impacts can only be assessed after they have already occurred, a precautionary approach has been taken reflecting this risk.
In the view of the UK, the global scientific importance and value to be gained by the exploration of Lake Ellsworth outweighs the impact the proposal has on the environment and justifies the activity proceeding.
Response to ICG
The UK is grateful to Norway for convening the ICG, and to all ICG participants for their constructive comments on the draft CEE.  These comments will be addressed in the final CEE, but in the meantime, a preliminary response to the comments is set out in UK Information Paper 13.  

