





Understanding concepts of Footprint and Wilderness related to protection of the Antarctic environment




Understanding concepts of Footprint and Wilderness related to protection of the Antarctic environment

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
Defining Footprint for Antarctic usage as a measure of the spatial extent of disturbance would be practical for CEP usage. Wilderness in the Antarctic could be similarly viewed as absence of footprint. With these definitions it would be possible to outline ways the CEP might consider more active management of wilderness as in the Environmental Principles set out in Article 3, paragraph (2b) of the Environmental Protocol. The tools would include Environmental Impact Assessment and Area Protection. 
Introduction 
The CEP has agreed that footprint and wilderness are important issues. In the CEP XIII report (paragraph 244) Members were encouraged to bring further papers to CEP XIV that might assist in developing a better understanding of the term “human footprint”. The terms have both tangible and intangible aspects: different people and cultures may have different perspectives of them and how they relate to other environmental management concepts. Members have provided some papers and comments that have helped produce this paper. 
Objective of the paper  
This paper aims to clarify:
    1. definitions of footprint and wilderness
    2. possible medium term goals for planning and protection of wilderness values. 
1. The terms footprint and wilderness
Footprint.  The Footprint Topic Summary (CEPXIII/IP48) noted that the term and various subcategories of it have been used in many reports and papers of the CEP and other parts of the Treaty System. IP48 concluded “Most references consider footprint as a measure of the spatial extent of physical disturbance”. COMNAP (CEPVIII/WP26) developed ‘Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica’ which identified a suitable parameter for measuring footprint as an “area subject to human activity, e.g. spatial coverage of buildings and associated including roads, pipes etc; number and location of field expeditions”. This recognises that footprint involves more than structures and that temporal as well as spatial aspects need consideration. Transient footprints that last only a short time (e.g. aircraft passing overhead, vehicle tracks in the snow) will often represent a less significant form of human impact than a permanent installation. 
Describing Footprint more generally as a measure of the spatial extent of disturbance would be more encompassing for Antarctic usage.  CEPXIII/WP29 noted there are subcategories of footprint relevant for the CEP that are visible, audible or otherwise measurable (including chemical or biological residues or disturbance). These subcategories can be quantified and temporal and spatial patterns described using the indicator parameter that best describes them (Kennicutt et al 2010). Most areas of chemical or biological contamination and debris fields will lie well within the range at which facilities and activities are visible. 

Wilderness. The term “wilderness” is referred to in the Environmental Protocol (Article 3, paragraph (1) and paragraph 2(b)(vi)) and Annex V. It is supported by the domestic legislation of many Parties (Kormos et al., 2008). Wilderness is quite a difficult word to clarify and depends on context and cumulative impacts so there is no consensus on its meaning – hence this paper. CEPI/IP2 noted that wilderness should be seen as a designator of land use. It proposed a working definition for Antarctic wilderness as “any part of the Antarctic in which neither permanent habitation nor any other permanent evidence or presence of past human presence is visible”. It further suggested that “identification would be based on visibility … with further considerations given to the extent of noise and access routes”.  Nowadays wilderness is generally regarded as land that is unmodified, wild, uninhabited, remote from human settlement or presence of human-built objects. Wilderness values are attributes of wilderness and social science can shed light on people’s values and interpretations. But Summerson and Riddle (2000) suggested that people from most cultural backgrounds would accept the premise that all of Antarctica is wilderness unless it has been modified by some human activity from within Antarctica. Wilderness therefore involves an absence of cumulative impact. For the CEP a simple practical definition of Antarctic wilderness may best be the absence of footprint, assuming that the general definition of footprint given above is acceptable.  
As noted at CEP XIII scientific and other human activities have become part of the Antarctic environment and it is inevitable that the footprint of human activity and cumulative impacts in the Antarctic have had an effect on wilderness. Further Environmental Reviews or State of Environment reporting would confirm that, although the “significance” or amount of wilderness degradation that has occurred since the first human footprint could be interpreted differently. However adopting the simple definition of wilderness would provide a practical basis for assessing potential impacts on wilderness values.
2. Possible medium term goals for greater protection of wilderness values  
Environmental Impact Assessment and Area Protection are two important tools Parties have for environmental protection. The CEP could consider how to apply them as medium term goals for more active management of wilderness. 
Potential human footprint and impacts on wilderness are often not fully assessed during planning of proposed Antarctica activities but Environmental Impact Assessment will help us understand and assess footprint and potential impacts. Parties have agreed Environmental Principles in Article 3 (2b) of the Environmental Protocol which states that activities “shall be planned and conducted so as to avoid … degradation of, or substantial risk to, areas of wilderness significance”. Terminology is well defined (EIA Guidelines, ATCM XXVIII/CEP VIII, 2005). Footprint is an output that can be predicted in EIA as the result of a proposed activity. Cumulative impacts need to be considered and inventories of sites of past activity will be helpful in assessing potential impacts on wilderness values and reducing such impacts.

Protection of wilderness values is specifically envisaged in Annex V of the Protocol. Several analyses (e.g. CEP XII/WP31) have noted that inviolate reference areas (Annex V, Article 3.2 paragraph (a)) and wilderness values (Annex V, Article 3.2 paragraph (g)), categories listed in Annex V, are still poorly represented in Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. There is a strong synergy between these two categories that the CEP could build on.

From a scientific perspective, there is a need to have inviolate areas set aside so that they will remain free of local human impacts, and will be available to science (and in particular biologists) in the future as genuinely unspoilt habitat where sophisticated scientific techniques might be applied.  It has already been shown that even a transient visit to a site will leave human commensal bacteria that can be detected years later using molecular biological techniques (see work by Baker and Cowan et al.).  Areas that might be designated as inviolate and wilderness in the Antarctic should not have experienced much footprint and would be chosen where they would be expected to remain free of local impacts. Potential designation should not be a spur for activities that might compromise the objective of being inviolate.
Conclusions about consideration and definition of footprint and wilderness in the Antarctic Treaty System
The terms “footprint” and “wilderness” can be defined quite simply. They are inversely related to each other, and directly or indirectly to terms in environmental impact assessment and other environmental management terms and concepts. Footprint can be minimised through planning using Environmental Impact Assessment but impacts on wilderness need additional management possibly including Area Protection in synergy with protection of inviolate areas for scientific purposes. Useful suggestions were made in Resolution 14, Protection of Antarctica’s wilderness values / La protección de los valores silvestres de Antártica, at the 9th World Wilderness Congress held in Merida, Mexico in November 2009.
Recommendations
1. Discussion at CEP XIV should aim for agreement to be reached on definitions of footprint and wilderness that are practical in the Antarctic context. 
2. The CEP should then consider medium term goals for (a) improving planning and environmental impact assessment to minimise footprint and cumulative impact and (b) giving greater protection of inviolate areas and wilderness values through Annex V measures.  
Acknowledgements
The discussion at CEP XIII and several colleagues from UK, Australia, Argentina, ASOC and COMNAP gave guidance or information that assisted this work. 

References

Further details in www.ats.org.ar and CEPXIII/IP49

Agraz JL, RA Sanchez, CA Rinaldi, JM Acero 1998. Environmental review of the Argentine activities at Marambio Station). Direccion Nacional del Antártico, Instituto Antártico Argentino: 66pp plus appendices.
Baker, G, Ah Tow, L, DA Cowan. 2003. PCR-based detection of non-indigenous microorganisms in ‘pristine’ environments. J. Microbiol. Methods 53:157-164.
EIA Guidelines, Resolution 4, ATCM XXVIII/CEP VIII, 2005 
IUCN 1997. Cumulative environmental impacts in Antarctica: minimisation and management. Proceedings of the workshop: 145pp. www.iucn.org/knowledge
Kennicutt II, MC, A Klein, P Montagna, S Sweet, TWade, T Palmer, J Sericano and G Denoux. 2010. Temporal and spatial patterns of anthropogenic disturbance at McMurdo Station, Antarctica. Environ. Res. Lett. 5, 034010, 10pp
Kormos, CF (ed.) 2008. A handbook of international wilderness law and policy. Fulcrum Publishing. 416pp.
Summerson R and M Riddle 2000. Assessing wilderness and aesthetic values in Antarctica. In: W Davidson, C Howard-Williams and P Broady (Eds), Antarctic ecosystems: models for wider ecological understanding, Canterbury University, New Zealand, 303-307.

