





Inspection undertaken by Japan in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article XIV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection





Inspection undertaken by Japan in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article XIV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection

Submitted by Japan
1. Overview 
(1) Background
Japan conducted the inspections of six stations in Dronning Maud Land from January 29th to February 10th 2010, under the provisions of the Antaractic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol.  This was the first time for Japan to conduct inspections in Antarctica.  
(2) Overview
(i) The Inspection Team
    • Mr. Yo Osumi : Team Leader (Senior Coordinator, Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
    • Mr. Meguru Akimoto (Official, Ministry of the Environment)
    • Dr. Kazuyuki Shiraishi (Deputy Director, National Institute of Polar Research)
    • Dr. Kentaro Watanabe (Professor, National Institute of Polar Research)
    • Mr. Kazuya Inui (Consultant, Nord Institute for Society and Environment)
(ii) Stations Visited
The Inspection team used DROMLAN (Dronning Maud Land Air Network) to fly to Novolazarevskaya runway from Cape Town on January 29th.  A DROMLAN aircraft                                                                                                                          was used for subsequent intra-continental flights.  
On the conclusion of inspections, the team returned in the same manner, departing from Novolazarevskaya runway on February 10th, arriving in Cape Town on February 11th.  
The six stations visited are as follows.
    • Maitri station (India): January 29th - January 30th
    • Princess Elisabeth station (Belgium): January 31st - February 2nd
    • Neumayer station III (Germany) : February 5th - February 6th
    • SANAE IV base (South Africa) : February 7th
    • Troll station (Norway) : February 7th - February 8th
    • Novolazarevskaya station (Russia) : February 9th - February 10th

Japan wishes to express its sincere gratitude and appreciation for cooperation and hospitality it received from the Parties and personnel of each station inspected.
The full inspection report has been submitted as a separate Information Paper to this meeting (ATCM XXXIV/IP004).


2. Summary of Inspection Results
(1) Overview
The inspection mainly focused on: (a) station facilities and operations, (b) environmental conservation measures, (c) scientific research and international cooperation, (d) use of antarctica for peaceful purposes, and (e) tourism.  
 The inspection team concludes that all stations were in compliance with the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes, and were making efforts to promote scientific investigation and international cooperation while minimizing environmental impacts.  Disparities were found among the stations with regard to the level of environmental protection measures, reflecting different physical, financial and other circumstances of respective stations.  
It was also noted that new modes of activities such as the involvement of various actors in scientific observation and station operations are emerging, which raises concomitant challenges.  
(2) Station Facilities and Operations
Wide variation was observed between the newly built stations and older ones, with regard to the size of buildings, installations, devices, equipment and other infrastructure, as well as the level of introduction of cutting-edge technologies.  
The increased involvement of various actors in the operation of the stations is also noteworthy.  There are a number of cases in which non-governmental actors are participating in the usage of station installations.  It may well be that activities by actors other than governmental ones in Antarctica will be more widespread in the future.
(3) Environmental Protection
(i) Waste Management and Disposal
Neumayer III and Troll had each signed an MOU (Memorandum of Understanding) with South Africa to have some of their wastes transported out by DROMSHIP (Dronning Maud Land Shipping ) consortium be unloaded and disposed of in Cape Town.  
The inspection team found that not all incinerators had secondary combustion chambers at some stations.  There were some uncertainties about the performance of existing incinerators and their exhaust fumes.  
The inspection team observed that nearly all stations had prepared manuals and conducted proper management of oil leaks and spills.  However, some stations’ oil storage tanks were placed on ice-free ground without oil weirs, and there seemed to be scope for further reduction of contamination. 
(ii) Treatment of Sewage and Domestic Liquid Wastes 
The inspection team observed that efforts were being made to reduce the impact on the environment through such installations as suitable septic tanks and the treatment and reuse systems for sewage and domestic liquid waste.  
However, some stations discharged treated sewage onto ice-free ground or inland freshwater lakes, and the inspection team found differences as to if the discharged water was subject to advanced treatment.
The environmental impact of effluent was unclear at some stations as water quality of the lakes where water may well be streamed into was seemingly not monitored.  
(iii) Conservation of Fauna and Flora  
Hydroponic plants, which were found at one station, had been brought in not necessarily with prior permission, though the station plans to follow relevant domestic procedures.  
With regard to protection of plant communities or nesting sites around the stations, each station was taking measures such as educating or informing its personnel about entry restrictions.  
(4) Scientific Investigation and International Cooperation
Efforts have been made to avoid increasing the work load in the field by introducing remote monitoring and remote control, rather than increasing the number of over-wintering personnel.  It was observed that securing adequate infrastructure, particularly electric power and space inside the stations for monitoring observation was an urgent issue at the relatively old stations.  
It is noteworthy that some station installations and heavy machinery are shared and reused on the basis of bilateral agreements, as a part of international cooperation activities.   
(5) Use of Antarctica for Peaceful Purposes
The inspection team found that all stations complied with the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes.  In terms of involvement of the military in logistics, practice varied.  Nevertheless, the inspection team found no activities contrary to the principle, and no weapons were found.
(6) Tourism
Dronning Maud Land still did not seem to be affected by large-scale tourism.  However, the inspection team encountered some evidence that small scale sightseeing via Novolazarevskaya runway was taking place. 
It was apparent from interviews that tourist visits to the stations were extremely rare, and many stations had policies not to allow tourist visits except in emergencies.  As more tourists may visit Dronning Maud Land in future with development of air routes, sightseeing activities in Antarctica need to be carried out under proper management.
3. Recommendations
i) Addressing New Modes of Activities in Antarctica:  
There may be a need to consider, in light of the prioritization of scientific investigation, to what extent it would be appropriate to make stations and various installations available for activities conducted by those other than governmental actors, and commercial activities in particular.  It may be possible for ATCM to consider coming up with new guidelines regarding new modes of activities in Antarctica, as necessary, but at first, exchanging views on this matter at ATCM would be needed.  
ii) DROMLAN logistics:  
Concerned Parties would need to acknowledge that the maintenance of the Novolazarevskaya runway, transportation of aviation fuel, and other aspects of DROMLAN logistics have become burdensome to Russian station personnel. 
iii) Waste Management and Disposal:
There is a need for renovation of less efficient or aging facilities whose environmental impacts are of concern, such as incinerators without an adequate capacity of exhaust gas treatment.
There also seems to be a scope to reduce the risk of oil leaks and spills through preventive measures, such as installation of oil weirs around oil storage tanks in accordance with the guidelines of Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP).   The station where such contamination has occurred should be proactive in removing the contaminated soil and related materials.  
iv) Treatment of Sewage and Domestic Liquid Wastes:  
The station that was discharging untreated liquid wastes informed the inspection team of a plan to introduce a treatment facility in future.  An early introduction of the treatment is highly recommendable.
 The stations that were not monitoring water quality at the time of the inspection are recommended to start doing so.  It is also recommended that such issues as waste water quality, and treatment methods be discussed at ATCM in the future.  An option could be for COMNAP to adopt practical guidelines on waste water quality as necessary.
v) Use of Renewable Energy:  
Exchanges of information on initiatives, achievements and challenges at each station and of best practices should be further promoted.
vi) The Effective Use of Facilities and Equipment through Cooperation among Stations, and the Responsibility of Final Disposal:   
Effective use of facilities based on international cooperation is desirable and should continue to be promoted.  In this regard, it is important for the parties which enter into this kind of arrangement to share the understanding as to who is responsible for waste disposal so that obligations under the Madrid Protocol will be continuously followed through.  
vii) Scientific Investigation and International Cooperation: 
Equipment and installations need to be maintained and updated particularly in order to maintain the quality of scientific data in an international observation network.  Exchanges of information on science programs and operations should also be encouraged through Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and COMNAP.  


