





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island



Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand conducted a five yearly review of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island. 

Key aspects of the review were:

    • In the 2007/2008 season, a vegetation survey was conducted at the site with the help of Antarctic scientists to enhance the vegetation survey conducted in the 2005/2006 season (WP 31, ATCM XXIX – CEP IX). The vegetation cover of the entire areas was mapped and a revised vegetation cover map was produced.
    • In the 2010/2011 season, a site visit was conducted to ensure the reason for which the Area was designated continues to serve its purpose.  In addition, an invertebrate biodiversity survey was conducted to ensure the boundary location incorporates significant populations of springtails, and the glacier boundary was also assessed in relation to potential changes due to climate change. 

The revised draft Management Plan was circulated for comment to scientists with both the United States Antarctic Programme (USAP) and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme who conduct research in the Area and have visited the site recently. In addition, the USAP environmental team was consulted.

The input received was used with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998), when considering revisions to the Management Plan. 

The revisions are outlined in the table below.
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island.

ASPA No. 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-12 (1985) as Specially Protected Area No. 20 New College Valley
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) as Site of Special Scientific Interest No.10 Caughley Beach
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 1 (2000) Specially Protected Area No. 20 New College Valley revised management plan incorporating SSSI No. 10 Caughley Beach
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2006)
Current management plan: 
Measure 1 (2006)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No changes to the boundaries. The coordinates are now defined and included in to the management plan text. 
A short section of the boundary follows the Cape Bird Ice Cap. This boundary has been mapped and is not expected to change over the next 5 years.  
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes
Figure 1 and 1a have been removed from the management plan as the images do not show any more information than what is show in Map A. 
Map B has been revised to include recent vegetation mapping.
Map C has been removed from the management plan because Map B has been updated and Map C is no longer relevant.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
A more complete description of the boundary has been provided, including GPS reference points for boundary cairns.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
Minor editorial amendments have been made throughout the Management Plan. 
Section 7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area now states ‘No poultry products shall be brought into the Area.’
Under Section 7(ix) provisions have been included to encourage lodging of metadata into the Antarctic Master Directory System.
A literature review and a site visit were conducted to update the information within the Management Plan. Scientists who frequently visit the Area and the USAP environment team were consulted in the review process.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a 
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a 
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a


