





Developing a plan for Special protection at Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls, Taylor Valley, McMurdo Dry Valleys, 
Victoria Land






Developing a plan for Special protection
at Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls,
Taylor Valley, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land
    1. Introduction
Blood Falls (77° 43' 19.7"S, 162° 16' 17.3"E) is a saline, iron-rich discharge of subglacial origin at the terminus of the Taylor Glacier in the McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica. The feature consists of surface brine, which forms a red-orange liquid at the snout of the Taylor Glacier and a subglacial brine reservoir, estimated to be located between 1 and 6 km up-glacier from the terminus (Keys 1980; Hubbard et al. 2004). Scientists  in the  Taylor Valley have identified Blood Falls as  potentially meriting special protection as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) because of its unique biological and physical characteristics and high scientific and educational values.
Increasing activity on the Taylor Glacier and recent ice-core drilling projects have highlighted the need to protect the Blood Falls environment as these activities have the potential to influence the seemingly unique microbial community and chemistry of the feature. Over the past year, the United States has undertaken extensive consultation with scientific community working in the Blood Falls area in order to develop appropriate management approaches and possible protected area boundaries for the feature. Consideration of the responses of the scientific community has led to the development of proposed protected area boundaries, which are presented below (refer also to Figures 1-3, Appendix A).
2. Values in need of special protection
The special values that have thus far been identified at Blood Falls are as follows:
    • The physical configuration of Blood Falls is thought to be unique. The highly saline, iron-rich discharge at the glacier terminus is fed by a subglacial reservoir of ancient marine brine, which is thought to have become enclosed approximately 3 to 5 My B.P. (Keys 1979; Mikucki et al. 2004).
    • The Blood Falls discharge contains a unique microbial community, apparently of marine origin. The bacteria may be capable of metabolising iron and sulphur compounds, allowing them to survive in the subglacial environment for millions of years (Mikuki et al. 2009). On account of its high iron and salt content, the Blood Falls ecosystem provides a potential analogue for exobiological studies associated with ice features on Mars.
    • The Blood Falls subglacial reservoir is comparatively accessible for study and the episodic discharge events provide a unique opportunity to sample the properties of the subglacial reservoir and its ecosystem without direct contact. It is very important for the integrity of scientific results that the discharge area is not unnecessarily disturbed. 
    • Blood Falls discharges into Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley, exerting considerable influence over the geochemistry and microbiology of the lake (Mikucki et al. 2004; Lyons et al. 2005).
    • The behavior of the Taylor Glacier is thought to be unique among the Dry Valley glaciers, as the subglacial reservoir supplying Blood Falls may lubricate the glacier base (Robinson 1984).
    • The Area possesses outstanding aesthetic values and significant educational value, as the site has been the subject of a range of scientific and media articles in recent years.
3. Boundary options and initial conclusions.
Proposed boundaries for the Blood Falls protected area were developed through consultation with the scientific community working in the Blood Falls area. Consultation responses suggested that there is minimal interaction between the surface and bed of the Taylor Glacier and that the primary potential mechanism for contamination of the Blood Falls system is the input of contaminants into the reservoir. As a result, there was support from the scientific community for a protected area boundary comprised of (i) an extensive sub-surface component (i.e. subglacial and englacial), with the aim of protecting the brine reservoir, and (ii) a modest sub-aerial component (i.e. ice and land surface), with the aim of protecting the primary surface outlet and discharge, which are as follows:
    1) The proposed sub-surface component would encompass all areas of the Taylor Glacier ablation zone east of Beehive Mountain (Figures 1 and 2, Appendix A). The boundary follows a conservative approach that accommodates the uncertainties surrounding the connectivity of the Blood Falls reservoir with the subglacial hydrological system. A number of potential approaches were proposed for defining the vertical extent of the sub-surface boundary, including depth below the glacier surface and the -10 °C isotherm surface within the glacier body. On grounds of practicality, depth below glacier surface is currently the favored approach, although this will be subject to further scientific discussion during development of the Management Plan.
    2) The proposed sub-aerial component of the boundary would include the supraglacial drainage catchment of the main Blood Falls outlet, the surrounding moat area and a section of Santa Fe Stream. The boundary was selected on the basis that it protects the area immediately surrounding the primary Blood Falls outflow, whilst minimizing restrictions on access to surrounding sites. The existing camping sites and helicopter landing sites would remain outside of the protected area.
Further details of the proposed boundaries for the Blood Falls protected area and rationale for their selection are presented in Appendix A.
4. Activities within the Area
Following the approach outlined above, the requirements of a sub-surface ASPA would not impose additional restrictions on movement or activities  that take place entirely on the glacier surface.  This approach would allow for continued access to the Taylor Glacier surface and activities would remain subject to pre-existing protocols established for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys. 
The consultation process identified drilling on the Taylor Glacier as a potential mechanism for contamination of the Blood Falls system, and appropriate management provisions were discussed. Following the recommendations of the scientific community, drilling on the Taylor Glacier would not be prohibited per se, but would be subject to close peer and environmental review, and projects would need to demonstrate that the necessary precautions were taken to avoid contamination of the reservoir.
5. Procedure in 2011-12 
To date, the consultation process has focused on science groups working in the Blood Falls area, with the aim of developing appropriate boundaries and management provisions specific to Blood Falls. During the forthcoming year, the United States wishes to engage with the broader scientific community, particularly those working on subglacial environments, to ensure that appropriate management approaches are used in the protection of Blood Falls and that are consistent so far as practical with those approaches being applied elsewhere in Antarctica. Moreover, the approaches and guidelines developed within the Code of Conduct for subglacial aquatic environments recently initiated by SCAR represents an important and practical tool that could help in the development of effective management provisions for the site. By the same token, practical issues that might arise at Blood Falls could help inform the further development and improvement of those protocols. 
6. Proposal
We propose the establishment of an International Working Group to discuss area protection at Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls and to develop a draft ASPA Management Plan to be submitted to the CEP in 2012. The United States offers to coordinate this group and invites Interested Parties and SCAR to participate.
7. Selected references 
Hubbard, A., Lawson, W., Anderson, B., Hubbard, B. & Blatter, H. 2004. Evidence of subglacial ponding across Taylor Glacier, Dry Valleys, Antarctica. Annals of Glaciology 39: 79–34.
Kavanaugh, J.L, Cuffey, K. M. Morse, D. L., Conway, H. & Rignot, E. 2009.Dynamics and mass balance of Taylor Glacier, Antarctica: 1. Geometry and surface velocities. Journal of  Geophysical Research 114, F04010, doi:10.1029/2009JF001309.
Keys, J.R. 1979. The saline discharge at the terminus of Taylor Glacier. Antarctic Journal of the United States 14: 82-85.
Keys, J.R 1980. Salts and their distribution in the McMurdo region, Antarctica. Chapter 8, unpublished PhD thesis held at Victoria University of Wellington New Zealand, and Byrd Polar Research Center, Columbus, Ohio: 240-282.
Lyons, W.B., Welch, K.A., Snyder, G., Olesik, J., Graham, E.Y., Marion, G.M. & Poreda, R.J. 2005. Halogen geochemistry of the McMurdo dry valleys lakes, Antarctica: Clues to the origin of solutes and lake evolution. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 69 (2): 305–323.
Mikucki, J.A., Foreman, C.M., Sattler, B., Lyons, W.B. & Priscu, J.C., 2004.  Geomicrobiology of Blood Falls: An iron-rich saline discharge at the terminus of the Taylor Glacier, Antarctica. Aquatic Geochemistry 10: 199-220. 
Mikucki, J.A., Pearson, A., Johnston, D.T., Turchyn, A.V., Farquhar, J., Schrag, D.P., Anbar, A.D., Priscu, J.C. & Lee, P.A. 2009. A Contemporary Microbially Maintained Subglacial Ferrous ‘Ocean’. Science 324 (5925): 397-400. 
Robinson, P.R. 1984. Ice dynamics and thermal regime of Taylor Glacier, South Victoria Land, Antarctica. Journal of Glaciology 30 (105): 153-160.

