





Fourth Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island





Fourth Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island
    1. Introduction
At CEP VII, Germany introduced IP 005 Research Project Risk assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for desig­nation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas. This paper described the below mentioned German three-year research project (2003 – 2006) and introduced it for the first time. Several CEP members expressed their support for the proposal, and indicated that they would willingly assist Germany in the project.
At CEP VIII, Germany introduced IP 016 Progress Report on the Research Project Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas. This paper provided an update of the project, noting the excellent cooperation with other Parties in the area through an informal co-ordination group. 
At ATCM XXVIII, Germany agreed that prior to tabling a draft Management Plan for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island (King George Island) and following a proposal by Chile an International Working Group should be established. This Working Group should be composed of those Parties with stations and/or huts in the area, Parties with an interest in the area as well as Observers to the Antarctic Treaty. It should discuss the issues related to the Draft Management Plan. For this purpose, Germany would organize two international workshops, one in September 2005 and another one in January/February 2006, in order to convene the par­ticipants on this issue” (Final Report of ATCM XXVIII, para. 90).
At CEP IX, Brazil, China, Germany, the Republic of Korea and the Russian Federation introduced WP 022 Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Proposal to establish an Intersessional Contact Group. This paper reported on the main findings and recommendations of the King George Island Work­shop “Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island” in January/February 2006 as well as on the outcome of the Workshop “Human impact on terrestrial habitats in the Antarctic” in September 2005”. Discussion of this paper is reflected in paragraphs 70 to 75 of the CEP Report.
At CEP IX, “Germany expressed satisfaction on reaching agreement with Chile in principle on devel­oping an ASMA for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. They will jointly convene – via note verbal – an inter­national working group (paragraph 74 of the CEP Report). Germany expressed the hope that a substan­tive outcome of the group’s work would be presented to the next ATCM. Chile confirmed that it will host a work­shop to prepare the input on this issue for discussion at CEP X.” (Final Report of ATCM XXIX, para. 77). Pursuant to these understandings an international working group involving government representatives of interested Parties was convened by Germany and Chile in order to discuss management approaches, possibly aiming at drafting a management plan for an ASMA covering the Fildes Peninsula Region (see IP 22 rev. 1 by Germany and Chile). 
At CEP X, Germany introduced IP 112 Possible Modules of a “Fildes Peninsula region” ASMA Management Plan. Further, Germany and Chile introduced IP 22 rev. 1 Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Comments of 15 IWG parties to four questions concerning the future management of the Fildes Peninsula Region were reported. Further, Chile introduced IP 117 Workshop on Coordination of Activities in the Fildes Peninsula Region.
At CEP XI, Germany introduced IP 30 Final Report on the Research Project “Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas“. It contained a proposal for a “Fildes Peninsula region ASMA Man­agement Plan” which was already presented to CEP X as IP 112 (2007) Possible Modules of a ‘Fildes Peninsula region’ ASMA Management Plan and which was uploaded on the IWG web-based Discussion Forum.
At CEP XII, Chile and Germany introduced WP 004 Second Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Chile introduced IP 81 Notes on a Multiple Protection System for some areas in King George Island: Zones under Annex V and their relevance to Fildes Peninsula and adjacent areas.
At CEP XII, Germany introduced IP 50 Research Project “Current Environmental Situation and Management Proposals for the Fildes Region (Antarctic)”
At CEP XIII, Chile and Germany introduced WP 040 Third Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island.
    2. Work of the IWG for the intersessional period until CEP XIV in 2011
At an informal meeting of the IWG in Punta del Este, it was agreed that the convenors of the IWG, Chile and Germany, would work on a revised draft Management Plan for the Fildes Peninsula taking aboard comments made within the IWG Meeting as well as any written contributions for their submission as part of a Progress Report to the XXXIII ATCM (see Annex 1 “Tasks of the IWG Fildes for the intersessional period until CEP XIV in 2010/2011”).
In the previous intersessional periods the draft Management Plan for the Fildes Peninsula has been revised several times on the basis of the comments received by Parties with stations in the area (WP 040 ATCM XXXIII). In 2010, it was revised again on the basis of comments by Uruguay and could be down-loaded from the web-based Fildes Discussion Forum of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.  
In 2010, the spatial synthesis of the different requirements concerning a possible Facility Zone, which has already begun in 2009, could be finalized on the basis of the maps submitted by all parties with stations in the area (CHL, CHN, RUS, URY, see Annex 2). 
The code of conduct for the facility zone as a part of the proposed management plan was revised on the basis of the comments by ASOC and Uruguay (see Annex 3). There are two remaining comments by ASOC, which have not been implemented so far. Before that, these comments need to be discussed further within the next intersessional period by IWG members. 
Thus, it appears that not all of the tasks in Annex 1 have been fulfilled. Therefore, we propose to pick up the left tasks again in order to tackle them within the next intersessional period (see chapter 3). 
    3. Further Steps
The IWG’s working plan for the intersessional period 2010-2011 (see Annex 1) could not be finalized. The majority of IWG members running a station in the area did not comment on the last version of the draft Management Plan for the Fildes Peninsula Region as well as on the code of conduct for the Facility Zone.
Some progress has been made with respect to the search for an agreed protection of the Fildes Peninsula Region. However, the following aspects should be taken into consideration and discussed further (unless otherwise agreed at CEP XIV): 
    • Code of conduct of the Facility Zone (see Annex 3)
    • Additional spatial zones like a visitor zone and its corresponding code of conduct and other possible components on the basis of the manifold revised proposal of a management plan for the Fildes Peninsula Region
    • The revised proposal of the Management Plan and its relation to the existing and any other potential ASPA included in the region
The participants of the IWG Meeting are kindly invited to continue their intersessional work at the web-based Fildes Discussion Forum of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

In addition, the IWG conveners propose to have an IWG Meeting during CEP XIV in Buenos Aires in order to continue the discussion of all aspects related to the nature, scope and characteristics of a management scheme for the Fildes Peninsula Region. 

Annex 1: Tasks of the IWG Fildes for the intersessional period until CEP XIV in 2010/2011

At CEP XIII held in Punta del Este (3 to 7 May 2010) the Convenors Chile & Germany presented the third Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula & Ardley Island (WP 040). In this Progress Report the IWG Conveners propose to have an IWG Meeting during CEP XIII in Punta del Este, Uruguay, in order to continue the discussion of all elements related to the nature, scope and characteristics of a management scheme for the Fildes Peninsula Region, including the suggestions by Uruguay and any other participant regarding the integration of the Fildes Facility Zones, and the revised Management Plan prepared by Germany.
This meeting took place in parallel to CEP XIII on 5 May 2010. The Convenors and the IWG members present agreed to continue their intersessional work at the web-based Discussion Forum of the ATS. They also underlined the importance of the Coordination in the field and encouraged the station managers in Fildes to continue their regular exchange of information. In the end the IWG members discussed the work to be carried out during the next intersessional period and agreed about the following Work Plan:

First Step: Facility Zone until 31 July 2010:
In order to finalise the work regarding the Facility Zone as already agreed on the Punta Arenas Workshop on 30 & 31 July 2009:
    (a) If not done so far, all IWG members with stations in the region are invited to submit the spatial definition and its boundaries (proposed location and size) of a possible facility zone around their stations by 15 June 2010, 
    (b) On the basis of (a), the Convenors will prepare a revised proposal towards an integrated facility zone representing the agreed common boundaries of all parties with stations in the region by 31 July 2010. 
    (c) All IWG members are invited to submit the missing information/elements in the current concept for the Facility Zone (see Appendix of WP 040 (2010)).
    (d) On the basis of (c), the Convenors will prepare the revised concept for the Facility Zone by 31 July 2010.

Second Step: Remaining Zones / current Management Plan until 31 October 2010:
In order to finalise the work regarding the draft Management Plan contained in Annex II of WP 040 (2010):
    (a) All IWG members are invited to submit their comments, corrections and amendments of the Codes of Conducts for the remaining proposed zones by 30 September 2010, 
    (b) All IWG members are invited to submit their comments, corrections and amendments of possible proposals for other Codes of Conduct and other possible components in the conceptual framework of the current draft Management Plan by 30 September 2010.
    (c) The Convenors will prepare a revised draft Management Plan taking aboard comments under (a) and (b) by 31 October 2010.

Third Step: Preparation of the Progress Report to CEP XIV until 31 January 2011:
On the basis of step 1 and step II the Convenors will prepare a Progress Report to be submitted to CEP XIV /ATVM XXXIV by 31 January 2011.

Annex 2:  Agreed proposal of a possible Facility Zone within the Fildes Peninsula Region





Annex 3:  Code of conduct for a possible Facility Zone within the Fildes Peninsula Region with two remaining comments by ASOC, which could not be implemented so far and they need to be discussed further.

1. Introduction
The Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA contains Facility Zones which include P. Frei and Escudero Stations (Chile), Great Wall Station (China), Bellingshausen Station (Russia) and Artigas Station (Uruguay) and the Chilean airport. It also includes infrastructure outside stations (all field huts, fuel tanks, lakes connected with pipelines for water supply), main roads, and beach areas used for logistic operations -influence area-. Activities within these zones are to be undertaken according to the following Code of Conduct the aims of which are to 
    • assure the health and safety of station personnel, researchers and visitors;
    • facilitate scientific investigation in the area by establishing and maintaining supportive infrastructure;
    • protect the natural, scientific and cultural values of the facilities zone.
A copy of the complete Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA Management Package will be kept at the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan Stations where relevant maps and information posters about the ASMA will also be available. The Station Leader or the Station Environmental Officer should brief station personnel on arrival about environmental management in the field, the location of protected areas, and the provisions of the ASMA Management Plan. Visitors should be made aware of the content of this Code of Conduct before arriving at the stations.
2. Station operation, construction and removal
2.1. Waste Management
Waste management should be included in the planning of all activities at the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan Stations. The detailed instructions are given in Annex III of the Environmental Protocol. Hazardous material should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area. Regular cleaning of rubbish from station grounds and surrounding areas reduces its dispersal into the environment by wind or birds. Cooperation between stations in clean-ups can increase their efficiency if needed or requested. Historic waste sites that are not designated as a historic site or monuments should be cleaned up as soon as possible.
2.2. Use of water
Water sources need to be separated from any handling or disposal of wastes, fuel or other chemicals. Regular tests of water quality and routine cleaning of water holding tanks are necessary. Used station water should not be disposed of into the environment without treatment. Filter systems need to comply with best practice standards.

2.3. Generation of power
Regular inspections and modernisation of generators is required to reduce emissions and fuel leaks. Solar and wind power should be used as much as possible to minimize fuel demand. In addition, the adoption of measures to increase energy efficiency should be considered in every station.
2.4. Handling of fuel 
The regular inspection of fuel storage facilities, supply pipe lines, pumps, reels and other fuel handling equipment is of high priority. Storage areas should be secured by siting them a safe distance from living quarters and from electrical supplies. In order to avoid incidences of fuel spills, e.g. during fuel transfer, all appropriate measures should be followed (see COMNAP guidelines). Any spills must be treated immediately with sufficient equipment according to Oil Spill Contingency Plans of each station with all available help by other stations on site or nearby. Oil spills shall be reported immediately to the Coordination Group in time. Station personnel should undergo regular emergency training. 
2.5. Prevention of fire 
Flammable substances need to be appropriately labelled. Fire fighting equipment should be available at dangerous sites like fuel stores and vehicle parks. Regular checks of electricity cables reduce the risk of short circuits. 
2.6. Construction and removal of infrastructure 
An Environmental Impact Assessment at the appropriate level should be undertaken before any construction or removal of buildings or other permanent infrastructure according to Annex I of the Environmental Protocol. 

3. Traffic management
3.1. Land traffic
Vehicles should only be used around and between the stations when necessary. The existing road network should not be enlarged without a clear scientific or logistic purpose. Such expansion should be subject of an EIA at the appropriate level according to Annex I of the Environmental Protocol. Appropriate facilities must be provided for secure refueling and servicing of vehicles. Any wildlife disturbance, vegetation damage, or interference with scientific work should be avoided. 
3.2. Air traffic 
Aircraft will generally take off from and land at the Chilean airport but the helicopter pads at the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan stations can also be used where there are scientific, logistics support and rescue reasons. All air traffic should be conducted according to AFIM and WAM within the facility zones avoiding all other zones within the ASMA boundary as far as possible. Special care should be taken when flying over land to reduce potential negative impacts on wildlife. Special guidelines should be followed as stated in the management plan of ASPA No. 150 and ATCM Resolution 2 (2004).
3.3. Sea traffic
Small boat and zodiac use should be concentrated in the marine areas within the facility zones as far as possible and only in support of scientific, logistic and non-governmental operations. All boats need to be operated by more than one person and be equipped with life jackets and VHF radios. Weather conditions need to be suitable to reduce the risk of accidents. For safety a second boat can be used or stay on stand-by for immediate support in an emergency. 
Crossing the isthmus between Ardley Island and Fildes Peninsula is only possible at high tide and with small boat and can be dangerous. The preferable route of getting from Bellingshausen or Frey station to the Hydrographers Cove or to the Great Wall station therefore is circumnavigating Ardley Island along its Northern and Eastern shore through the Maxwell Bay.
4. Field excursions 
The station leader or the station environmental officer will brief field parties on environmental management in the field, the location of protected areas, and the provisions of the ASMA Management Plan. All waste from field parties, except for human waste (faeces, urine and gray water) will be returned to the stations for safe disposal. All field parties will be equipped with VHF radios. 
5. Protected Areas 
ASPA Nos. 125 and 150 are located in the area. Station members and visitors will be made aware of the location of these areas and the restrictions on access to them. Information about the ASPAs including the management plans will be displayed in all stations. 
6. Flora and fauna
Any activity involving the removal or harmful interference with native flora or fauna (Annex II to the Environmental Protocol) is prohibited unless authorised by a permit issued by the appropriate authority. Minimum approach distances to birds or seals should be followed to reduce disturbance. Scientists and visitors should take care near wildlife particularly in the breeding and moulting seasons. Birds are not to be fed on station food. Food wastes should be hidden to prevent scavenging by birds. The introduction of non-native species should be avoided by cleaning clothes, boots and equipment before entering the area. Each registered introduction of non-native species should be reported to the Coordination Group, and remedial action should be considered.
7. Visitors
Any visits to the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan stations should be arranged by informing the station leaders of the planned activity. Contacts are made via Marine VHF. Station leaders will coordinate visits to stations with expedition leaders. Visitors will be informed about the principles of this code of conduct and the ASMA management plan. They should follow visitor guidelines (Recommendation XVIII – 1, IAATO). The station leaders will appoint guides to present station-specific information. 


