





Yacht guidelines to complement safety standards of ship traffic around Antarctica





Yacht guidelines to complement safety standards of ship traffic around Antarctica
Summary/ Intention
In view of concerns expressed about safety standards and regulation of yachts, it is proposed that the ATCM’s Tourism Working Group considers the development of  common yacht guidelines for the Antarctic Treaty area based on aspects of existing guidelines (e.g. from IAATO or the UK). As a first step, this paper proposes a checklist of issues that those intending to conduct yachting expeditions to Antarctica may find helpful to guide their preparations. The checklist may also be useful for competent authorities to use when assessing yacht-based expeditions planning to visit Antarctica. It is subsequently proposed that further work be undertaken during the intersessional period to consider the development of guidelines for yacht-based activities, including in conjunction with the proposed competent authorities’ intersessional work if this is agreed.
Introduction
Within the last decade, several attempts have been made by the ATCM and IMO to improve safety regulations for sea-based activities within the Antarctic Treaty area. Many of these efforts also helped the protection of the Antarctic environment since they aimed to minimize the risks posed by ship damage. A good deal of focus to date has been on the increasing cruise ship traffic as each ship brings e.g. up to several hundred people to the Southern Ocean. In addition, IMO Guidelines for Shipping in Polar Waters, SOLAS (International Convention for the Safety Of Life At Sea), and STCW (International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers) are valuable regulations that do much to improve safety of life at sea.
In contrast, small yacht expeditions are not included in these regulations. For example, SOLAS is relevant for merchant ships that transport cargo or passengers but it does not cover warships, small cargo ships, fishing vessels and sail boats. Although it has yet to be decided, it seems likely that the IMO’s polar shipping code will apply only to SOLAS vessels in the first instance. Thus, recent comprehensive guidance provided by IAATO for small boat operations (ATCM XXXIII, IP 61 IAATO Further Recommendations to Tourism Vessel Operators to Enhance Marine Safety and Guidelines for Small Boat Operations in the Vicinity of Ice) and enhanced information by poster and pamphlets for ‘Sailing to Antarctica’ were highly welcomed. This is particularly useful as nearly half of the commercial yachts known to visit the Antarctic area (including bigger yachts carrying less than 12 passengers) are already associated with IAATO. Within the ATCM, Measure 4 (2004) on “Insurance and contingency planning for tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area” is directly relevant to yacht operations and will be an increasingly important tool when it comes into force.
The UK and the USA (ATCM XXXIII, WP 52 Data Collection and Reporting on Yachting Activity in Antarctica), took a first step towards assessing the current status of yacht sailings. However, a reliable statement on mapping of yacht activities in Antarctic waters will remain a challenge without some form of monitoring or possibly regulations requiring a general register and tracking or reporting system.
Checklist of yacht specific items for discussion
The current IAATO guidelines as well as national initiatives seem a useful starting point to develop agreed yachting guidelines at ATCM level. In addition, the forthcoming IMO circular on 'Basic Safety Guidance for Yacht Races or Oceanic Voyages by Non-Regulated Craft' will provide useful content to consider. The following checklist is intended to be yacht specific and could be used as the basis for developing more formal yacht guidelines in the future:

Technical preparation:
    • Vessel structure and specific equipment:
        ◦ Metal hulls should be favoured for yachts regularly visiting Antarctica; all other hull types should be strong and stable. Consideration should also be given to visiting only during Austral summer months and preferably ice-free areas to avoid hazards
        ◦ All items onboard should be prepared for withstanding extreme weather conditions and large seas
        ◦ The vessel itself, especially the superstructure, should be able to withstand extreme weather conditions and large seas. Small vessels less than 60 feet should be able to withstand 360 degrees roll.
        ◦ A sturdy boarding ladder or platform is highly recommended
        ◦ Decks should be fitted with safety harness jackstays and attachment points
        ◦ Multiple sets of anchoring equipment; shorelines and associated equipment/ good ground tackle is essential
        ◦ Drogue
        ◦ Multiple shore landing craft
        ◦ Comprehensive tool kit and spare parts inventory
        ◦ Robust mast & rigging on sailing vessels 
        ◦ Means to combat icing of the vessel and rig
        ◦ Bolt cutters for sailboats in order to free a broken rig
        ◦ Heavy weather sails for sailing yachts
        ◦ Cold weather treatment for fuel
        ◦ Storm boards with the ability to replace, cover or repair any hatch or opening
        ◦ Essential: Radar
        ◦ Essential: Deck spotlight for ice identification at night
        ◦ Comprehensive first aid equipment
        ◦ Ocean-going man-overboard marking and retrieval equipment
        ◦ Ocean-going grade life rafts, lifejackets or survival suits and safety harnesses for at least 100% capacity
    • Other critical boat systems (i.e. steering, autopilot) should be robust and where possible duplex (i.e. with redundancy) 
    • Communication equipment:
        ◦ Suitable means to receive and transmit weather and ice information
        ◦ Long-range communications systems: Iridium, Inmarsat and/or HF/SSB
        ◦ 406 EPIRB (Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacon)
        ◦ PLB (Personal Location Beacon)
Personal preparation:
    • Experience, training and knowledge are the basis for pre-expedition decisions:
        ◦ Involve experienced yachtsmen particularly of sailing in high latitudes
        ◦ Ensure absolute self sufficiency when operating south of 60 degrees
        ◦ Don’t rely only on (old) maps and charts-based GPS positioning
        ◦ First aid equipment training for crew members
        ◦ All crew and passengers should be comprehensively briefed on vessel operations, safety procedures, environmental considerations and bio-security
        ◦ Additional training for crew members in ship and sailing techniques relevant for high latitude operations, particularly in icy waters and severe weather conditions
    • Reports/ Monitoring:
        ◦ Risk assessments for all planned activities should be provided beforehand
        ◦ Post visit report to permitting authorities afterwards
        ◦ Weather observations should be reported regularly to the Voluntary Observation Program 
    • Environmental considerations:
        ◦ Leave pets at home and avoid introducing non-native plants
        ◦ Keep oily waters onboard. 
        ◦ Do not litter. If you bring it in, take it out.
        ◦ When possible, disposal of sewage and grey water is to be avoided.
It is noted that it will be important to involve experts with experience in sailing in Arctic/Antarctic waters in the further deliberations as to the technical issues listed above.
Furthermore, it should be noted that the guidance and recommendations suggested by the above list could vary depending on type and size of the vessel, and that it may be useful to discuss and defined issues related to type/size in the further consideration of guidelines/checklist. 
Recommendations
In order to help improve safety standards of yachts visiting Antarctica, promote good practice and further protect the environment, Parties are invited to: 
    i) debate the proposed yacht checklist and consider whether the checklist might form the basis for development of more detailed guidelines for yachting expeditions during the intersessional period;
    ii) discuss the yacht checklist and options for its wider use, for example, through dissemination and consultation among the yachting community; 
    iii) deliberate the use of the yacht checklist by competent authorities in assessing yachting expeditions (possibly on a trial basis during the 2011/12 Antarctic season);
    iv) explore ways to capture and share data on activities in Antarctic waters (e.g. via an ATS database or the EIES) and propose ideas to encourage yachts to report their position and intentions while in the region
    v) encourage the IMO to consider whether any specific requirements for yachts visiting Antarctica should be addressed in the second phase of the development of the Polar Code.


