





Proposed monitoring activities within Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 107 Emperor Island, Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula





Proposed monitoring activities within Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 107 Emperor Island, Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
A working paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
ASPA 107 Emperor Island, Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, was established to protect the emperor penguin colony. The continued existence of the emperor penguin colony within the ASPA is now in doubt.  The United Kingdom proposes delaying the revision of the current ASPA Management Plan for 5 years to enable the status of the colony to be confirmed, after which appropriate management action will be considered.
Background
The Dion Islands (Latitude 67°52’ S, Longitude 68°42’ W), on the western side of the central Antarctic Peninsula in north-western Marguerite Bay, were originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 8 through Recommendation IV-8 in 1966 after a proposal by the United Kingdom. Values protected under the original designation were concerned entirely with the presence of the only colony of emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) known to exist on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula. A management plan for the Area was adopted through Recommendation XVI-6 (1990), which reaffirmed the values of the Area. The boundaries were extended to include the intervening sea between the islands to ensure protection of the emperor penguins at sea or on sea-ice in the immediate vicinity. Attention was drawn to the additional important value of the colony being one of only two known in which breeding occurs on land. It was also noted as probably the smallest emperor penguin colony, with annual numbers fluctuating around 150 pairs.
The current Management Plan, adopted though Measure 1 (2002), states that the ASPA should be “designated for an indefinite period, provided the emperor penguins continue to breed in the Area.”
A recent study by UK scientists has cast doubt over the continued existence of the emperor penguin colony on the Dion Islands.  When discovered in 1948, the colony comprised of approximately 150 breeding pairs; these numbers were maintained until 1970, after which time the colony showed a continuous decline. By 1999 there were fewer than 20 pairs, and in 2009 high-resolution aerial photography revealed no remaining trace of the colony.  The decline and possible loss of the Dion Islands colony is thought to be linked to a well-documented rise in local mean annual air temperature and coincident decline in seasonal sea ice duration in the area. 
Proposed monitoring activities
In light of current uncertainty concerning the persistence of the emperor penguin colony within the ASPA, the UK proposes delaying the revision of the current ASPA Management Plan for 5 years to facilitate research that will enable the status of the colony to be confirmed.  Appropriate management action, including possible de-listing, will then be considered.
Reference
Trathan, P.N., Fretwell, P.T., & Stonehouse, B. (2011). First recorded loss of an emperor penguin colony in the recent period of Antarctic regional warming: implications for other colonies. PLoS ONE 6(2): e14738. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0014738

