





Site Guidelines for the Taylor Valley Visitor Zone, Southern Victoria Land





Site Guidelines for the Taylor Valley Visitor Zone, Southern Victoria Land

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand and the United States

Abstract

In accordance with Resolution 5 (2005), New Zealand and the United States have drafted site guidelines for the Taylor Valley Visitor Zone (formerly the Canada Glacier Tourism Zone) in the McMurdo Dry Valleys. The guidelines aim to minimise the risk of visitor related pressures at this site of outstanding natural and scenic value. It is proposed that the attached site guidelines be adopted by means of a resolution and that the secretariat publish the guide as it has done for existing site guidelines.

Background

In accordance with Resolution 5 (2005), New Zealand and the United States have drafted site guidelines for the Taylor Valley Visitor Zone. The area has outstanding natural and scenic value and is in the largest ice-free area in Antarctica. Site specific guidelines will support the protection of the values in the zone.

The zone has received a moderate number of landings compared to other sites in the Ross Sea Region, with 3 landings there in the last 6 seasons, totalling around 35 hours of visitation by approximately 450 visitors. The zone is accessed by helicopter from vessels in McMurdo Sound. 

This zone is in the McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 2). As part of the review of the ASMA Management Plan this year, tourism guidelines appended to the plan have been re-formatted as Site Guidelines. The guidelines reflect the existing Management Plan provisions for the area, and are intended to be used in conjunction with the Management Plan. 

The name of the zone has been changed to the ‘Taylor Valley Visitor Zone’ from that used in the original Management Plan (‘Canada Glacier Tourist Zone’) in order to avoid potential confusion with nearby ASPA No. 131 Canada Glacier. A minor change has been made to the northern boundary of the Visitor Zone following concerns raised by scientists working in the Area about tourist traffic in a wetland area which is the subject of long-term scientific monitoring.

We note that some of the text of this site guideline is contingent on the endorsement of the review of the ASMA Management Plan at this meeting, and if necessary, minor changes can be made to the guideline to accommodate any revision of that Management Plan. 

Recommendation

It is proposed that the attached site guide be adopted by means of a resolution and that the secretariat publish the guide as it has done for the existing site guidelines.


Map Text for Translation

Map 1 – Ross Sea

English



Ross Sea



ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys



Wilson Piedmont Glacier



Taylor Valley Visitor Zone



Taylor Valley



Ferrar Glacier



Blue Glacier



McMurdo Sound



Cape Bird



Cape Crozier



Ross Island



Mt. Erebus



Cape Royds



Erebus Bay



McMurdo Station



Scott Base



Ross Ice Shelf




Map 2 –Taylor Valley Visitor Zone Overview Map

English



ASPA No. 131 Canada Glacier (Entry by permit)



Canada Stream



Canada Glacier



Green Creek



Taylor Valley Visitor Zone



Delta Stream



Crescent Stream



Lake Fryxell



Lake Fryxell Facilities Zone



Taylor Valley Visitor Zone – Overview Map



Contour – Land (20m)



Contour – Ice (20m)



Glacier



Ice Free Ground



Lake



Stream



Protected Area



Facilities Zone



Visitor Zone



Helicopter landing site





