





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Non-Native Species 2010-2011




Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Non-Native Species 2010-2011
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand on Behalf of the ICG
Summary
The Non-Native Species Intersessional Contact Group (NNS ICG) has completed its second year of work. Drafting of the overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address risks posed by NNS is complete. A NNS Manual containing generally applicable guidelines and resources to support the prevention, monitoring and response to NNS introductions has been drafted. Annexed to the Manual are additional guidelines that the ICG has identified as being important but requiring further attention or development before inclusion in the Manual proper. The ICG recommends that the CEP endorse the Manual and encourage its use. The ICG also puts forward a draft work plan to support further development of the Manual. 

Background
In 2006, CEP IX considered the recommendations arising from the CEP Workshop on Non-native Species in the Antarctic (ATCM XXVIII WP 13). It recommended, inter alia, that: 
    • the issue of non-native species in the Antarctic should be given the highest priority, consistent with the high environmental standards set out in the Protocol; 
    • the CEP should take the lead on the issue; and
    • a set of comprehensive and standardised guidance and / or procedures should be developed, aimed at all operators in the Antarctic.

At CEP XII in 2009, the Committee agreed with a proposal by Australia, France and New Zealand to establish an intersessional contact group (ICG) to progress work on the recommendations from the 2006 workshop, in line with the high priority afforded to this issue through the CEP’s 5 year work plan (ATCM XXXII WP 5).

The 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management emphasised the importance of preventing introductions, acknowledged that the greatest effort should be placed on preventing the introduction of non-native species (Para. 111, Co-chair’s report), and reccomended that:
    • The CEP consider using established methods of identifying a) Antarctic environments at high risk from establishment by non-natives and b) non-native species that present a high risk of establishment in Antarctica (Recommendation 22).
    • Parties be encouraged to comprehensively and consistently implement management measures to respond to the environmental implications of climate change, particularly measures to avoid introduction and translocation of non-native species, and to report on their effectiveness (Recommendation 23). 

CEP XIII in 2010 considered a report from France on the first year of the ICG, (ATCM XXXIII WP9) and agreed to a second year of intersessional work, to be led by New Zealand, with the following terms of reference:
    1. Continue the discussion on the overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address risks posed by non-native species.
    2. Continue the development of a suggested set of generally applicable measures1 (practical measures, tools or procedures), to prevent or minimise the risk of the introduction of non-native species, and to monitor and to respond to any introductions (including the transfer of species between sites in Antarctica). The ICG will consider the recent work presented by several Parties at CEP XIII, the relevant recommendations from the ATME on the implications of climate change, and the existing guidelines endorsed by the ATCM or those used by other bodies (e.g. COMNAP, SCAR, IAATO, IMO) for inclusion in a manual. 
    3. Continue the identification of particular aspects of Antarctic operations for which further work might be required in order to develop specific guidance.
    4. Report to CEP XIII on progress with the above.

During the ICG’s second year of work, eleven Members (Argentina, Australia, Brazil, France, Germany, India, The Netherlands, Norway, United Kingdom, United States of America, and Uruguay), ASOC, COMNAP and IAATO participated. 


Overall Objective and Key Guiding Principles (TOR 1)
Work on the overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address risks posed by NNS was largely complete during the first year of the ICG’s work. Minor changes have been made to this text, and the ICG see this work as complete. It is intended that the overall objective and key guiding principles will provide high-level direction for the development of further guidance. It also forms the introductory material for the attached NNS Manual (pages 1-4). 

The ICG recommends that the CEP:
    1. Endorses the overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address risks posed by non-native species.


Development of a NNS Manual (TOR 2 and 3)
The ICG has prepared a NNS Manual, comprised of the outputs from the first three terms of reference. The purpose of the Manual is to provide guidance to Antarctic Treaty Parties in order to meet the overall objective identified above, and minimise the risk of accidental or unintentional introduction of NNS. 

The Manual includes the overall objective (Section 1) and key guiding principles (Section 2). Section 3 contains generally applicable guidelines to prevent, monitor and respond to NNS introductions as well as resources that the ICG identified as useful to support such work.  Annexed to the Manual are additional guidelines that the ICG has identified as being important but requiring further attention or development before inclusion in the Manual.

The Manual is intended to be a central information source for NNS guidance, presenting practical guidelines and resources that operators can apply and use, as appropriate, to assist with meeting their responsibilities under Annex II to the Protocol. The Manual is intended to be a ‘living’ document that will be updated and added to as new work, research and best practice are developed. 

In accordance with TOR 2 and with the CEP’s discussion of this matter in 2010 (CEP XIII final report Para. 306, 338, 342) the ICG drew on existing resources to build the Manual including the ballast water guidelines, SCAR’s environmental code of conduct and vehicle cleaning guidelines, as well as its own work.

The ICG agreed that there is a pressing need for further detailed guidance to be developed for inclusion in the Manual. The support of SCAR, COMNAP and other experts in the development and implementation of further guidance will be important.

The ICG considered that the Manual should be presented in a format that is readily updatable, so that as new components are created, they can be easily added. The ICG suggests that the Manual should be hosted on the ATS website in the four Treaty languages, in a format similar to the CEP Handbook, so that Parties can easily access the guidelines and resources that will support their work, and so that additional guidelines and resources can be easily added.

The ICG recommends that the CEP:
    2. Considers and endorses the Non-Native Species Manual;
    3. Encourages the dissemination and use of the Manual;
    4. Continues to develop the Non-Native Species Manual with the input of SCAR and COMNAP on scientific and practical matters, respectively;
    5. Requests that the Manual is posted on the ATS website;
    6. Considers forwarding the objective, key guiding principles and Manual to the ATCM for endorsement by means of a resolution. 


Work Plan
The ICG has considered a draft revision for the NNS section of the CEP 5 Year Work Plan. The suggested work plan gives a focus to developing work on preventative measures in the coming intersessional period, followed by development of monitoring and response measures in subsequent years, with a suggested review of progress and of the contents of the Manual in 4-5 years. 

The ICG did not consider in detail how this work programme would be progressed, but agreed that having a focus for each meeting in line with the guiding principles would help guide work and discussions at each meeting. It was noted that much of the work would take some time to develop, for example work on monitoring guidance may need to begin in the coming intersessional period if it is to be ready for discussion in 2013.

Actions:
1. Continue the development of guidelines and resources for inclusion in the Non-Native Species Manual. 

CEP XIV 2011
Consider final report and recommendations of the ICG.
Intersession
Manual posted on ATS website.
Interested Members, Scientists, National Antarctic Programmes work on preventative measures.
CEP XV 2012
Discuss further preventative measures for inclusion in the NNS Manual.
Intersession
Interested Members, Scientists, National Antarctic Programmes work on monitoring measures.
CEP XVI 2013
Discuss further monitoring measures for inclusion in the NNS Manual.
Intersession
Interested Members, Scientists, National Antarctic Programmes work on response measures.
CEP XVII 2014
Discuss further response measures for inclusion in the NNS Manual.
Intersession
Prepare for review of manual –consider informal discussion group.
CEP XVIII 2015
Review Manual.

The ICG recommends that the CEP:
    7. Includes the suggested NNS actions in the revised 5 year work plan;
    8. Undertakes a review of the Manual and progress against the work plan in 4-5 years.




