





Proposed addition of No.1 Building Commemorating China’s Antarctic Expedition at Great Wall Station to the List of Historic Sites and Monument





Proposed addition of No.1 Building Commemorating China’s Antarctic Expedition at Great Wall Station to the List of Historic Sites and Monument

This is a proposal for a new Historic Site or Monument

    (i) Name of Proposed HSM: No.1 Building at Great Wall Station
    (ii) Description:  The No.1 Building, built in 1985 with a total floor space of 175 square meters, is located at the centre of the Chinese Antarctic Great Wall Station which is situated in Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetlands, West Antarctica. The Building marked the commencement of China devoting to Antarctic research in the 1980s, and thus it is of great significance in commemorating China’s Antarctic expedition. 
    (iii) Coordinates: 62°13′4″ S Latitude and 58°57′44″ W Longitude
    (iv) Original proposing Party: CHINA
    (v) Party undertaking management: CHINA








	





























Proposed addition of No.1 Building Commemorating China’s Antarctic Expedition at Great Wall Station to the List of Historic Sites and Monument

Summary
China proposes, in accordance with Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, that the No.1 Building commemorating China’s Antarctic Expedition at Great Wall station be added to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments Approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting”.   The building was the first permanent building constructed by China in Antarctica and laid the foundation for China’s continuous scientific study in King George Island area and symbolized the beginning of understanding and exploring Antarctic by Chinese people. Its construction process also embodied the so-called Antarctic spirit of Chinese expedition which was interpreted as being brave in exploration and innovation and solidarity and team work and daring no hardship, and could be regarded as an epitome of Antarctic spirit worldwide. 
Background
Chinese Antarctic Great Wall Station was the first scientific research station China established in Antarctic and No.1 Building was the first permanent building being constructed at the station. On December 30, 1984, the first Chinese Antarctic Expedition landed on King George Island. The construction job of No.1 Building started on January 20, 1985 by more than 130 expeditioners.  With their wisdom, courageous, creativeness and solidarity and by overcoming all difficulties that saw lack of experiences and heavy equipments, the Chinese Antarctic expedition successfully completed the construction of the Building on February 20, 1985.
The Building, with a total floor space of 175 square meters, is an overhead assembled housing with exposed steel structure. It was designed by a Chinese company which gave full consideration to the factors such as warm-keeping, wind-resistant, fireproofing, anti-corrosion, high level of using prefabricated components. It was well-appointed and showed beautiful interior decoration. The construction reflected China’s technological level in architecture at that time and was the critical facility which realized the heroic attempt that the Expedition team built the station and overwintered at the station in the same year in the history of China’s Antarctic Expedition.
Over the following years, No.1 Building was the core building at Great Wall station and played a very important role in the scientific research activities. It was ever functioned as the station headquarters, meeting room, bedroom, workroom, communication room, dining room, kitchen, storeroom, medical room, post office and library. The observation programs China carried out in Antarctic in the field of meteorology, seismology, the ionosphere and whistlers all began from this building. Moreover, a lot of activities including the inauguration ceremony of Great Wall station were held in this building. 
With the advancement of China’s Antarctic research, more-modernized buildings were built since then at the Station according to an overall construction plan of China’s Antarctic program. No.1 Building has fulfilled its historic mission to perfection and is no longer used as a main research facility, but its historic value and memorable significance is increasing with time. The First Chinese Antarctic Expedition and the establishment of the Great Wall station have been introduced to the school textbooks for primary school and middle school in China for popularization of polar science knowledge and public awareness of the Antarctic expedition. 
The further maintenance and conservation plan for No.1 Building is in process. 
Position and Description
Position:  62°13′4″ S Latitude and 58°57′44″ W Longitude
The building locates in the centre area of Chinese Antarctic Great Wall Station which is situated at Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetlands, West Antarctica. It’s an overhead assembled housing with exposed steel structure. The Building is 23 meters long, 8 meters wide and 4.7 meters high, with a total floor space of 175 square meters. 
Reason for designation
Consistent with Resolution 8 (1995) and the Appendix to Resolution 3 (2009), the building merits listing for the following reasons:
    1) The Building was the first permanent building of China’s Antarctic Expedition. It laid the foundation for China’s long-term Antarctic research.  It is a crystallization of Chinese Antarctic expedition’s spirit of being brave in exploration and innovation, solidarity and cooperation, and daring no hardship and symbolizes the beginning of understanding and exploring Antarctic by Chinese people. 
    2) The Building was successfully constructed by more than 130 Chinese Antarctic expeditioners with rather simple tools and equipment under the condition of lack of experiences and heavy equipments. The construction work represent China’s attempt in choosing method and construction materials in polar areas in which the lessons and experiences gained from the construction of the building was served as guidance and reference for China’s future station building in Antarctic. 
    3) As a symbol of the spirit of China’s Antarctic expedition, the Building has been introduced to the school textbooks of the primary school and middle school in China for popularizing polar science knowledge and cultivating the Antarctic expedition spirit of exploration, innovation and cooperation. Therefore, the Building is of great significance for inheriting the history of China’s Antarctic expedition.
Available Photographs
    1) Overview of the Building
Bibliography
Wu Heng, Qian Zhihong, editor-in-chief, An Undertaking of Antarctic Expedition in Contemporary China, Contemporary China Publishing House, June 1994.
Guo Kun, Chinese Antarctic Great Wall Station, Ocean Press, 2011.
Ma Huaichang, Special Housing with New Building Materials Erecting in Antarctica, Journal of Chinese Building Material, vol. Ⅶ, 1985. 
Wang Yaoming, The Electric Work at Chinese Antarctic Great Wall Station, Journal of Glass and Ceramic, vol. Ⅳ, 1987. 


















Overview of the Building

