





Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections: January 2010 and January 2011




Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections: January 2010 and January 2011
Abstract
In January 2010, Australian observers conducted on-ground inspections of Syowa Station (Japan), Druzhnaya IV and Soyuz Stations (Russian Federation) and Mount Harding Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 168, and an aerial observation of Molodezhnaya Station (Russian Federation). In January 2011, Australian observers conducted on-ground inspections of Gondwana Station (Germany) and Vostok Station (Russian Federation), and an aerial observation of Leningradskaya Station (Russian Federation). The full inspection reports are presented in separate Information Papers.  This paper outlines key findings and Australia’s recommendations.  Map 1 shows the locations mentioned in this paper.
Key findings
January 2010
Molodezhnaya Station (Russian Federation)
Molodezhnaya Station is very large, with a smaller separate complex of buildings and equipment some 12km from the main station. Extensive snow and ice cover was apparent despite the summer melt. Some buildings and pipework were partially buried, and melt ponds surrounded some buildings. 
The inspectors saw numerous very large fuel tanks, without apparent secondary containment.  No conclusions could be made about the contents of or condition of these tanks. The inspection team’s assessment was that considerable effort would be needed to bring the station back into an operational capacity, or to remove items no longer required. 
Syowa Station (Japan)
The station includes a mixture of older and new buildings.  The inspection team assessed the condition, maintenance and safety of the station as generally good. Cleanup activity was underway to manage and repatriate waste. Comprehensive management systems were in place for environmental protection and for safety. The team observed bunded fuel tanks to be in good condition.  Minor spills at the vehicle refuelling point were observed. Of particular note was the clear focus on science at Syowa Station.  A significant number of scientists (11) had wintered over.
Druzhnaya IV station (Russian Federation)
The station was operating to support geosciences field programs in the broader region. Core facilities such as generator, kitchen/mess, and communications huts remain on site, other huts are removed at the end of each summer season and returned as needed. Some empty 200 litre fuel drums had accumulated.  Station personnel were engaged in removing them from snow for return (intact) to the resupply vessel. Some wastes, including eggshells, were stored uncovered, posing a risk of disease introduction to local bird populations. Overall, the inspection team regarded the operation and management of the station as appropriate to the scale of activities that it supports.  
Soyuz station (Russian Federation)
Most station buildings showed weather-related damage, and some contained substantial amounts of snow and ice.  The site appeared not to have been well secured after its last visit. The inspection team observed unsecured material including empty drums and open-top waste containers in several locations, in addition to some localised fuel or lubricant spills. There were several outdoor piles of what appeared to be waste equipment and numerous open fuel drums containing solid, partly burned wastes or liquid oily wastes. The inspection team regarded these wastes as a high environmental risk to the ice free area and freshwater ecosystems. The inspection team considered that substantial further deterioration of the station buildings is likely in the near future.  
ASPA 168, Mount Harding, Grove Mountains
ASPA 168 was designated at ATCM XXXI, principally to protect scientific, aesthetic and wilderness values. 
The inspection team inspected the ASPA from the air, and made a short on-ground inspection by foot.  The team gave consideration to the provisions of the management plan for the protection of the values of the area, and regarded them as appropriate.  The team noted no evidence of non-compliance with the management plan.
January 2011
Leningradskaya Station (Russian Federation)
Buildings and structures varied in condition. While many appear to be intact, others are badly damaged, some had collapsed, and others were shifting on their foundations.  Snow and ice accumulation appeared to be doing significant damage to infrastructure. The team observed large fuel storage tanks. No secondary containment was evident.  Many (200-300) drums were scattered at the base of the nunatak. Considerable debris was apparent, scattered over a wide area. The observers assessed that considerable effort would be required to make the station operational, address environmental damage, and halt deterioration sufficiently to reduce the risk of environmental harm.
Gondwana Station (Germany)
The station was unoccupied at the time of the inspection. Germany forwarded the station keys to Australia and offered open access to all facilities, however the keys arrived after the team departed from Australia. The inspection was therefore confined to the exterior of the station and unlocked buildings. Gondwana Station was in good order. Building exteriors were in good condition, and stored materials were well secured. The inspection team noted the small footprint of the station, and the design and construction which appears to have resulted in minimal physical disturbance to the local environment.
Vostok Station (Russian Federation)
The inspection team was warmly welcomed to Vostok Station, and in a period of six hours on site inspected the station and the project to drill into and sample the waters of subglacial Lake Vostok. 
The team were advised that the original station is completely under snow, and is no longer occupied. Many buildings in present use are also partially or wholly under the snow surface. 
The team observed the frame of a large new building, and was advised that this had been erected three years ago, as part of the construction of a new station with six buildings, with work planned to recommence when rebuilding work at Progress Station (Russian Federation) is complete. 
Some waste materials are burned in open fuel drums or an open incinerator.  Substantial amounts of accumulated waste were observed.  The team was informed that this is progressively sent to Progress Station. 
The station leader noted that it was planned to cease activities and practices that do not meet contemporary standards, when new station infrastructure is installed.
The team observed the ice coring operation for the water sampling of subglacial Lake Vostok project, including recovery of a section of core from 3684m depth. The thermal drill to be used for penetration of the lake was not yet assembled, and was not observed. Drip trays were in place to retain drilling fluid. The team noted that there was no centrifuge for separation of drilling fluid from ice and water, and a tank was used for this function. As far as could be observed, it appeared that the project is proceeding in large part in accordance with the final CEE circulated by the Russian Federation.
The team noted that Vostok Station supports numerous scientific projects, in addition to the main drilling activity, demonstrating a commitment to valuable science, under difficult conditions.
Recommendations
Many facilities in this extensive region are inspected very infrequently, and some have not been inspected for many years. Australia has first-hand experience of the challenges associated with operating in this region of Antarctica, with maintaining long-established facilities, and with managing the legacies of past practices. 
The key findings of the inspections include some areas of environmental concern.  Australia therefore recommends:
    1) that every endeavour be made to bring the management of current operational facilities into compliance with the provisions of the Protocol, particularly with respect to waste management practices;

    2) that Parties should maintain and regularly assess temporarily unoccupied facilities, particularly where facilities are unoccupied for long periods and where bulk fuel storage is involved, to ensure that environmental harm is not occurring.  In this respect, the Russian Federation may wish to consider:
    3) assigning a high priority to assessing and reducing the risk of environmental harm from materials including wastes and deteriorating structures observed at Soyuz Station; 
    4) providing the Parties with information about the contents of and condition of the fuel storages observed at Molodezhnaya and Leningradskaya Stations; and
    5) informing the Parties of any plans to arrest the deterioration of facilities at Leningradskaya and Molodezhnaya Stations, and to remove unwanted material that threatens to irretrievably enter the environment.

    6) that Parties should give due consideration to the removal of facilities and equipment no longer in use, and the removal of accumulated waste materials.  In this respect, the Russian Federation may wish to consider:
    7) informing the Parties of its plans to establish new facilities at Vostok station, including provisions for the removal of structures that may no longer be required; 

    8) that the Parties, on a cooperative basis, make efforts to share with the operating Party any information they may obtain on the condition of unoccupied facilities, to support them in the management of such facilities; and

    9) that the Parties share knowledge and experience they may have in addressing the challenges of dealing with the legacies of past activities, and the maintenance of long-established facilities.

In Australia’s view these tasks should not necessarily be prioritised below the development of new facilities and capabilities.
Acknowledgements
At all occupied facilities Australia’s inspection teams were welcomed with warm hospitality, characteristic of the cooperative foundations of the Antarctic Treaty.  Australia extends its gratitude to Germany, Japan and the Russian Federation for their cooperation in the conduct of these inspections.  
Australia also gratefully acknowledges the assistance of France, Italy, Japan, and the USA for their provision of logistic support for the inspection activity. 
Map 1: 	Australian inspection activity 2010 and 2011: inspection locations and 		places visited





