





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands 





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
A working paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The Deception Island Management Group agreed, in the margins of ATCM XXXIII, that the United Kingdom would undertake a major review of the Management Plan for ASPA No.140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.  In submitting this revised Plan, the United Kingdom recommends that the CEP ask the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake an intersessional review and to report back to CEP XV.
Background
Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, were originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 21 through Recommendation XIII–8 (ATCM XIII, Brussels, 1985).  Subsequently, the number of Sites of botanical interest within the ASPA was increased to 11 through Measure 3 (2005).
Values protected include (i) the greatest number of rare plant species of any site in the Antarctic, (ii) the largest known stand of Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis), (iii) the only intertidal lagoon with hot springs in Antarctica and (iv) areas of volcanic ash, mudflows, scoria and lapilli deposited between 1967 and 1970 that provide unique known-age surfaces of value for colonisation studies.
Following a visit to the Area in January 2010, the Management Plan has been revised and updated by the UK.  The revised plan is attached for the consideration of the CEP. 
The proposed revision includes some substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan including:
    • Introduction.  An introduction has been added that describes the primary reasons for the Area’s designation as an ASPA and the contribution of the Area to the Antarctic protected areas system.
    • Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features.  The boundaries of Sites C, D, F, G and H have been revised either to reflect changes in geomorphology within the Sites or to enhance the protection of the Sites.  The Area’s position within the framework of the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ has been described [Resolution 3 (2008)]. 
    • Section 6(ii) Access to the Area.  This section has been added and includes information on possible access routes to each Site.
    • Section 5. Maps. The Management Plan maps have been redrafted to show the revised Site boundaries.
    • Annex 2.  Photographs of each of the Sites that comprise ASPA 140 have been included.
Recommendation
Given that the revised Management Plan has been substantially amended, the United Kingdom recommends that the CEP ask the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake a more detailed intersessional review of the revised Plan and report back to CEP XV. 

