





Environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage





Environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
Abstract
In Decision 4 (2010) the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) requested the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) to consider environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage in the circumstances of Antarctica. In anticipation of a discussion at CEP XIV, this paper briefly reviews relevant past discussions and identifies several suggested points for inclusion in the Committee’s response to the ATCM.
    1. Background
ATCM XXXIII adopted Decision 4 (2010) which, inter alia, requested the CEP to ‘consider environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage in the circumstances of Antarctica’.
Some previous discussions by the ATCM and CEP are of relevance to the ATCM’s request. In particular, ATCM XXIII adopted Resolution 5 (1999) which called on COMNAP and SCAR to provide advice on ‘the operational and scientific aspects of preventative measures and response action, with a view to aiding the ATCM in its understanding of these practical aspects in order to facilitate work on liability issues’. The advice was to address, inter alia, ‘[w]hether, and under what circumstances, would it be possible and/or practicable to take containment, mitigation or clean-up action, and whether, and under what circumstances, would it be possible to restore the environment’.
COMNAP provided its response to this query in Section D of ATCM XXIV/WP14 Response to XXIII ATCM Resolution 5 (1999). It presented definitions for the key terms and distinguished between ‘containment’ and ‘mitigation’, being the primary actions that could be taken immediately following an incident and ‘clean-up’ and ‘restoration’, being follow-up actions. COMNAP also identified relevant considerations at each stage, noting that before primary actions could be taken, there must be an appropriate risk assessment. It suggested that follow-up action should be preceded by an assessment of whether such action is feasible, cost-effective, likely to appreciably affect the natural rate of recovery, or will cause more harm than the impact of the incident. 
In ATCM XXIW/WP 14 and ATCM XXVI/WP29 “Worst Case” & “Less than Worst Case” Environmental Scenarios, COMNAP also presented several examples of scenarios involving national Antarctic program activities that might result in environmental harm / environmental incidents.
    2. Points for consideration in the CEP’s response to the ATCM
Australia notes that the term ‘environmental damage’ is not defined in the Protocol or annexes, and recalls the advice of SCAR in ATCM XXIV/WP14 that the terms ‘harm’ or ‘damage’ are not scientific concepts. However, it is Australia’s view that the following points are applicable to ‘environmental damage’ by any reasonable definition, and should be considered by the CEP when developing advice to the ATCM in response to Decision 4 (2010).
    1. Avoiding environmental damage is highly preferable in all cases
Decision 4 (2010) contemplates the situation where environmental damage has already occurred. As mentioned above, ATCM XXIV/WP14 and ATCM XXVI/WP29 identify a range of scenarios which might result in environmental damage. The question to the CEP relates not to assessing the likelihood of environmental damage occurring, but to the environmental issues to be considered when deciding whether or not to attempt repair or remediation actions. Nevertheless, the continuing development and implementation of preventative measures is vitally important. 
    2. Timely recording and reporting of environmental damage is important
The amount of time that has passed since the environmental damage occurred may have a significant bearing on the options available for, and the effectiveness of, repair or remediation action. A better environmental outcome is likely to be achieved with prompt action, for example the rapid containment or eradication of a non-native species, or the swift removal of toxic waste inadvertently released into the environment. Accordingly, ensuring that environmental damage is recorded and reported as quickly as possible will maximise the chances of effective repair or remediation.
    3. The environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage will need to be assessed on a case-by-case and site-specific basis
Similar to the process of predicting and mitigating the environmental impacts of a proposed activity, the environmental issues associated with environmental damage will depend on the characteristics of the damage and the location in which it has occurred, including:
    • Nature: what types of change are imposed on the environment due to the damage (e.g. chemical, biological, physical)
    • Spatial extent: what area / volume has been damaged, and is this likely to increase if the environmental damage is not addressed?
    • Intensity: what is the amount / level /degree of environmental damage?
    • Duration: what is the period of time over which the environment damage is likely to occur?
    • Reversibility: what is the possibility of a return to the initial environmental conditions though natural processes and without human intervention once the damage has occurred and how long is this likely to take?
    4. Standard environmental risk management processes can be applied, with due consideration to the circumstances of Antarctica
A standard environmental risk assessment and risk management process1 can be effectively applied to any situation. It involves: establishing the context; identifying risks; analyzing risks; evaluating risks; treating risks; and monitoring and review. Effective application in the circumstances of Antarctica, requires drawing on the best available knowledge of causal relationships between stressors and their affects on the Antarctic environment (e.g. how do different types and levels of pollution affect Antarctic species; are particular introduced species likely to become established/invasive in particular environments?). Uncertainty should not be a reason to delay action, although improving understanding of these causal relationships over time will assist with identifying appropriate repair and remediation actions.
    5. Objectives for repair or remediation should reflect the objectives and provisions of the Environmental Protocol, and be appropriate to Antarctic conditions
Article 3 of the Protocol establishes environmental principles that can inform objectives for actions to repair or remediate environmental damage. Depending on the circumstances, this may range along a spectrum from doing nothing (see below) to comprehensive action to ensure near complete return to the initial environmental conditions. In many cases, identifying an appropriate intermediate target level or threshold may be sufficient (e.g. not attempting to reduce pollutant levels to zero, but instead setting a target level that will ensure there are no significant adverse affects on Antarctic flora or fauna – such target levels can be identified through standard exposure-response studies widely applied in other regions).
    6. Consideration should be given to whether repair or remediation of environmental damage by any practical option will result in greater adverse environmental impact
This principle is expressed in Article 1.5(a) and Article 2.1 of Annex III, in relation to the clean up of waste disposals sites on land and abandoned works sites, and to the removal of fuel drums and other solid non-combustible wastes. It requires a comparative assessment of the likely environmental impacts if no action is taken, and the likely environmental impacts of repair and remediation options. 
    7. Assessment of options for repair and remediation will also need to consider operational feasibility
Some relevant considerations do not relate strictly to environmental issues, although they may have a significant bearing on the ability to undertake repair or remediation action and, consequently, on the environmental outcome. As noted previously by COMNAP, these may include: 
    • Safety: can human safety be ensured when undertaking repair or remediation actions?
    • Accessibility: can the damaged area be accessed to undertake repair or remediation actions?
    • Cost: what is the monetary cost of undertaking alternative repair or remediation actions?
    8. Generally applicable standards, guidelines and techniques relevant to the Antarctic context will assist
Although responses to environmental damage will be determined on a case-by-case basis, as mentioned above, the Parties’ ability to respond effectively and in a manner consistent with the objectives and provisions of the Protocol will be enhanced by the development over time of generally applicable standards, guidelines and techniques. 
Recommendation
Australia suggests that the CEP considers and builds on the eight key points raised in this paper when formulating its response to Decision 4 (2010).


