





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 165 Edmonson Point, Ross Sea






Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) N° 165 Edmonson Point, Ross Sea
Working paper for the CEP presented by Italy

Introduction

Previous research conducted in Edmonson Point gave a significant contribution to the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) and led in the 2005 CCAMLR Scientific Committee Meeting, to the approval of the Italian proposal of registering the site as a specially protected area. In Measure 1 (2006) - ATCM XXIX-CEP IX, Edmonson Point was finally recognized as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA N. 165). 
The Edmonson Point area is extremely interesting from a scientific point of view. A wide number of marine species are present in the area, including Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae), South Polar Skuas ( Stercorarius maccormicki). In addition the site represents a suitable habitat for the Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelii) reproduction. As a consequence of this variety the Italian National Antartic Research Programme (PNRA) increased monitoring activity and research programs in the area to improve marine ecosystem safeguard.
The ASPA N. 165 Edmonson Point area is located in Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea, at the foot of Mount Melbourne eastern slope, about 50 km NE from Mario Zucchelli Station in Terra Nova Bay (Italy).  It is one of the largest low lying ice free coastal areas in Northern Victoria Land and was first identified in the 1980s as a site that could be protected, being one of the few ice free coastal areas (Given, 1989; Harris et. al., 2003). 
The aims and objectives for which the ASPA N. 165 area was set up, are still relevant.
According to the provisions of annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and according to Resolution 1 (1998), Italy started the five-year review of the management plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area N.165  Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Ross Sea.
Scientific distinctiveness

The following list evidences the reasons why Edmonson Point is important from a scientific point of view:
    1. The site is regarded as one of the best in Victoria Land for its diverse and extensive 	terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems and is considered excellent for studies on the  biogeochemical processes in lakes and for multi-disciplinary research because of the diverse habitats.
    2. The habitat for bryophyte development is one of the largest of its kind in Victoria Land, and vegetation is unusually well developed. 
    3. The site is populated with a good example of Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) and south polar skua (Stercorarius maccormicki) colonies and is suitable for the collection of long 	term series of data.
    4. The site includes a Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddellii) breeding area along the 	adjacent coast, which is considered to be representative of similar sites in the Ross Sea. There is no other ASPA representative breeding area for seals in the region.
    5. The site is considered particularly interesting to study the impact of climate change on terrestrial ecosystems.


Changes to the existing Management Plan 
No substantial changes were made to the provisions of the existing Management Plan. The boundaries, map and descriptions of the area remain the same as in the existing Management Plan
Minor changes occurred in the following sections:

Review of activities: 
During the last five years, different projects were carried out in the Edmonson Point ASPA 165: 
    •  “Use of the bioindicators in the evaluation of the changes of natural and anthropic origin on the antarctic ecosystems”: a project, which was carried out for many years in the area, studying marine species present in the area like Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae), South Polar Skuas (Stercorarius maccormicki) and the habitat for the Weddel Seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) reproduction.
    • The study of mosses, lichens and meiofauna within these substrates with the scope to study the adaptive strategies (cryptobiosis and thermo-tolerance), taxonomic identification and molecular characterization of the collected tardigrade species.
    • Studies on contaminant fluxes of persistent organic pollutants between abiotic and biotic compartments and on biodiversity and evolution of rock meristematic fungi in polar environment as possible bioindicators of climate changes and antropogenic impacts.
    • Projects on the determination of organic pollution and on the determination of the concentration trends of organic persistent contaminants in relation to the climatic changes. This projects will be also implemented in fresh waters in the next future 
In section 7 some results are presented.

Breeding birds
In the previous version of the management plan:
Table 1: Year 2005 is 2385 not 2091; in the text (Breeding Birds) the average number is 2080 and not 1808.
According to CEMP procedures, between 2005 and 2010, three breeding birds population counts were made at Edmonson Point. Results evidenced that the colony consisted respectively of 2385, 2303 and 2112 occupied nests in 2005, 2007 and 2010. The average number since the beginning of this research program being 2112. The average value from 1994 to 2005 was 2080. Thus total population seem stable with respect to the average value.
The ratio between skuas and penguins remained high (1:20) as reported by Pezzo et al, (2001). Edmonson Point’s skua population nearby Adélie penguin colony remained stable through years consisting of about 130 breeding pairs in the 2010 summer season. At Edmonson Point North and South 55 and  61 breeding pairs  respectively were counted in the 2010 summer season.
 
Scientific Research after 2005 is reported in paragraph 8 (iii) of the existing Management plan
Ecology of marine birds and CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) Studies.
The studies on Adélie penguin population involved demographic parameters that were estimated in relation to individual characteristics (sex and age) and to large scale (Ross Sea winter ice extent anomalies and SOI) and local scale (food availability) environmental variables. While large-scale environmental factors affected adult survival, breeding success varied principally according to local variables. Breeding success was particularly low when local stochastic events (storms) occurred at sensitive times of the breeding cycle (immediately after the hatching) (Olmastroni et al. 2004; Pezzo et al, 2007; Ballerini et al., 2009). Changes in the fast-ice extension in front of the breeding area influenced adult breeders transit times between colony and foraging grounds, and females conducted longer foraging trips, dived for longer periods and made more dives than males. The diving parameters were affected neither by the sex nor by the year, but differed between the breeding stages (Nesti et al, 2010). Annual adult survival probability at Edmonson Point (0.85, range 0.76– 0.94) was similar to that estimated from other Adélie penguin populations in which individuals were marked with passive transponders. An annual average survival rate of 0.85 seems to be typical of the species and is consistent with an expected average lifespan of about 11 years (6.6 years after adulthood) (Ballerini et al., 2009).
Some aspects of the breeding biology of the south polar skua, during five seasons are currently under investigation being this research the subject of a Ph.D thesis carried out at University of Siena (A. Franceschi, Aspetti della Biologia riproduttiva dello Stercorario di McCormick, Stercorarius maccormicki).
Permits issued
The National Antarctic Research Program (PNRA) on behalf of the Italian Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs, issued permits to:
    • enter into the Protected Area 
    • sample living fauna and flora, principally mosses, lichens and meiofauna, algae and meristematic fungi 
    • carry out activities in relation to the use of bioindicators in the evaluation of natural and anthropogenic climatic changes in the antarctic ecosystems 
    • carry out long term monitoring programs on Adélie penguins and skuas at Edmonson Point area.  (CEMP site)
In the attachment to the revised Management Plan (appendix 2), sampling areas, species involved, amounts collected and sampling methodologies are presented for the five years of activity (2006-2011).

Management issues
Key management issues relate to the protection of potentially sensitive features, such as:  moist soils that can be easily disturbed; the extensive but fragile vegetation cover; a variety of lakes and streams; two species of breeding birds and one breeding species of seal. 
Priority issues are also the management of activities that may be harmful or interfere with fauna and flora including aircraft access, movements within the area, camping, facilities, installation/removal of equipment, use of materials, waste disposal and coordination of the multidisciplinary scientific activities. 
Logistics constraints imposed restrictions to the study seasons that often started after penguins arrival at the colony. The necessity to decrease impacts for nesting penguins and skuas, made impossible to put in activity the CEMP research camp (Map 2 and 4). Moreover snow coverage and  distance from the colony made difficult the use of the alternative camping site (site A Map 2). For this reason during the 2006/07 campaign, a new camp position, suitable for research activity with reduced impacts on birds, was identified. The camp was placed in situ during the 2009/2010 summer season. Its position, 74°19'44.58"S 165° 8'4.99"E, is near the helicopter landing site B (Map 2 and 4). The camp included 1 big apple, 1 toilet tent and 1 generator and some fuel drums for 40 days of autonomy and was removed at the end of the study season. It is recommended to use this location for future CEMP research activities.
The small apple and Nansen Hut remain in the old site, near the penguin colony as observation point and shelter for the instrumentation and for overnights stay when 24 hour monitoring is carried out.

References:
				
In the section 7(7ii) of the Management Plan, more information regarding penguins and skuas census and new specific bibliography was added. 
In Appendix 1 of the revised Management Plan additional correlated bibliography was included for consultation.

The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection. 

Remembering  that the Management Plan, here appended,  has been endorsed by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources in November 2005; and

nothing that no changing were done on respect to marine component;

It is proposed, that this Revised Management Plan be approved during ATCM XXXIV without further intersessional review.


ASPA N° 165 - EDMONSON POINT ROSS SEA 
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA No. 165) under Measure XXIX-1 (Edinburgh 2006)
First adoption of management plan 
Measure XXIX-1 (2006)
Any revisions to management plan
ATCM XXXIV 
Current management plan
Measure XXIX-1 (2006)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
n/a
Other relevant measures

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
 See main working document for a complete list of amendments.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a

