





Visitor site guide for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison, East Antarctica





Visitor site guide for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison, East Antarctica
Working Paper prepared by Australia
Summary
Australia has prepared a visitor site guide for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison.  The guide aims to assist in managing visits to this place of outstanding historical, archaeological, technical, social and aesthetic value.  Australia proposes that the attached visitor site guide be considered by the CEP with a view to adoption by means of a Resolution.
Background
Cape Denison in Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica is the site of Mawson’s Huts, comprising the intact buildings, structures, and relics of the Main Base of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition of 1911-1914 (AAE) led by Dr (later Sir) Douglas Mawson. .  Cape Denison is one of six sites remaining from the ‘heroic era’ of Antarctic exploration, and is the least disturbed of those sites.
Cape Denison is designated as Historic Site and Monument No. 77 Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 3.  Within the ASMA, the four timber huts of the AAE, and their immediate surrounds (within 5 metres of the huts) are designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 162, to protect their important historical, technical, architectural, social and aesthetic values. 
The ASMA management plan recognises the educational value of visits to the area. Specific provisions for visits to the site are included in the ASPA and ASMA management plans. Entry to the ASPA, including the interiors of the Main Hut and Magnetograph House, is permitted in accordance with a permit issued by a national authority.
Visits to Cape Denison and Mawson’s Huts for educational purposes, including ship-borne commercial tourism, have occurred for many years.  Some yacht visits have also occurred. Tourist numbers have been consistently below 300 visitors per season, often considerably fewer. An increased level of visitation is anticipated during the centenary of the AAE. 
Proposed visitor site guide
While numbers of visitors to Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison have been low, relative to many landing sites on the Antarctic Peninsula, the values of the site are significant, and the site is sensitive to the potential impacts associated with visits. Australia therefore regards a visitor site guide as a useful adjunct to the existing management arrangements. 
The attached visitor site guide does not replace or extend the provisions of the ASPA and ASMA management plans. It draws on these previously agreed provisions with the objective of presenting, in an attractive and readily accessible format, important information about the site, the key management provisions, and practical guidance on how visitors can minimise their impacts. The advice included in the visitor site guide is specific to visits to Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison. 
The visitor site guide is consistent with the contents of other site guidelines adopted by the ATCM since 2006. Appropriate photographs will be provided to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat for illustration of the formatted visitor site guide.
Recommendations
Australia recommends:
    • that the CEP consider the attached visitor site guide for Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison, and forward it to the ATCM to be added, by means of a Resolution, to the list of sites subject to site guidelines; and
    • that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat publish and make available this visitor site guide.



Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide
-----------------------------------

Mawson’s Huts and Cape Denison
 67°00’30”S, 142°39’40”E

Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, East Antarctica, 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area 3, Antarctic Specially Protected Area 162, and Historic Site and Monument 77.

Key features
    • Historic huts and original contents from the Australasian Antarctic Expedition of 1911-1914 led by Dr (later Sir) Douglas Mawson.
    • A largely unmodified cultural landscape with expedition huts, objects and artefacts in their original context, demonstrating the living conditions, scientific research, isolation, and environmental extremes of the expedition.

Description

Topography
Cape Denison is a largely ice-free peninsula adjacent to the polar plateau.  The cape consists of rocky ridges and valleys. The Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) extends from Land’s End to John O’Groats, and south to the moraine line.
	
Fauna
Confirmed breeders – Adélie penguins in multiple colonies, and small numbers of Wilson’s storm petrels, snow petrels, and south polar skuas.

Other – Weddell, leopard, and elephant seals haul out, and emperor penguins, southern giant petrels, cape petrels, and Antarctic petrels have been observed.

Flora
13 lichen species, and non-marine algae have been recorded in the area.

Historic huts and artefacts
Four huts from the Australasian Antarctic Expedition of 1911-1914 stand at Cape Denison: the Main Hut and the Magnetograph House which are intact; and the Absolute Magnetic Hut and Transit Hut which are standing ruins. Also present are remains of scientific instruments and installations, wireless masts, a memorial cross, and scatters of artefacts.  Three newer huts are used for research and management activities, or in case of emergency.
Visitor impact

Known impacts	
Disturbance of artefacts and wildlife.

Potential impacts
Damage or disturbance to artefacts or structures through touching and other handling, theft and trampling. Deterioration of hut fabric and artefacts associated with increased humidity levels inside the huts. Fire. Disturbance of wildlife and damage to vegetation. 

Landing requirements

Visitors
In accordance with the ASMA 3 Management Plan, those proposing to visit should inform the Australian national program as far in advance of a visit as is practicable. Detailed illustrated instructions for access to the huts and securing them on departure are available (tourism@aad.gov.au).

Where permits have been obtained, visitors may enter the Main Hut and Magnetograph House within Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 162 under the supervision of a hut guide (with approved cultural heritage skills) appointed by a permitting authority.  A maximum entry number of 4 people at a time (including the guide) applies inside the Main Hut, and a maximum of 3 people (including the guide) applies inside the Magnetograph Hut.  Visits may occur only after visitors have received a briefing on the management plans and the values of the site.

Visitor area

Artefact-rich areas (in particular the scatter immediately to the north of the Main Hut), bird colonies, areas of lichen, and routes used by penguins between nesting sites and the sea must be avoided. 

Visitors accessing the Memorial Cross should follow a route that avoids disturbance to the Adelie penguins and petrels nesting in the vicinity. For large groups this may require direct supervision of visitors and/or the temporary marking of an appropriate route using canes or similar.

Landing areas
Boat landing options may include Boat Harbour, and due north of the Sorenson Hut.  The ASMA management plan designates a helicopter landing site and approach paths.  

Restricted areas
Entry into ASPA 162, including the historic huts and the area within 5 metres of each of these huts, may only occur in accordance with the ASPA 162 management plan, under a permit issued by a national authority.  The other huts within the ASMA may only be entered for emergency use.

Visitor code of conduct
	
Smoking and the use of naked flames in and around the huts is strictly prohibited. 
Boots and clothing should be cleaned of snow and grit before entering the huts.  Backpacks and all bags should be left outside the huts.  

Contact with the huts and the handling, removal or disturbance of artefacts (and flora and fauna and parts thereof) requires specific prior authorisation by a permitting authority.
Care should be taken not to tread on artefacts or areas of snow and ice under which artefacts are likely buried.

Visitors should maintain a distance of at least 15m from nesting seabirds, penguins in colonies, and breeding Weddell seals and pups (including weaners).  A distance of at least 5m should be maintained from mature seals, and Adélie penguins on ice or away from colonies.

Cautionary notes
Boat landings are frequently hampered by heavy seas and prevailing or katabatic winds.  Wet rocks, ice and snow mean that caution is required in disembarking boats and walking around this site.  Caution must also be taken inside the huts because of icy conditions.









	

