





Management Plan for ASPA No. 166, 
Port-Martin, Terre Adélie

Proposal to extend the existing Management Plan





Management Plan for  Antarctic Specially Protected Area      No. 166, Port-Martin, Terre Adélie

Proposal to extend the existing Management Plan
Summary
France has conducted the five-yearly review of the management plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 166, Port-Martin, Terre Adélie. In light of this review, it is suggested to renew the management plan without any modification for a period of five years. 
Introduction
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, France has conducted the five-yearly review of the management plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 166, Port-Martin, Terre Adélie.
Following this review, France proposes the renewal of this management plan in its entirety.
The isolation of the site, as well as the protection status it has received since 1985 (HSM, then ASPA) have enabled it to remain in a condition very close to the one it was left in when the resident team abandoned it in January 1952 after a fire destroyed it. 
The main goal of the initial management plan which accompanied the designation of Port-Martin as an ASPA in 2006 was to protect the site against any form of anthropic degradation, in order to preserve major archaeological interest of the site. In fact, Port-Martin is the perfect illustration of a base in Antarctica in the post-war period. 
The archaeological investigations have not been completed within the period covered by the previous management plan, notably because of the difficult logistic constraints imposed by the isolation of the base. The value of these investigations remains nevertheless unchanged. The management plan should be extended so that they can be completed and the site preserved in its present condition. 
Summary of information about the current management plan
See table below.
Recommendations
France recommends that the CEP approves the request for an extension to the Management Plan for ASPA no166, Port-Martin, Terre Adélie, for a five period up to 2016..


ASPA no 166, Port-Martin, Terre Adélie
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation
Historic Site No. 46, Recommendation XIII-16 (Brussels, 1985)
First adoption of management plan 
Measure XXIX-1 (2006)
Any revisions to management plan
n/a
Current management plan 
Measure XXIX-1-2 (2006)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Proposal for extension
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as
n/a 
Other relevant measures

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
n/a
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?

(iii) any changes to the maps If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?

(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?

(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.

(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.

5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a


