





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land



ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 1 (2004) ASMA No. 2
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 1 (2004) ASMA No. 2
Any revisions to management plan:
None
Current management plan:
ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land. (2004)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
None
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Existing maps have been replaced and new maps added.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. More specific site descriptions have been added to assist plan interpretation.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A

Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 2
McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land

    a. The McMurdo Dry Valleys were originally designated as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 2 through Measure 1 (2004) due to its exceptional environmental and scientific values as the largest ice-free area in Antarctica, and the need to coordinate management of activities in the region to ensure that these values can be sustained for the long-term. The current Management Plan strongly reaffirms the high environmental and scientific values of the Area and has revised management measures to ensure that the aims and objectives set out in the management plan for the McMurdo Dry Valleys can continue to be met.
    b. Major revisions to the boundaries of the Area are made in the current Management Plan. In particular, the northern boundary has been extended to include all of the significant ice-free land of the Convoy Range, which was previously outside of the Area (Map 1). This additional ice-free area is considered part of the same broad environmental and ecological unit as the rest of the McMurdo Dry Valleys, and the change resolves an anomaly in the previous definition of the boundary.
    c. The southern boundary has been revised to include all of the Trough Lake catchment within the Area (Maps 1 and 16). The Trough Lake catchment is a large and pristine ice-free hydrological unit in the southern Dry Valleys, which is considered to be of high environmental and scientific value. Its full inclusion within the Area was considered to be a priority. Improvements in mapping and catchment definition allowed revision of the ASMA boundary so the majority of the hydrological unit is included within the Area. A part of the catchment where a small tongue of the Koettlitz Glacier extends over a ridgeline and spills into the Upper Alph River valley has been excluded for practical reasons – technically the catchment supplying ice to the Koettlitz Glacier extends tens, if not hundreds, of kilometers to the Polar Plateau. For this reason a pragmatic boundary was delineated where the glacier crosses over the ridgeline that would otherwise define the Trough Lake catchment near The Pyramid (Map 16).
    d. Minor adjustments have been made to the coastline boundary and designated boundary coordinates in order to reflect updates and improvements in mapping, and where practicable to select defined mountain summits as key boundary points.
    e. The boundary changes enlarge the Area by ~2500 km2, bringing the total area of the ASMA to 17,500 km2, which represents an increase of approximately 17%. The boundaries now include all of the contiguous area of ice-free valleys and mountain ranges within the unit considered as the McMurdo Dry Valleys.
    f. Changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan have been substantial, in particular including a significant revision to the system of zoning applied within the Area. 
    g. The main changes to the Management Plan in summary include:
Introduction and Table of Contents
    h. A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area and the reasons for designation. Text formerly included in Section 1 was adapted for this purpose.
    i. A Table of Contents was added as a summary guide to the plan structure.
Section 1 - Values
    j. New values related to hydrological and glacial features were identified and added, in particular those of saline surface and sub-glacial lakes. The importance of relatively pristine condition of the environment has been given more prominence, and historic values have been included.
Section 2 - Objectives
    k.  Management objectives were elaborated further to include promoting understanding of the ecosystem through monitoring and encouraging the exchange of information.
Section 3 - Management Activities
    l.  Specific reference to the new McMurdo Dry Valleys website (www.mcmurdodryvalleys.aq) as a repository of information on the Area has been added. A requirement was added that tour operators and non-governmental expeditions making visits to the Area should brief all personnel on the requirements of the Management Plan in advance, which is consistent with obligations on National Programs operating within the Area. A new provision has been added on development of best practices to achieve the objectives of the Management Plan, and provisions related to signs and marking within the Area are included.
Section 4 - Period of Designation
    m. The period of designation has not changed, and remains for an indefinite period. 
Section 5 – Maps and photographs
    n. The previous Management Plan maps have been comprehensively revised and replaced, and new maps have been added. A new approach to the maps has been adopted that shows key features both in the context of their surrounding environment and, usually in detailed insets, sites of specific installations such as structures, designated helicopter landing sites and campsites etc. Line maps have been prepared for inclusion in the adopted Management Plan, while versions with imagery included will also be made freely available for download from the McMurdo Dry Valleys website.
    o. The process of improving the mapping required a significant effort to undertake new surveys of facilities and features in the field, as described in an earlier Information Paper submitted to the CEP in 2009 as ATCM XXXII IP66. Although these improvements are necessary and welcomed, map accuracy remains variable throughout the Area. The more remote regions remain relatively poorly defined (e.g. the peaks and features in the west of the Area on the margin of the Polar Plateau), while more frequently visited sites such as in the Taylor Valley are now mapped with a high level of accuracy (generally less than 2 m of horizontal error) and are fully compatible with modern GPS observations. 
    p. Improvements to mapping in the region are expected to continue, in particular with the increasing availability of high-resolution satellite imagery of excellent quality, such as that acquired by Digital Globe’s Quickbird and WorldView platforms. These data and other imagery have been made available to the research community through the US National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) Commercial Imagery Program, and have made a vital contribution to the mapping improvements seen in the current Management Plan.
    q. A particular focus has been creating new maps for sites of particular scientific importance and / or sensitivity, which are coupled with the new site descriptions included under the revised zoning schema (see below). The location and extent of some of these areas has not previously been clear, and visitors have sometimes experienced difficulty in correctly identifying the features and behaving accordingly. Ten new maps have been included in the plan to address these needs.
Section 6 – Description of the Area
    r.  (Section 6 (i) Boundaries and coordinates) Coordinates for the revised boundaries are provided. The standard format for specification of coordinates has been changed to degrees and decimal minutes because this is the format used in aircraft operations, minimizing the need to make conversions when specifying locations within the Area. A brief note on coordinate accuracy within the Area has been added.
    s. (6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area) The system of zoning applied within the Area has been revised to be consistent with the model of standard zones proposed in ATCM XXXIII WP 10 (2010). Under this model Facilities Zones remain unchanged, and Scientific Zones and Restricted Zones have been introduced to replace the former category of ‘Special Features’, which is not used elsewhere in Antarctica. In addition, the former category of ‘Tourist Zone’ has been reclassified as Visitor Zone, the latter being considered more inclusive (e.g. it also applies to Program personnel). The specific criteria for designation of zones and the key policies that apply within are defined in this section of the Management Plan. Permits are not required for entry into any zone (should there be a need to regulate access by permit, designation of a full Antarctic Specially Protected Area is required), although it is recommended that Restricted Zones should only be accessed for compelling reasons that cannot be served elsewhere within the Area. An important development is that new boundaries for the Scientific and Restricted Zones have been assessed and specified, making their identification on the ground much easier and more practical. Provision is made for adding, modifying or deleting zones, or zone categories, as required. Detailed information on all zones, and any site-specific guidelines for activities within them, are included in the appendices to the Management Plan.
    t.  (Section 6 (iii) Structures) Information on all structures located within Facilities Zones has been moved to Appendix C. One semi-permanent camp (Odell Glacier Camp (US)) has been decommissioned within the Area, and this has been added to the list of decommissioned sites (Table 4).
Section 7 Code of Conduct, Section 8 Exchange of Information, and Section 9 Supporting documentation
    u. (Section 7 (i) Access) No substantial changes. Clarification is added regarding conditions for access to Restricted Zones.
    v. (Section 7 (ii) Activities) No substantial changes.
    w. (Section 7 (iii) Installation of structures) Some clarification was added to this section to take account of the fact that minor installations such as weather stations and scientific instrumentation are installed outside of Facilities Zones. It would not be practical or desirable to designate new Facilities Zones in all cases where these minor installations occur. More specific guidance on making full use of existing sites, including coordinating among the National Programs operating within the Area, has been included. 
    x.  (Section 7 (iv) Field camps) It is recognised in this section that there are benefits to minimising the footprint of field camps within the Area, and more specific guidance has been added to help achieve this goal. Repeat use of specific field camps may be desirable when work is conducted at a site over an extended period. Such sites may not require the installation of semi-permanent facilities, and therefore are unlikely to be considered for designation as Facilities Zones. In these cases, provision is made in this section for listing designated field camp sites, and a first example has been included (Blood Falls field camp site, Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley).
    y. (Section 7 (v) Native flora and fauna) More specific provisions have been added to help protect against the introduction of species not native to the Area, and to minimise the transfer of native species within the Area.
    z. (Sections 7 (vi) Collection of materials, 7(vii) Wastes, and 7(viii) Reporting, Section 8 Exchange of information, Section 9 Supporting documentation). No substantial changes. References were removed from Section 9 on the grounds that there are too many important and relevant publications to list; instead, it was considered more useful and appropriate to refer readers to the new website for the McMurdo Dry Valleys (www.mcmurdodryvalleys.aq), where extensive documentation and links to additional source material are maintained.
APPENDIX A: General Environmental Guidelines for the McMurdo Dry Valleys
    aa. The Appendix has been re-named in order to distinguish these guidelines from the Code of Conduct specified in the main body of the plan. The structure of the Appendix has been revised to group information under particular topics, which should make the General Environmental Guidelines more practical to use. In carrying out this exercise, it became apparent that few of the general environmental guidelines were specific to a particular environment type, so the original sections on Lakes, Streams, Valley Floors and Sides, and High Desert have been integrated under the topics, re-phrasing these as appropriate where they applied to all environment types. Where a particular provision related only to a specific environment type, this information is retained. Overall, the policies contained within the guidelines in Appendix A remain similar to those adopted in the previous Management Plan.
APPENDIX B: Environmental Guidelines for Scientific Research
    bb. The Appendix has been re-named in order to maintain consistency with Appendix A. The original guidelines in Appendix B were developed after a detailed and lengthy process of consultation within the scientific community, and as such they have stood the test of time. In contrast to the General Environmental Guidelines in Appendix A, however, many of the provisions in Appendix B are very specific to particular environment types (e.g. lakes, streams, soils, glaciers, etc.). As such, the original structure has been maintained. 
APPENDIX C: Guidelines for Facilities Zones
    cc. The Appendix has been re-organised to include information on structures within Facilities Zones that were previously in the main body of the plan. New maps have been added, showing the locations of Facilities Zones, their surrounding geographical features, and (usually within insets) the specific infrastructure that is installed at the sites, including buildings, and specifications of where helicopters should land (with coordinates), and campsites should be established etc.
APPENDIX D: Guidelines for Scientific Zones
    dd. Appendix D is new, and includes more specific guidelines and maps for several sites that were formerly classified as ‘Special Features’. A standard format for the information has been developed, which includes location, coordinates, site description, boundaries, known and potential impacts, access conditions, any site-specific guidance, and key references. A site photograph is also included.
APPENDIX E: Guidelines for Restricted Zones
    ee. Appendix E is new, and also includes sites that were formerly classified as ‘Special Features’. The format used to organise information on the Restricted Zones is the same as that used for Scientific Zones. Sites were classified as Restricted Zones where their intrinsic qualities or sensitivity were such that it was considered desirable to exercise more measured control over site access, without necessarily proceeding to full ASPA status at this time. Appendices D and E replace the former Appendix E ‘Guidelines for Special Features’.
APPENDIX F: Guidelines for Visitor Zones
    ff. Appendix F replaces the former Appendix D, and has been prepared in a form that is intended to accommodate any designated Visitor Zones that may be agreed within the Area. At present, one site has been identified as suitable for visits by tour operators and non-governmental expeditions, which is located adjacent to the Canada Glacier in the Taylor Valley (Map 24). The name of the zone has been changed to the ‘Taylor Valley Visitor Zone’ from that used in the original Management Plan (‘Canada Glacier Tourist Zone’) in order to avoid potential confusion with nearby ASPA No. 131 Canada Glacier. A minor change has been made to the northern boundary of the Visitor Zone following concerns raised by scientists working in the Area about tourist traffic in a wetland area which is the subject of long-term scientific monitoring. The boundary modification ensures that sensitive stream areas are avoided, while still maintaining the essential high quality of experience offered to tourists and other visitors to the site. Appendix F has been structured so it can accommodate, as an attachment, an Antarctic Treaty System Visitor Site Guide for the site, which is being submitted for the Visitor Zone under a separate Working Paper (WP30). Site-specific guidance has therefore been included within the ATS Site Guide, rather than repeated here, which will be included as an attachment to Appendix F if adopted by the Parties. 
    gg. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.
    hh. In the course of reviewing and revising this Management Plan a number of issues requiring further attention and discussion were brought to light.   The McMurdo Dry Valleys Management Group intends to engage on these issues in the coming years.
            i. Recently, the CEP has given Non-Native species issues high priority.   In particular, the Non-Native Species ICG has been developing a manual to aid in the prevention of unintentional Non-Native Species introductions into the Treaty area.   The Management Group plans to discuss how to best incorporate recommendations from this manual into the management plan.
            ii. Many of the current and past scientific projects conducted within the ASMA involve deploying equipment into the field.   As the amount and sophistication of science increases it becomes more important to record effectively the equipment and details of its deployment. Such efforts will make it easier to ensure that all equipment that is no longer needed is removed from the Area. The Management Group plans to discuss how to design and implement such an equipment recording system.
            iii. The ASMA has been the site of human activity and scientific research pre-dating the designation of the Area.   The Management Group supports quantifying the human footprint within the ASMA and will investigate cataloging sites of past activity.
            iv. The Management Group hopes to establish a monitoring program that will assess whether the values for which the area was established are protected and maintained.
            v. The Management Group acknowledges that Area can provide a valuable and educational experience to tourists.  With that in mind the Management Group will consider whether it is possible to create additional Visitor Zones within the Area.



