
XXVI ATCM
CEP Information Paper
June 2003
Original: English
Agenda Item 5








ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY: 1994-2003




Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by
the United States of America and the United Kingdom 


ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY: 1994-2003
by
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc.
Principal investigator, Antarctic Site Inventory

This paper provides an update on results of the Antarctic Site Inventory project through February 2003.  The Antarctic Site Inventory has collected biological data and site-descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula since 1994.  The project's methodology and results from previous field seasons have been described and discussed in XIX ATCM/INF 47, XX ATCM/INF 100, XX ATCM/INF 102, XXI ATCM/INF 114, XXII ATCM/INF 27, XXIII/INF 32, XXV ATCM/INF 25.
Introduction.  Following a year of examining methodologies and logistics, the Antarctic Site Inventory began fieldwork in November 1994, intending to:
    • determine whether opportunistic visits can be used to effectively and economically detect possible visitor-caused changes in the physical features, flora, and fauna of sites in the Antarctic Peninsula being visited repeatedly by ship-based tourists;
    • begin collecting baseline information necessary to detect possible changes in the physical and biological variables being monitored; and 
    • determine how best to minimize or avoid possible environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Peninsula area.
Data collected by the Inventory are intended to assist the implementation of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which, among other things, requires a priori environmental impact assessments for all human activities, including tourism, and for monitoring to be done, as and when necessary, to assess and verify predicted environmental impacts.  There is a focus on the “initial environmental reference state” of particular locations, which in the case of tourism, would refer to places where shipboard passengers are visiting.
The environmental concern is to identify changes to the baseline reference state and, if possible, determine whether any detected changes are naturally occurring or are anthropogenic, perhaps caused by tourism or other human activities.  Potential impacts may be short-term or long-term, immediate or cumulative. (Benninghoff and Bonner, 1985; Abbott and Benninghoff, 1990; SCAR, 1996; Emslie, 1997; Hofman and Jatko , 2002).
Results.  The Antarctic Site Inventory has demonstrated an ability to reach Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites frequently and cost-effectively, relying opportunistically on expedition tour vessels and the United Kingdom ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance for logistics support.  Well-timed visits by trained researchers have proved an effective means of characterizing sites and for collecting relevant biological data (Naveen, 1997a; Naveen, et. al, 2001).
In the eight seasons from November 1994 to March 2003, the Inventory has made 503 visits to 82 Peninsula locations.  There have been repetitive visits to all of the visitor sites that are most heavily visited by expedition tourists, and to all sites which exhibit the most species diversity and which are most prone to potential environmental disturbance from human visitors. (Naveen: 1997a; Naveen: 2003; Naveen, et. al, 2001)
Logistics.  Site visits are achieved by placing research teams aboard expedition vessels operating in the Peninsula during the austral spring and summer.  With respect to penguins and flying birds, the focus is collecting data on breeding population size (nest counts) and breeding productivity (number of chicks per active nest), which are the appropriate biological parameters for detecting direct and cumulative impacts on these populations (Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2001).
Expedition ships are selected carefully, particularly those with: (a) the longest Peninsula itineraries (b) whose Initial Environmental Evaluations have been reviewed by national authorities; and (c) whose operations and expedition personnel enable Inventory researchers to reach the most heavily visited sites and to collect data at key census times (the peak of egg-laying for nest counts and the peak of chick-crèching for chick counts).  Site visits and aerial photodocumentation also have been undertaken in cooperation with HMS Endurance. (Naveen: 1996, 1997a, 1999, 2003)
At each site researchers attempt to identify and census prospective control colonies (i.e. those that are seldom disturbed) and experimental colonies (i.e. those that are frequently visited).  The intent is to repeat regular censuses both near and far from landing beaches where visitors access a particular location.  This will allow comparisons, over time, between areas where there are more and less human activity.
For the approaching 2003-04 Antarctic field season, logistics already are in place for Inventory researchers to continue collecting data at previously visited sites and to gather data at new sites encountering tourist visits for the first time.  It is hoped that in November 2003 the project will be in a position to focus more on long-term monitoring and assessment at Petermann Island, a key site that is heavily visited, diverse in species composition, and sensitive to potential environmental disruptions from visitors.
Methodology.  The Inventory’s methodology (fully described in Naveen: 1996, 1997a, 2003) involves the collection of three categories of data and information:
    • Basic Site Information, which includes descriptions of key physical and topographical characteristics; latitude and longitude; distribution of flora, seal haul-out and wallow locations, and discrete groups of breeding penguins and flying birds;
    • Variable Site Information and Data, which includes weather and other environmental conditions (sea ice extent, cloud cover, snow cover, temperature, wind direction and speed), biological variables (number of occupied nests, number of chicks per occupied nest, ages of chicks), and the nature and extent of any observed visitor impacts (footprints or paths, cigarette butts, film canisters, and litter); and
    • Maps and Photodocumentation, which portray the major features of each site, particularly the locations of colonies and assemblages of resident fauna and flora.
With respect to key biological variables, data collection follows Standard Methods established by the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) (Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2001).  Data also are collected with reference to other pertinent authorities, in particular, The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea (Croxall, J. P. and E.D. Kirkwood, 1979) and The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins (Woehler, E.J., 1993).
The Inventory divides the Antarctic Peninsula into six subareas: South Orkney Islands, including Laurie, Coronation, and Signy Islands (SO); Elephant Island and nearby islands (EI); Northeast Antarctic Peninsula/northwestern Weddell Sea (NE), from Cape Dubouzet (63˚16’S  64˚00’W) to James Ross Island; South Shetland Islands, including Deception, Low, and Smith Islands (SH); Northwest Antarctic Peninsula (NW), from Cape Dubouzet (63˚16’S  64˚00’W) to north end of the Lemaire Channel; and Southwest Antarctic Peninsula (SW), from the north end of the Lemaire Channel to the northern part of Marguerite Bay (68˚18’S 67˚11’W).
Publications.  Biological data and site descriptions collected by the Antarctic Site Inventory have been published and routinely made available in peer-reviewed papers, government reports, and popular publications, including:
    • Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Naveen, 1997a)
    • Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites (2d edition): A Report to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, US Environmental Protection Agency (Naveen, 2003)
    • Prevalence of Leucism in Pygoscelid Penguins of the Antarctic Peninsula, Waterbirds 23 (2): 283-285 (Forrest, S. and Naveen, R., 2000).
    • Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334 (Naveen, R., Forrest, S.C., Dagit, R.G., Blight, L.K., Trivelpiece, W.Z., and Trivelpiece, S.G., 2000).
    • Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132 (Naveen, R., Forrest, S.C., Dagit, R.G., Blight, L.K., Trivelpiece, W.Z., and Trivelpiece, S.G., 2001).
    • The Oceanites Site Guide to the Antarctic Peninsula, Oceanites, Inc., Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA (Naveen, 1997b)
The Compendium includes site descriptions, data on fauna and flora, orientation maps, and photographs of Antarctic Peninsula tourism sites, while the Site Guide provides a summary of this information that can be used readily by visitors, Antarctic tour operators, and expedition staff.  The Site Guide is a popular version of these materials.
The census paper (Naveen, et al., 2000) presents penguin, blue-eyed shag (Phalocrocorax atriceps), and southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus) population data collected between 1994-2000.  Since 1994, the Inventory has detected declines in nesting populations of blue-eyed shags at five of its thirteen shag census sites; the declines are significant at three of these sites, two of which are either inaccessible to tourists or receive few tourist visits.  These declines suggest that shag populations should be further monitored, and that their decline may be indicative of some underlying environmental change.
The zodiac landings paper (Naveen, et al., 2001) examines the location, intensity, and frequency of zodiac landings by expedition tour ship passengers in the Antarctic Peninsula over ten seasons, 1989-90 through 1998-99.  In this period, the 25 most heavily visited Peninsula sites, by number of landings, were:
Site

1989-99 Landings
89-99 Rank
Whalers Bay, Deception Island
SH
425
1
Cuverville Island
NW
359
2
Port Lockroy (incl. Jougla Point), Wiencke Is.
NW
350
3
Pendulum Cove, Deception Island
SH
300
4
Hannah Point, Livingston Island
SH
290
5
Petermann Island
SW
278
6
Half Moon Island
SH
263
7
Almirante Brown Station, Paradise Bay
NW
259
8
Paulet Island
NE
196
9
Arctowski Station, King George Island
SH
166
10
Neko Harbor, Andvord Bay
NW
152
11
Baily Head (incl. Rancho Point), Deception Is.
SH
149
12
Waterboat Pt. (G. Videla Station), Paradise Bay
NW
148
13
Aitcho Islands
SH
147
14
Penguin Island
SH
118
15
Palmer Station, Arthur Harbor, Anvers Is.
NW
104
16
Pléneau Islands
SW
89
17
Paradise Bay (nonspecifically described as to site)
NW
88
18
Hope Bay (Esperanza Station)
NE
87
19
Ak. Vernadskiy (ex-Faraday) Station, Argentine Is.
SW
72
20
Telefon Bay, Deception Island
SH
65
21
Yankee Harbor, Greenwich Island
SH
60
22
Point Lookout, Elephant Island
EI
59
23
Torgersen Is., Arthur Harbor
NW
57
24
Portal Point, Charlotte Bay
NW
56
25

From its inception, the Inventory has collected data regarding the presence or absence of nesting species of penguins and flying birds, wallows of southern elephant seals, and large patches or beds of lichens and mosses at all sites visited.  These data are used to rank sites as to their species diversity, based on the number of faunal species and major floral groups recorded.
Five sites with high species diversity were identified: Hannah Point (SH), Penguin Island (SH), the Aitcho Islands (SH), Cuverville Island (NW), and Fort Point (SH). Fifteen sites with medium species diversity were identified: Arctowski Station (SH), Astrolabe Island (NW), Baily Head (SH), Brown Bluff (NE), Half Moon Island (SH), Heroína Island (NE), Port Lockroy (NW), Point Lookout (EI), Orne Island (NW), Paulet Island (NE), Petermann Island (SW), Pléneau Island (SW), Turret Point (SH), Whaler’s Bay (SH), and Yankee Harbor (SH).
Using these presence/absence data as a base, sites also are ranked as to their potential sensitivity to disruption by visitors, depending on: (a) the number of penguin and seabird species whose nests visitors may access easily, (b) whether or not visitors may access southern elephant seal wallows easily, and (c) whether or not visitors may access easily and possibly trample large patches or beds of lichens and mosses. 
Four highly sensitive sites were identified: Hannah Point (SH), Penguin Island (SH), the Aitcho Islands (SH), and Turret Point (SH). Nine moderately sensitive sites were identified: Brown Bluff (NE), Fort Point (SH), Gourdin Island (NW), Orne Island (NW), Paulet Island (NE), Petermann Island (SW), Pléneau Island (SW), Georges Point, Rongé Island (NW), and Waterboat Point (NW).
Acknowledgements.  The 2000-03 field seasons were supported and assisted by: Environmental Defense, Inc, New York, NY; The Tinker Foundation, New York, NY; the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office; the British Royal Navy’s UK ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance; Lindblad Expeditions, Inc., New York, NY, and the expedition staff, officers, and crew of MV Endeavour; the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO); the Cincinnati Zoo and Biological Garden, Cincinnati, OH; and many private contributors.  Oceanites, Inc. is grateful for this support, and welcomes additional sponsors and collaborators.

References
Abbott, S. and Benninghoff, W.S., 1990. Orientation of Environmental Change Studies to the Conservation of Antarctic Ecosystems, in Antarctic Ecosystems. Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel), Berlin, Germany.
Benninghoff, W.S. and W.N. Bonner, 1985. Man’s Impact on the Antarctic Environment: A procedure for evaluating impacts and logistic activities. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England.
Croxall, J. P. and E.D. Kirkwood, 1979. The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, England.
Emslie, S., 1997. Natural and human-induced impacts to seabird productivity and conservation in Antarctica: a review and perspectives. In Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management, The World Conservation Union (IUCN), Washington.
Forrest, S. and Naveen, R., Prevalence of Leucism in Pygoscelid Penguins of the Antarctic Peninsula, Waterbirds 23 (2): 283-285 (2000).
Hofman, R.J. and Jatko, J., (eds.), 2002. Assessment of the Possible Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Commercial Ship-Based Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Area: Proceedings of a Workshop Held in La Jolla California, 7-9 June 2000, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Naveen, R., 1996. Human Activity and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory, In R. Ross, E. Hofman, and L. Quetin (eds.) Foundations for Ecosystem Research in the Western Antarctic Peninsula Region. American Geophysical Union. Washington. pp. 389-400.
Naveen, R., 1997a. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Naveen, R., 2003. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites (2d edition): A Report to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, US Environmental Protection Agency.
Naveen, R., 1997b. The Oceanites Site Guide to the Antarctic Peninsula, Oceanites, Inc., Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA.
Naveen, R., 1999. Visitor landings in the Antarctic Peninsula, 1989-99. Unpublished report submitted to the US Environmental Protection Agency, November 15, 1999.
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334 (2000).
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132 (2001).
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Subcommittee on Bird Biology (Ed. by E. Woehler and J. Croxall), 1996. The Status and Trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic Seabirds.
Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2001 (revised). CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies. Hobart, Australia.
Woehler, E. J., 1993. The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, Eng­land.

