






	










Report of the Informal Intersessional Group 
on Tourism Activities in Antarctica

















Madrid, 9/20 de junio 2003

ATCM XXVI/IP-012
Information Paper 
English
Original: French

Agenda Item: ATCM 10








Information Paper submitted by France at the Twenty-Sixth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Madrid, 2003)

Agenda Item 10: Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area


Report of the Informal Intersessional Group on
Tourism Activities in Antarctica














Submitted by France

France submitted a Working Paper at the Twenty-Fifth Consultative Meeting (Warsaw, 2002) emphasizing the need for a new Annex to the Madrid Protocol governing tourism activities in Antarctica (XXV ATCM/WP 02).
This proposal was discussed by the Working Group on legal and institutional matters. The XXV ATCM Report states that a number of delegations at that Meeting expressed interest for tourism-related issues and that France offered to coordinate an informal intersessional meeting in preparation for the ensuing debate on tourism at the XXVI ATCM (Madrid, 2003).
To this effect, two main focuses were identified:
    • The need for and relevance of a regulation on tourism activities to be adopted by the Consultative meeting, in particular as they relate to health, safety and insurance;
    • The definition of “tourism” and of “non-governmental activity”.
To facilitate the discussions, additional elements of information were provided:
    • A literary search of all national legal instruments on tourism in Antarctica (laws and regulations as well as administrative and enforcement measures adopted to enforce compliance with the Madrid Protocol);
    • A compilation of all working and information papers submitted at Consultative Meetings held since 1961;
    • A list of resources on tourism that may provide useful work references (publications, journal articles, Web sites, etc.).

Various participants representing the following eleven States took part in the discussions: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands, New Zealand, and Norway. The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) and the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) also participated in the discussions. 
The principle that was however applied at that meeting was that ideas and positions expressed during the discussions would not necessarily be taken as reflecting the ideas and/or positions of the State or Organisation that the person making the statement belonged to. This approach was adopted as it allowed for faster progress during the discussions.
Three key issues emerged from the discussions:
    • The need to regulate tourism activities in Antarctica;
    • The need for a definition of “tourism activities” and of “non-governmental activities”;
    • The need for a debate on the form of such regulation.

1.	The need to regulate tourism activities in Antarctica

Whenever activities of a commercial nature were considered in Antarctica, the Parties adopted a formal instrument related to the proposed activities, as illustrated by The London Convention for Conservation of Antarctic Seals and the Canberra Convention on Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. The authors of the Madrid Protocol aimed at providing global protection to the Antarctic environment. Consequently, all activities conducted in Antarctica, including tourism, are governed by regulations formulated in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty.
However, since the adoption of the Madrid Protocol, tourism developed and diversified significantly. The Antarctic environment must be protected from this increase in human activity, all the more so that its cumulative impacts are not always considered when planning group tours. 
It is essential to act before these activities can no longer be adequately supervised. By virtue of the precautionary principle, such action can only be expected when considering the magnitude of this expansion. If tourism is not adequately regulated in due course, it will develop even further and will result in major environmental damage before being put under control. 
All is not negative when it comes to tourism. It would indeed not be advisable to prohibit tourism development, provided it is duly regulated.
Let us not forget either that various Parties, NGOs and IAATO among others expressed concern about this constant expansion at several Consultative Meetings, as illustrated by the many working and information papers on the subject submitted at the Consultative Meetings. Those many contributions facilitated identification of many key issues posed by tourism development. These issues are not necessarily intractable. It is nevertheless important to take stock of the situation they relate to. This assessment would allow for identification of the truly sensitive issues which must be constructively discussed by competent organisations. It is essential that all stakeholders may take part on the tourism debate. Both the tourism industry and Parties anxious to protect the Antarctic environment must be in a position to share their concerns. 
The issue of tourism in Antarctica becomes all the more important when viewed in the context of health, safety and insurance. This aspect of the matter became prominent recently when it was discovered that a significant number of incidents occurred during non-governmental activities conducted in the course of the 2001-2002 season.
The magnitude of these developments must be assessed. The informal discussion group started reviewing the matter. It is indeed necessary to determine precisely the frequency and the extent of the requests for assistance addressed to national programmes. As well as their number, various aspects should be examined, including the types of incidents, the cost of interventions by the Parties, the sums refunded by NGOs and the causes of incidents. 
This assessment should not be occasional or in respect of a given year but should go back several years in time. The consequences of non-governmental activities in Antarctica would emerge from such an assessment and determine in what respects the body of law should be strengthened.
    2. The need for a definition of “tourism activities” and of “non-governmental activities”

The Madrid Protocol relates in several instances to “activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty Area pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area” (Art.3 (4), Art. 8 (2), Art.15 (1) and Art.1 (1) of Annex III). Four types of activities must be identified: scientific research programmes, tourism, governmental activities, and non-governmental activities. The Madrid Protocol does not identify the persons who belong to each of those categories.
Since the need for a regulation governing tourism activities is under discussion, the definition of tourism should necessarily be examined. However, the literary search in national regulations shows that the notion of tourism activities remains more or less imprecise.
Non-governmental activities are of varied types. Two approaches can be distinguished. Tourism activities could be divided into categories as clearly defined as possible or, conversely, defined in more general terms. When passing national regulations to enforce the Madrid Protocol, Parties opted for either one or the other approach to regulate tourism. A solution to this discrepancy must be found in order to define rules that may apply to all in the Treaty Area.
3.	The need for a debate on the form of such regulation

If the need to regulate tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica and the need for a definition of such activities are recognized, then the appropriate approach and, more specifically, the form of such regulation must be considered.
There is no real regulatory vacuum in the field of tourism. International law, national legislations, codes of conduct contribute to tourism management in Antarctica. The need is more in respect of harmonisation of existing regulations, as well as the accuracy of such regulations and the overall efficiency of existing mechanisms.
Regulatory measures have been adopted by Parties on whose territory tourism activities were conducted. Consultations are organised between those Parties and appropriate tour operators. It is nevertheless essential that regulations are enforced once passed and, as a matter of priority, that Parties that did not yet regulate tourism in Antarctica ensure that national regulations are passed. 
The large number of participants at the informal discussions on tourism indicates a growing awareness of the role played by tourism in human activities conducted in Antarctica and of its environmental consequences. Tourism is an issue which is regularly reviewed at Consultative Meetings when working papers on the matter are submitted. A more formal discussion is now in order. 
In view of the increase in the number of tourists and of related activities, it is important to consider the manner in which existing regulations – whether based on guiding principles issued by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) or resulting from Consultative Meetings – may be better applied and enforced. Moreover, as Parties adopted different national rules in respect of tourism, it would be useful to examine what approach could be adopted – without necessarily passing a distinct Annex on tourism –to ensure that guiding principles are harmonized and, more importantly, adhered to. 
This reflection which started as an exchange of views over the Web is still very much in its initial phase. Gradually, the discussion group became larger. The large number of participants clearly demonstrates the need for a discussion of the issue. Without attempting to find solutions to the problem of tourism development in Antarctica, discussions so far led to a better identification of common concerns and problems. We should now consider how this discussion could be pursued so as to ensure that the initial objectives may actually be reached. 
