º



XXVI ATCM
Information paper IP-
Agenda item: ATCM 12
Submitted by: SCAR
Original: English


Predicting the state of the Southern Ocean during the 21st century

Introduction
From 1750 to the present, the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide has increased from about 280 parts per million (ppm) to over 370 ppm; this latter value is unprecedented in the last 420 thousand years and has probably not occurred in the last 20 million years.  This increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration is similar in magnitude to changes between glacial (“ice age”) and interglacial periods.  By 2100, the models predict that the concentration of carbon dioxide is expected to be about a factor of two, or more, greater than pre-industrial levels.  Stabilisation of this and other greenhouse gas concentrations requires significant cuts in emissions and changes in the way we live.  

Projected Changes
Virtually all areas of the globe are expected to warm during the 21st century as a result of greenhouse gas concentration increases.  However, projections suggest that surface warming will be at a minimum in the Southern Ocean.  Despite this minimum in warming, the Southern Ocean still absorbs additional heat from the enhanced Greenhouse Effect and exports this heat to lower latitudes.  Since all water expands when heated this will inevitably result in a global sea-level rise through ocean thermal expansion.  
For the Southern Ocean, some of the most important projected changes are a decrease in the amount of sea ice, an increase in the ocean stratification and stability of the Southern Ocean and a decrease in the vertical mixing (overturning) of the Southern Ocean.  These changes have positive feedbacks that enhance the Greenhouse Effect.  At present, over 50% of the global ocean’s water mass properties are determined through interaction with the atmosphere and cryosphere in the Southern Ocean region.  
A surface warming in the Southern Ocean region and a reduction in sea-ice cover is likely to result in increased evaporation over the ocean and increased snow fall in Antarctica.  This increased precipitation will partly offset other contributions to sea-level rise.  Both ocean and atmosphere warming also leads to increased melting of ice shelves.  The West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) is grounded below sea level and concern has been expressed about the possibility of a collapse of the WAIS, leading to a sea level rise of several metres.  While climate change is not expected to lead to a rapid collapse of the WAIS during the 21st century, there is at present insufficient understanding to make confident projections on the longer term.  

Potential Impacts
A major reduction in the Southern Ocean overturning (the phenomenon whereby currents heading for Antarctica rise to the surface and turn northerly) would be a first order change in the climate system and would be likely to have significant impacts on the atmosphere and the ocean.  However, the likelihood of this change and the resultant impacts on a global and regional scale remain poorly quantified at present.  
These changes in the Southern Ocean are projected to result in a reduction of the uptake of anthropogenic carbon dioxide.  The Southern Ocean is currently the largest long-term sink for anthropogenic carbon dioxide in the global ocean and a reduction in the size of this sink would make the stabilisation of atmospheric concentrations more difficult to achieve.  
Biogeochemical models also indicate a significant reduction in the biological productivity of the Southern Ocean.  When combined with a decrease in the area of the sea-ice habitat, there is the potential for significant stresses to ripple through Antarctic ecosystems with profound impacts at all levels in the food chain, from algae to krill to the great whales.  These biogeochemical models also project a long-term reduction in the amount of oxygen in the deep ocean as a direct result of changes in the Southern Ocean.  

Confidence in Projections and Changes to Date
The current generation of climate models have too coarse a spatial scale to accurately represent many of the important phenomena occurring in the Southern Ocean.  As a result, it remains unclear what confidence we should place in projections of a reduction of the Southern Ocean overturning.  The present overturning has only recently been quantified and thus direct confirmation of the projected decrease awaits further observations.  
However, observations are suggesting that changes have occurred in recent decades in the properties of water masses formed in the Southern Ocean.  These changes, including a warming, a freshening, a decrease in dissolved oxygen and an increase in dissolved inorganic carbon concentrations of water masses, are consistent with the changes suggested by models of climate change.  However, other explanations (eg climate variability) are also possible.  
Satellite data since the 1970s shows no significant overall decrease in Southern Ocean sea-ice extent. In fact the latest analyses  of all available satellite data have shown that  sea ice has increased in all sectors of the Antarctic except the Bellingshausen Sea over the period 1979-98.  At present there is no accepted explanation of this trend, which indicates gaps in our understand of the drivers of change. Data on ice extent gathered during whaling expeditions has been used to infer a significant retreat of sea-ice between the mid 1950s and early 1970s, but this interpretation remains controversial at present.  There are currently no reliable data available to indicate whether the sea ice thickness might have changed.
Perhaps the most dramatic change in the Southern Ocean in recent years has been the rapid collapse of ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula as a result of regional warming.  The most recent of these was the Larsen B Ice Shelf which collapsed in a matter of days in March 2002.  Although disintegration of floating ice shelves does not directly impact on sea level, it modifies the freshwater budget of the Southern Ocean, with consequent further impact on the overturning circulation.  There is also some evidence that after the Larsen B Ice Shelf collapsed, the ice streams that previously drained into it accelerated, discharging more grounded ice which affected sea level.

Reducing Uncertainty
The collapse of ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula should be a reminder that changes can be rapid and dramatic.  Increasing confidence in projections relies on improved understanding of the critical processes through detailed experimental studies, theoretical advances and ongoing observations and the incorporation of this understanding in the next generation of models.  Perhaps the most important issue requiring urgent attention is ongoing monitoring of conditions through sustained satellite and in situ observations.  For the Southern Ocean, critical measurements include observations of surface conditions (temperature, salinity and biogeochemical properties), surface buoys to validate satellite and model based estimates of air/sea fluxes, full depth repeat ocean observations of ocean properties, observation of major ocean currents, observations of sea ice extent and thickness and, in particular, subsurface ocean conditions measured by a network of profiling floats (the Argo project).  
SCAR coordinated national programmes, working in close partnership with other major international programmes such as the World Climate Research Programme and the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme will be essential to reducing uncertainty.  

Further Reading
For a general description of the Southern Ocean and global change
Church, J.A., 2002. Southern Ocean. (pp 668-672) In The Encyclopedia of Global Environmental Change, Volume 1: the Earth System: physical and chemical dimensions of global environmental change, MacCracken, M.C. & J.S. Perry (eds), in Encyclopedia of Global Environmental Change, T. Munn (ed.), Chichester, John Wiley and Sons. 

For a detailed description of the oceanography of the Southern Ocean
Rintoul, Stephen R, Chris Hughes & Dirk Olbers, 2001. The Antarctic Circumpolar Current System. In Ocean Circulation and Climate, eds Siedler, John Church, J.A. & W.J. Gould, International Geophysics Series, 77, San Diego, Academic Press, 715 pp. 

For more information on Climate Change
IPCC, 2001: Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Houghton, J. T., Ding, Y., Griggs, D. J., Noguer, M., van der Linden, P., Dai, X., Maskell K. & C.I Johnson (eds.)]. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 881pp.  
IPCC, 2001: Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [McCarthy, J.J., Cansiani, O.F., Leary, N.A., Dokken, D.J. & K.S. White (eds.)]. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1032pp.  


John A. Church
Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems CRC and CSIRO Marine Research
GPO Box 1538, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia 7001
Ian Allison
Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems CRC and Australian Antarctic Division
Channel Highway, Kingston, Tasmania, Australia 7050
