º




The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
The Antarctica Project
ASOC Secretariat
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W.
Washington, DC 20009 USA
Tel +1 202 234-2480
Fax +1 202 387 4823
antarctica@igc.org
www.asoc.org



XXVI ATCM
Information Paper IP __
Agenda Item: 5(b)
ASOC
Original: English







Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 

(ASOC)

to the

XXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

9-20 June 2003
Madrid, Spain

Report pursuant to Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty, under Agenda Item 5(b)






The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
The Antarctica Project
ASOC Secretariat
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W.
Washington, DC 20009 USA
Tel +1 202 234-2480
Fax +1 202 387 4823
antarctica@igc.org
www.asoc.org





Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 

(ASOC)

to the

XXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

9-20 June 2003
Madrid, Spain

Report pursuant to Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty, under Agenda Item 5 (b)



ASOC is delighted to return to Madrid for this XXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, 12 years after Antarctic Treaty Parties adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection here.

We trust that this meeting will not only see a conclusion of the outstanding formal commitments in the Final Act and Protocol adopted here – namely rules and procedures for liability for damage to the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems – but the final establishment of that mechanism we have been discussing for even longer, the Secretariat in Buenos Aires.

ASOC calls upon all Parties, Observers and Experts at XXVI ATCM to rededicate themselves to ensuring full and faithful implementation of the Protocol, and concerted efforts to ensure the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment as one of the great splendours of our common home.
__________

ASOC maintains a Secretariat in Washington DC – and a central website: http://www.asoc.org.
    • ASOC member groups and individuals are present in most ATCPs.
    • ASOC Regional Offices are located in: Asia (Seoul, South Korea), Europe (Amsterdam, The Netherlands and Madrid, Spain), Latin America (Santiago, Chile), and Southern Africa (Cape Town, South Africa).
    • ASOC National Offices are located in: Australia (Canberra), Russia (Moscow), and Ukraine (Kiev)

KEY ISSUES FOR XXVI ATCM

    1) Antarctic Tourism:

ASOC has identified regulation of Antarctic tourism by the ATCM as a priority issue for Parties, so that this steeply growing industry does not result in damage to the Antarctic environment or undermine the stability of the Antarctic Treaty System. An Information Paper on tourism policy issues is tabled at this meeting.

ASOC has tabled a revision of its 2002 Information Paper on Port State Jurisdiction, addressing mechanisms open to Parties to regulate vessels engaged in non-governmental activities. This paper includes a draft Memorandum of Understanding.

A further short Information Paper is provided on mechanisms for improving yacht compliance.

    2) Liability:

Completion of at least a first Annex on Liability for damage to the Antarctic environment is a priority for this ATCM.

    3) Secretariat:

Conclusion of the Headquarters Agreement, funding arrangements and other establishment issues to allow the operation of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat in Buenos Aires to commence before the next Antarctic operational season.

    4) Consistent Protocol Implementation:
 
Since the XXV ATCM, ASOC has continued its research on the potential application of SEA to Antarctic activities and institutions, to complement existing EIA tools under the Protocol and as a better way to meet the requirements of Article 2. . Further documentation on SEA will be made available to Parties as appropriate. 

    5) Review of Protocol Annexes:

ASOC participated in the Intersessional Contact Group on Annex II review lead by Argentina. ASOC congratulates Argentina and the other participants for the valuable effort they have made despite the short intersessional period. ASOC supports the Progress Report on the ICG to be tabled at this CEP and looks forward to continuing these valuable discussions in the near future. 

    6) Annex V: 

ASOC encourages the development of practical mechanisms to give effect to the formal capacity to designate marine areas as ASPAs or ASMAs under the Antarctic Protected Areas system. This requires the establishment of effective cross-institution mechanisms between the Protocol and CCAMLR.

ASOC has participated in the Deception Island ASMA process, and is encouraged by the depth of participation from so many Parties.

    7) Lake Vostok:

ASOC has participated in the Lake Vostok intersessional CEE review coordinated by France. ASOC is encouraged by the active participation of so many Parties, which bodes well for the future of the CEE review process. ASOC urges Russia to accept the recommendations of this Working Group, and to refrain from penetrating Lake Vostok until technology is available that will prevent contamination. 

BROADER ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 
 
1) Southern Ocean Fishing:

The high level of illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing for toothfish, and associated seabird and other bycatch, continues at unsustainable levels. Recent events in the Southern Ocean continue to highlight CCAMLR’s inability to effectively combat IUU fishing. Everyone seems to acknowledge this, yet CCAMLR continues to approve further fishing permits, and CCAMLR Parties continue to import IUU toothfish.

The notion that this issue can somehow be safely left to CCAMLR and that largely the same people, from the same states, meeting at an ATCM need not trouble themselves with an unrelenting assault on the integrity of the Antarctic environment, has no credibility. The greatest threat presently facing the Antarctic environment – which the Protocol seeks to secure – is the present debacle surrounding Antarctic fishing. It is therefore both appropriate and necessary for this meeting in Spain – one of the world’s premier distant-water fishing states, after all – to seriously address this threat, and mechanisms of response.

While ASOC applauds those few Parties that are taking aggressive enforcement actions, ATCPs as a whole are failing to utilise their individual and collective capacity to address IUU fishing. Available mechanisms include cooperative use of satellite imagery, enforcement vessels, and various port-state enforcement options. 

ASOC encourage all states – whether members of CCAMLR or not – to take the steps urgently needed to halt this activity and to effectively implement the toothfish Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS). ASOC has developed several trade and management solutions that would assist in the elimination of IUU fishing and thereby assist in the conservation of Southern Ocean marine living resources. These are not radical solutions. They have, in fact, been adopted by other international organizations faced with similar problems. These include (1) centralized monitoring and compliance, (2) increased enforcement and inspection powers including the adoption of an enforcement protocol, and (3) strengthening the CDS, including actions to be taken when Port States are presented with toothfish without a verifiable DCD or from unregulated waters.

The CDS will only be able to track the trade in toothfish and assist states in closing markets to illegally caught toothfish if implemented by all states involved in the toothfish trade.

ASOC has created an IUU vessel ‘Red List’, available at www.asoc.org to assist governments in identifying and scrutinising vessels that may be involved in IUU fishing in the Southern Ocean. ASOC also applauds the creation of the Coalition of Legal Toothfish Operators (COLTO) in May of this year by several of the companies involved in the legal toothfish trade. COLTO has also created a list of suspected IUU vessels and offers a reward for the apprehension of pirate fishers. 

ASOC notes that four members of the Antarctic Treaty System have ratified the Agreement on the Conservation of albatross and Petrels (ACAP) - Australia, New Zealand, Ecuador and South Africa. This agreement requires one more ratification to come into force. ASOC recommends that the ATS considers how co-operation will occur with the ACAP Secretariat once that has been established. 

2) Climate Change:

ASOC looks forward to early entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol, which all honest observers acknowledge is only the first step toward doing what is in the long-term best interests of the planet. ASOC also calls upon those few states that so far have not indicated support for the Kyoto Protocol to reverse course and begin doing their share to fight global climate change. ASOC regrets the failure of the WSSD meeting last year in South Africa to make targeted commitments to invest in renewable energy, as well as the continuing refusal of key states such as the U.S. and Australia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. ASOC welcomes Russia's announcement that it will ratify the Kyoto Protocol soon thereby allowing it to enter into force and begin functioning.

ASOC looks forwards to working with delegates at this XXVI ATCM and to the successful resolution of the important issues identified above.

