
CEP Information Paper
Agenda Item: 4g
 
Progress towards a Deception Island
Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)


Joint Information Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the UK, the USA, 
ASOC and IAATO


1.	Introduction

Deception Island was first raised for discussion as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) at ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994), in order to protect the island’s ‘scientific, nature conservation, wildlife as well as its historic values’. Recent Information Papers (XII SATCM/IP8, XXIV ATCM/IP63 and XXV ATCM/IP28) submitted to the CEP summarize the consultation and site investigations undertaken by those Parties and NGOs with major interests in Deception Island (Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the UK, the USA, ASOC and IAATO) to achieve that objective. 

An island-wide approach to the management of activities on Deception Island has been agreed by the above Parties, entailing an ASMA which would comprise a matrix of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs), and further zones in which activities would be subject to a code of conduct.

2.	Deception Island Management Package

Substantial progress has been made since CEP V with the preparation of a draft island-wide ‘management package’. This includes the following key documents:

2.1	Draft Deception Island ASMA Management Plan

The ASMA would comprise the whole of Deception Island and Port Foster. The draft Management Plan will meet the requirements of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, including a general code of conduct for activities on the island. It will also provide for an informal Deception Island management group to oversee the implementation of the Management Plan. 

2.2	Draft ASPA 140 Management Plan

The proposal for ASPA 140 will comprise 11 small sub-sites of botanical interest on the island. This multi-site approach reflects the characteristic fragmented distribution of the island’s vegetation, and is considered necessary in order to protect Deception Island’s unique flora, which includes 18 species not recorded elsewhere in the Antarctic, 2 of which are endemic.



2.3	Draft ASPA 145 Management Plan

ASPA 145 comprises two sub-sites within Port Foster which are of ecological interest due to the volcanic nature of Deception Island. The two areas are subject to long-term research, and the overall aim of the Management Plan will be to reduce the risk of accidental interference which could jeopardize these scientific investigations.

2.4	Draft conservation strategy for HSM No. 71, Whalers Bay

A Working Paper jointly submitted to CEP VI by Chile, Norway and the UK describes the extent of the revised HSM No. 71 on the shore of Whalers Bay. The overall aim of the conservation strategy will be to prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the structures and artifacts within the site, whilst recognizing that they will deteriorate naturally over time, and so allow for mitigating measures to be implemented (e.g. ongoing clean-up of debris). The conservation strategy will also include a code of conduct for visitors to the site. 

2.5	Draft facilities zone general code of conduct

It is proposed that a Facilities Zone would be located on the western shore of Port Foster, which would include Decepción Station (Argentina) and Gabriel de Castilla Station (Spain). Existing guidelines for staff at both stations will be supplemented with a general code of conduct for this zone. 

2.6	Draft code of conduct for visitors at specific sites

Activities at the three other frequently visited sites on Deception Island (Pendulum Cove including HSM No. 75 - Pedro Aguirre Cerda Station, Baily Head, and an unnamed beach and crater on the west of Telefon Bay) would also be managed by a code of conduct. 

2.7	Draft volcanic escape strategy

All activities undertaken on Deception Island need to be planned and conducted taking into account the significant risk to human life posed by the threat of volcanic eruption. A draft escape strategy has been produced, including a map showing suggested routes to the outer coast where evacuation by either boat or helicopter may be undertaken. 

3.	Final steps and timeframe

Further consultation amongst the informal Deception Island contact group is planned. The objective is to complete the island-wide ‘management package’ and table it at CEP VII.
