
XXVI ATCM 
Information Paper
	Agenda Item 14
Submitted by the United Kingdom 


Antarctic Waves – Data from world-class Antarctic scientific research help students make music.  Winner of the 2002 British Academy of Film and Television (BAFTA) Interactive Entertainment Award for Offline Learning.

Partners: British Antarctic Survey & multi-media specialists Braunarts 
Budget: £101000 from NESTA (National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts).  Equivalent in-kind costs from BAS.
Development time: Two years

Antarctic Waves is an innovative and exciting music-making toolkit from the British Antarctic Survey, and multimedia company Braunarts.  Its UK launch was at a science festival in September 2002. The CD-ROM is aimed at secondary school students and uses real Antarctic science, imagery and sounds to provide new ideas for musical composition.
In the spirit of crossing the divide between science and music, students can have direct access to real Antarctic scientific data to create music inspired by important global issues such as climate change and ozone depletion.  Stunning imagery, scientific data, natural Earth rhythms and sounds from the Southern Continent are just some of the elements that can enable students to compose new sounds in a fun and stimulating way - whether it be pop, samba, bhangra or classical music.  Antarctic science is international and this CD allows composition into any musical culture. It uses as a unifying principle the concept of waves, which underlie so much of the scientific data and also comprise a key element in compositional structure of music.  Waves represents - cyclical phenomena in the atmosphere and the ocean; various techniques scientists use to measure and record data; the ways in which music is both made and heard; and, as a series of metaphors connecting this scientific work with musical ideas. 

There are five science areas on the CD-ROM. One covers the journey of a wandering albatross in search of food for its chick. Scientists use satellites to track the amazing round trips of up to 6000 km. Students can follow this path to create a unique selection of sounds. Another area looks at the study of ice. Scientists study Antarctic ice to record past climate in Antarctica. Students can travel through the ice layers of a glacier to make a series of sounds, starting at one layer, adding extras to build up musical texture. 

Antarctic Waves is an educational development of the joint commission by the Philharmonia Orchestra and BAS of Sir Peter Maxwell Davies’ Antarctic Symphony, which received its world première at the Royal Festival Hall in May 2001. The orchestra were involved in the early concept development of the CD.

Over two years, working with composers, education consultants and students, the production team created a resource that is not only stimulating for students but is also structured to meet the UK curriculum needs for music composition.  This innovative science/arts collaboration is funded by NESTA (National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts). 

The Antarctic Waves CD was launched to all UK secondary schools or colleges where GCSE and A-level music, or an equivalent qualification, is taught in September 2002.  A specially written music and vision artwork – Wavejammer, inspired by Antarctic Waves and using BAS video, was performed by Coldcut’s Matt Black during UK National Science week in March 2003.

Copies of the Antarctic Waves CD can be purchased for around £39. For more details visit: www.antarcticwaves.com














Linda Capper mipr
Head of Press, PR & Education
British Antarctic Survey
High Cross, Madingley Road
Cambridge CB3 0ET
Email: L.capper@bas.ac.uk

