

                         
                                    XXVI ATCM – Madrid, 
                                        June, 09-20, 2003

                                   






ROMANIAN  SCIENTIFIC ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES
IN COOPERATION WITH CHINA
2002-2003


                                                        ANTARCTIC  TREATY
            COOPERATION AND EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION IN ACCORDANCE 
                                     WITH ARTICLES III and  VII, PARAGRAPH 5 &
                                            RECOMMENDATIONS  VIII-6 & XIII-3                                    












                                                                                           Submitted by 
                                                                                           ROMANIA







                                     Inquiries about the Romanian Antarctic Program 
                                                        can be addressed to:
                                       National  Romanian Antarctic Program (NRAP)
                                                Ministry of Education and Research
                                                C.P. 42-29, Bucharest-4, Romania
                                                       Tel/Fax: +401 337 2986 
                                        Email address: negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com
        
                      ROMANIAN  SCIENTIFIC ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES
                                         IN COOPERATION WITH CHINA 
                                                         2002-2003  

                 Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic and of the Article 6 of the Protocol, Romania makes efforts to promote such collaborations, willing to become a Consultative Party. In this respect, Recent Romanian Antarctic activities have been performed based on the scientific cooperation with China in their stations within the 19th Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition, between 20.11.2002 and 20.03.2003.  
               The projects proposed by Romania to be developped in cooperation with the Chinese scientists are focussed on studies of cryo-pedology, biology, biochemistry, climatic changes, and determination of certain pollutants in the Planetary Ocean waters, in ice, snow and dead biological material. 
	  Organization of this expedition has been performed by the Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration, that provided the logistics and the financial support, within the scientific cooperation agreement between the Romanian and the Chinese Governments.            


                                        2002-2003 FIELD RESEARCH PROJECTS

            During the anchorage of ships in the vicinity of the Chinese Antarctic stations Great Wall and Zhong Shan, sampling (water, snow, ice, soil, lichens and dead biological materials, a few rocks without special scientific importance for the museum) was performed in view of the subsequent researches, some of which are summarized below. During the Chinese scientific operations in Grove Mountains, Teodor Negoita collected soil and sand samples.    
            Research is structured based on the following discipline areas, each one being the responsibility of a government agency:
           A joint research by Romania and China on:

          PEDOBIOLOGY
          (T-35)
         Biotical, Enzymatic and Chemical Characterization of East and West Antarctic Soils. Teodor Negoita, Gheorghe Stefanic, Romanian Polar Research Institute and Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration, Polar Research Institute of China, respectively.   

           In a study of pedogenesis of soil samples from King George Island, Larsemann Hills and Grove Mountains, the microflora (bacteria, fungi and algae) will be studied. Using the Indicators of vital and enzymatic activities and the Biological Synthetic Indicator, we aim to put into evidence certain potentials of mineralization and biosynthesis, capable of soil forming processes, under Antarctic conditions, that hardly enable the humification of organic material.   
           In our previous research, we found that the Biological Synthetic Indicators from the microbiotopes of some Antarctic areas are similar to those Indicators characteristic for fertile alpine soil (chernozems) of Romania. 
          Even if the soil formation process is practicaly impossible under an adverse climate lasting 9 months per year, with very cold temperatures, inadequate ground and absence of a high vegetal cover, and very low humidity, it is still interesting to study the Antarctic soil evolution. To this purpose, we will use the indicators of biotic, enzymatic and general biologic potentials of the soils that have been introduced by the Romanian scientist Gh. Stefanic (1994) as useful tools  for a general comparasion of different biotops. 
            
               Characterization of organic matter accumulation in the Antarctic soils.
               (T-15)
                Teodor Negoita, Gheorghe Stefanic, Romanian Polar Research Institute and Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration
               Our research will also focuss on pedo-genesis issues in King George Island. The terrestrial crust of Antarctica is an incipient stage of soil formation. The variety of the contents of organic matter and mineral components suggests a passive accumulation and a weak bioconversion thereofi in small locations dispersed under the shalter of rock fragments. The results of some chemical researches are described also referring to a coast zone in the N-E of the Antarctic continent, investigated by us with respect to pedogenesis.          
             CLIMATIC  STUDIES
            (T-36)  
Determination of the  δD  and δ18O isotopes in the lake water and in the snow from East and West Antarctica. Teodor Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute and Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration.
 
 	Taking into account the Antarctica large ice surface and the geographic zone characteristics of Antarctica, the project is focussed on the study of the δD and δ18O isotope ratio distribution in the surface snow, in ice and lake water.           
	Thus, a better data base will be provided in order to interpret the isotopic profiles of the snow layer, and by means of isotopic models, to compare the climate parameters and the prevailing
conditions of  precipitation accumulation. 
	The data obtained in King George Island and Larsemann Hills, areas under the influence of abbundant precipitations as a consequence of the contact of the cold winds from the Antarctic ice-cap and the warm currents from the Antarctic Seas, will be correlated with the investigations between the East Antarctic coast and Grove Mountains.

	The δD şi δ18O values of the snow show variations of the season temperature, and those related on the altitude and geographic latitude. Complications arise in the areas with low precipitations quantities, such as the areas in the Antarctic continent interior, towards Grove Mountains, because the snow is removed by winds and redeposited.The δ18O concentration in snow, in the studied areas in Antarctica, also enable to determine the average rate of  water accumulation.      
            The Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic areas render evident the way the Earth evoluates, this continent being an indicator of the current global climatic changes. 

                 
              ENVIRONMENT  POLLUTION 
              (T-23)
 Heavy metal ions in snow, lake water and ice from West and East Antarctica.
 Teodor Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute and Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration.
              This program include assessment of the pollutant terrestrial and marine levels in Antarctica also considering the influences of the pollution sources inside and outside the Antarctic area. In this context the pollution dynamics compared to the levels determined in the previous years and correlated to the data obtained by the other countries being parts of the Treaty.  
              The Antarctic ice-cap represents the highest water reservoir on the Earth: If all this huge ice volume (about  3x10mill. cu. Km) would be melted, the level of the Planetary Ocean would increase by a few tens of meters.  

              During the last decades, on an international scale, continuous efforts have been done to assess the atmospheric pollutant precipitations stored in the snow and ice layers accumulated in time in the ice shell of Groenlanda and Antarctica. Among the most interesting investigations, there are those related to the heavy metals. Many of these metals are realy noxious and they have been spread into the Earth atmopsphere even since the Antic times following the human activities.

              The most chemical elements are present in the Antarctic snow and ice, in low concentrations, yet indicating a pollution degree increase even in this area considered to be the cleanest in the World. Even if numerous studies have been already performed on this subject, there still are  many thing to do in order to realy understand the current dynamics of these microelement presence, from local and remote sources, now, when the human impact on a worldwide scale increased.
         
Tritium determination in  water of the Pacific, Atlantic, Indian and Southern Oceans. Teodor Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute and Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration.
Quantities of Tritium from the waters of the Northern seas and the Southern Ocean can reach, by evaporation, in the terrestrial and fresh water ecosystems of Arctica and Antarctica. 
In case of radioactive substance losses in the air discharged from the nuclear plants, Tritium is one the radionuclids crytical for the envoronment, as it can be found in most cases as tritiated water. In this form, it follows the water circuit in Nature, remaining in the throposphere for a few days, and in the stratosphere for a few years. 
            All the Earth seas are in a continuous movement and connection, due to the currents. Each radioactive product discharged in a place somewhere, is dispersed in a few years everywhere

             MEDICINE  
             (T-10)
             Teste imunologice şi metabolice asupra organismului uman la expuneri îndelungate la temperaturi scăzute. Cornel Ursaciuc, Institutul Naţional Cercetare-Dezvoltare „Victor Babes”, Romania and Romanian Polar Research Institute.
              The project deals with tests regarding: 
    • Assesssment of some ilness risk degrees during prolonged exposures to cold temperatures; 
    • Determination of the time period in which modifications of the immune system functions arise; 
    • Determination of the recovery period of the immune system functions after exposures to cold temperatures, in order to establish the organism defense capacity;
    • Determination of the adequate food regime. 
 



