
º


















XXVI ATCM/ IP 125 Madrid, 14 June 2003



REPORT OF THE CHAIRMAN OF WORKING GROIJP 1 ON TItE
SECRETARIAT OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY


The Chairman, Prof. Francesco Francioni, welcomed Delegations and underlined the great progress made so far in the elaboration of the legal framework for the establishment of the Secretariat. He thanked the Spanish Govemment for the excellent organization of this Meeting. He also thanked the Delegations for having entrusted him with the mission of chairing this Group. He recalled with fond memories the work done in Madrid in 1991 when he participated in the negotiations that led to the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection.

The Chairman referred to the intersessional Meeting heid in Buenos Aires in
April 2003, thanked the Argentine Government for the excellent organization of the
Meeting and considered that the docurnents, drafied therein and included in XXVI
ATCMIWP 005 (WP 005), were a solid basis for current discussion.

The Chairman proposed the following working rnethod: Delegations should go through a first reading of the docurnents, starting with the Draft Measures and Decisions, then, the Staff and Financial Regulations, and, finally, the Headquarters Agreernent. He suggested to discuss ah docurnents in the WorYing Group and, if necessary, to resort to the establishrnent of different contact groups on specific points. He also highlighted the need of a second reading of the texts on Friday 13

After a brief discussion Delegations agreed on this working rnethod.

The Chairman opened the discussion on sorne general issues.

Sorne Delegations highlighted the need to revise the Rules of Procedure of the ATCM in order to provide a rnechanisrn of consultations in the intersessional period. After having heard the views of other Delegations, the Chairman suggested to discuss, first, the available options and, then, leave the resolution of this issue to the Group on Institutional Matters.

Other Delegations raised the problem of estabhishing more precise provisións for the functioning of the Secretariat in the interim period. In particular, Norway pointed out the need to guarantee adequate resources to the interim Secretariat and expressed concern about the lack of rules of procedure for the election of the first Secretary.

Other Delegations stated that the resolution of sorne substantive problerns, which were still pending, should be taken into account before analysing procedural aspects.


On the basis of this preliminary identification óf general issues, the Chairman decided to open the discussion on each individual docurnent included in WP 005. The Chairman drew the attention of ahí Dehegations to the importance of trying to remove the uncertainties reflected in the brackets stihh on the text. He, however, assured ahí Dehegations that, in no way, this would preclude discussion on new points that had not been raised in the intersessional rneeting of Buenos Aires or reconsideration of the existing text.


Measure on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty

The discussion started with the Draft Measure corresponding to Annex 1 of WP
005. With regard to paragraph 3 of the Preamble conceming the reference to the XVII
ATCM, ahí the Delegations agreed to dehete this paragraph since its very purpose of
recahhing the original elernents of the Secretariat was reflected in the content of the
Measure.
£


Then, the discussion focussed on paragraph 3 of Article 3 concerning consultations during the intersessional periods. The discussion also led to the question of whorn should be consulted by the Secretariat during such periods. Although rnost Delegations highlighted the need to have a common convenor to coordinate such consuhtations, none of thern considered necessary to estabhish a perrnanent body, such as a standing comrnittee, frorn which the Secretariat couhd seek advice. Sorne Delegations stressed the importance of conferring with ahí Consultative Parties in sorne cases. The Chairman highlighted that this can be now facilitate by the use of electronic instruments of communication. No specific decision was made on this issue. Delegatións agreed to delete the brackets of paragraph 3 and leave the.text as it was.

One Delegation proposed sorne addition to paragraph 1 of Artiche 3 in order to address with the need to establish míes of procedure for the election of the Executive Secretary. Other Delegations suggested sorne change in the language of paragraph 1 of Article 3. Ihe Chairman invited such Delegations to submit a common text. The proposed text stated that the procedure for the election of the first Executive Secretary would be established by a Decision of the ATCM. The Working Group accepted such proposal.

Before closing the discussion concerning Artiche 3, the Chairman gaye the floor to the Executive Secretary of CCAMLR. He made sorne observations on paragraph 2 of Article 3 highlighting that the text did not seern to reflect the importance of the role of the ATCM in determining the criteria for the selectiori of Staff rnernbers of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. The Chairman thanked the Executive Secretary of CCAMLR for his useful suggestions.

The Chairman opened the discussion on Article 4. He reminded ihe Group that this article raised the controversial issue of cost-sharing and financial contributions to the Secretariat. He pointed out that this article should be analysed in connection with Annex 6 to WP 005 and the Decision on apportionment (Annex 7). The Chairman rerminded that the work done in Buenos Aires had permitted enormous progress toward consensus by splitting financial contributions into two different categories, equal shares, on the one side, and variable shares, determined in relation to Antarctic activities taking into account financial capacity, on the other. India presented ATCM XXVJ/WP 110 containing additional contribution to the resolution of the problem of cost sharing. Ihis

paper provided that the actual capacity to pay of Parties would be assessed by each Party, which could choose among five levels of contributions.

Building on the increasing support for the proposed cost-sharing formula, the Chairman proposed to establish an informal contact group to be chaired by Jan Huber of the Dutch Delegation in order to verify the practical consequences of the apphication of the formula.

Considering sorne persisting uncertainties in the language of Article 4, the Chairman proposed to corne back to this problern after the discussion of the issue of cost sharing to be dealt with in the ad hoc contact group.

The reading of the Measure went through Artiche 5 on privileges and immunities, which was approved by the Working Group.


-	Decision on the Provisional Application of the Measure on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, and Decision on apportioning contributions of States parties to the Secretariat and Sehedule

Ihe Chairman opened the discussion on the Decision on the provisional functioning of the Secretariat (Annex 3 to WP 005). He focussed the attention of Delegations on paragraph 1 of the Decision, which provided the possibility of fixing a term of expiration for the Decision in order to compel Parties to adopt the Measure most rapidly. Insteád, of having a strict term of expiration, sorne Delegations were in favour of creating a review process, which would have the advantage of assuring continuity and flexibility. The latter solution was preferred by the Working Group.

During the discussion several important issues emerged which included: a) the provisional financing of the Secretariat, b) the procedure of selection and appointment of the Execútive Secretary, c) the modalities of provisional application of the Headquarters Agreernent. In the view of the techinical cornplexity of the issues, the Chairman established a contact group to be chaired by M. Michel Trinquier of the French Delegation. This contact group would report later to Working Group 1.

The Chairrnan reverted to the issue of cost-sharing and gaye the floor to Mr. Huber, who reported that consensus was reached in the contact group on several important issues, which were reflected in the documents that he presented for approval. Such documents were: a new version of Article 4 (budget of the Secretariat) of the draft Measure establishing the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, a draft Decision on apportioning contributions of States parties to the Secretariat, and a draft Schedule on the method of calculating the scale of apportioned contributions. The rnost significant features óf these docurnents were: a) the acceptance of the percentage of 50 % for each type of contributions (equal and variable); b) the definition of the criterion for determining the variable part of contributions aVoiding the reference to SCAR, but mentioning the extent of national Antarctic activities, taking into account the capacity to pay; c) the quorurn for the approval of the budget, which corresponded to the Parties present to the ATCM; d) the identification of five categories of contributors and the definition of the rules to move from a category to another.

3

The contact group on the provisional establishment of the Secretariat chaired by M. Trinquier reported to the Working Group, presenting a new version of the draft Decision. This took into account the progress made by the contact group on cost sharing. The rnain features of the new docurnent were: a) the functioning of the interim Secretariat, which should take place, as far as possible, in accordance with the provisions concerning the definitive establishment of the Secretariat; b) the procedure of appointment of the first Secretary; c) the provisions for the initial financing of the Secretariat on the basis of voluntary contributions, which shouhd assure sorne certainty in the estimation of the budget of the Secretariat; d) the acceptance of the offer of the Argentine Republic to provisionally apply the Headquarters Agreernent.

After detailed discussion of the individual provisions of these documents, the Chairman submitted thern to the approval of the Working Group. The Working Group approved Measure. the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treatv, (Annex 1 to this Report), Decision. Provisional Application of the Measure. with attached letter of commitment of the Argentine Government (Annex 2) and Decision. Apportioning Contributions to the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, with annexed Schedule (Annex 3).

With regard to paragraph 8 of Decision. Provisional Application of the Measure, the Working Group agreed that, in the unhikely event that the CCAMLR Secretariat were not to be able to perform the function of a recipient of vohuntary contributions in an interesting-bearing account tó be later transferred to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, alternative solutions would be agreed on the basis of appropriate consultations among Consultative Parties.

The Argentine Delegation expressed its satisfaction for the approval of the Measure and Decisions and wished to emphasise that priority should be given to the appointment of the Executive Secretary by the next ATCM.


Headquarters Agreement for the Secretariat to the Antarctic Treaty

The Cháirman opened the discussion on the text of the Headquarters Agreernent annex to WP 005. The Russian Delegation recalled the reservation made in Warsaw on the ATCM as a suitabie party to the Headquarters Agreement, and suggested several amendments to flie title, definitions, immunities and final provisions. The Chairman formed an ad hoc contact group, which was to meet in the early morning of the following day to discuss the proposed amendments.

Qn the basis of consultations in the contact group, an amended text of the Headquarters Agreernent was submitted by the Chairman and was approved by the Working Group (Annex 4 to this Report) as an annex to the Measure on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treatv.

The Russian Delegation wished to stress the view that nothing in the Headquarters Agreement can be understood as to change the nature and status of the ATCM and that, with regard to Artiche 23 of the Headquarters Agreement, amendments are to be. made ,by means of a Measure.

StaffRegulations


The discussion, then, focussed on Staff Regulations XXVI ATCM/WP 012. The Chairman further acknowledged the effort rnade by Argentina and Australia in coordinating informal consultations especiahhy on the issues of salary, remuneration scales, eligibility of persons as staff, and their responsibilities. The Chairman then gave the floor to the Australian Delegation for a brief introduction of the paper. The Chairman submitted such regulation to the approval of the Working (3roup. Staff Regulations were approved in their entirety (Annex 5 to this Report).


Financial Regulations and Draft Budget

The Chairman thanked Argentina and Australia for XXVI ATCMIWP 011 on Financial Regulations and opened the discussion on this document. With sorne slight amendments and integrations of blank spaces, the text of the Financial Regulations was approved by Working Group 1 (Annex 6 to this Report).

The Chairman then opened the discussion on the draft budget (non-Paper prepared by Argentina and Australia). The Dutch Delegation introduced a tentative scale of contributions to the budget and emphasised the need for two different budgets, one for the initial period and one for the definitive period.

Several Delegations expressed the view that there should be only one scale of contributions without distinction between the initial period and the definitive period, while other Delegations pointed out that, at this stage, one should avoid the technical term budget and rather speak of estirnated or projected costs.

The Chairman thanked ahí Delegations for having expressed their views on this matter and indicated that a draft budget or estirnated scheme of the Secretariat’s costs should be approved by the ATCM and attached to the Final Report.


Draftmg Committee

Considering the enormous tirne pressure under which the complex documents on the establishment of the Secretariat were reconsidered and partially redrafted, the Chairman proposed the establishment of a drafting committee with a view to ensuring proper linguistic and editorial revision of the texts approved;

Following the Chairman’s proposal, the Working Group agreed that the following Delegations would compose the Drafting Committee: Argentina, Australia, France, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, United Kingdorn and United States.

The Chairman expressed bis satisfaction for the very productive work done with the hehp of all Delegations and for the important step made with the approval of all the texts related to the establishment of the Secretariat. No doubt this reflects the will of all Consultative Parties to move tóward further strengthening of the mechanism of international cooperation represented by the Antarctic Treaty.
