º



ANNUAL REPORT UNDER THE PROTOCOL
ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY




The Netherlands
2002/2003 season




    1. Notification pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

1.1	Notification of the measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Protocol

a) The legislation

The Wet bescherming Antarctica (Protection of Antarctica Act) of 5 March 1998 provides for the protection of the Antarctic environment with rules to implement the Protocol on Environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The Besluit bescherming Antarctica (Decree on the Protection of Antarctica) of 26 August 1998 (see also XXII ATCM/IP33) provides the procedure for permit applications and issuance under the Act. The Act was translated into English as the Protection of Antarctica Act and, accompanied by an explanatory memorandum, was circulated during the XXII ATCM, Norway (1998)/IP 32 and IP 31. Although the Act and the Decree were drawn up in 1998, it was not possible for the Netherlands to implement this regulation at the time. The Act was the first Dutch legislation on activities in Antarctica. To ensure effective implementation of the rules required considerable effort. 
On 16 January 2000 the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries mandated LASER, a Ministry of Agriculture agency, to undertake the implementation of the Act (including the issuance of permits). 
On 2 November 2000 the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries officially approved the application form for a permit under the Act. This application form was published in the Official Gazette of 6 December 2000 and was also translated into English. 
The Act and the Decree came into force on 1 April 2001.

Annex IV to the Protocol - Prevention of Marine Pollution- is implemented in the relevant maritime legislation.

b) Other instruments (e.g. education, self regulation)

LASER published a brochure entitled Dutch Antarctic Legislation, which includes an outline of the Antarctic Treaty System and the consequences of this legislation for those who want to organise or participate in Antarctic activities. The brochures are available for everyone concerned.

The Guidance for visitors to the Antarctic as adopted in the Antarctic Treaty Meeting in Kyoto in 1994 is included in the brochure. For general information about Antarctica and tourist activities, they are referred to the CEP- and IAATO-websites. 

c) Supervision and enforcement

Under sections 27-29 of the Act it is possible for the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries to charge civil servants with enforcing the provisions laid down by the Act. The actual inspections by Dutch officials will take place sporadically. The Act imposes an obligation to lend every assistance to international observers.

d) Co-operation (article 6 of the Environmental Protocol)

Research on Antarctica is most of the time performed in close co-operation with Dutch universities and foreign universities and research institutes. In the Netherlands research programmes for research in the Arctic and Antarctic regions are closely interlinked.

1.2  Contingency plans drawn up in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol

As the Netherlands does not operate a research station in Antarctica, no contingency plans in accordance with Article 15 were drawn up. For activities involving ships, in line with the Protocol and the relevant IMO regulations, a contingency plan is required under the permit. 



2. 	Report pursuant to Annex I, Article 6 (1) of the Environmental Protocol

2.1 	Procedures for considering the environmental impacts of proposed activities in Antarctica (Annex I, Article 6 (1a))

The implementation of  the provisions of the Protocol on environmental impact assessment for activities which are not likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact are covered by the requirements of the permit application.  

If LASER determines that the activity may proceed, a draft of the permit is prepared. An official notification of the provisional decision is published in the Official Gazette and in a national newspaper, giving the parties concerned the opportunity to submit objections to the provisional decision. The whole procedure for such a permit takes approximately 6 months.   

The comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) set out in Annex I of the Environmental Protocol is very similar to the environmental impact assessment (EIA) embodied in the Dutch Environmental Management Act of 1993. The procedures of this law can therefore be followed in case of  activities that are likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. 

After presenting the declaration of intent with a brief description of the proposed activity by the proponent, and after a public consultation period of 4 weeks, the competent authority draws up the guidelines which define the environmental effects and alternatives to be discussed in the environmental impact statement (EIS). The proponent is responsible for drawing up the EIS. As soon as the EIS is ready, the proponent sends it with the permit request to the competent authority. The procedure given in Annex I, article 3 (3) and 3 (4) of the Environmental Protocol will then be followed. 
2.2 	List of Initial Environmental Evaluations developed in accordance with Article 2 and decisions taken (Annex I, Article 6 (1b) and also ATCM Resolution 6 (1995)) 

If the assessment of an initial environmental evaluation, which should be added to the application form for a permit, indicates that a proposed activity is likely to have no more than a minor or transitory impact, a final check will take place within the procedure of the permit to see if the activity can take place and under which conditions.
 
During the 2002/2003 season, the following Initial Environmental Evaluations were prepared in accordance with Annex I, Article 2, of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 

Brief description of the Development or Activity
Location of activity
Organisation   
Decision taken following consideration of the IEE

Sailing expedition
 



Antarctic waters, including a visit of Whaler’s Bay and Argentine Islands

Rederij Bark Europa

23 December 2002


Sailing expedition
Antarctic waters, including a visit of Whaler’s Bay and Port Ockroy
Reederij Oosterschelde Ltd.
23 December 2002
Sailing expedition
Antarctic waters, including a visit of Deception Island
Oceanwide Expeditions
23 December 2002
In addition to these 3 applications 2 applications were received of persons who intended to partake in a touristic sailing expedition to Antactica. These applications were refused on ground of the fact that the applicants was not responsible for the organisation of the activity concerned. The refusals were sent to the applicants at 7 August 2002 and 9 September 2002 respectively.

2.3 	Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, from procedures put in place in accordance with Annex I, Articles 2(2) and 5, of the Protocol (Annex I, Article 6 (1c))

During the 2002/2003 season, no significant information was obtained from monitoring procedures put in place in accordance with the provisions of Annex I.


2.4 	Information referred to in Article 3 (6) on Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (Annex I, Article 6 (1d))

During the 2002/2003 season, no draft CEEs or final CEEs were prepared for Dutch activities in Antarctica.


3. 	Report pursuant to Annex II, Article 6 of the Environmental Protocol
3.1	Number and nature of permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol during the 2002/2003 season (Annex II, Article 6 (2) of the Protocol)

During the 2002/2003 season, no draft permits or final permits on the basis of  Article 6 (2) of the Protocol were prepared for Dutch activities in Antarctica.



4. 	Report pursuant to Annex III, Article 9 of the Environmental Protocol
Waste Management Plans Prepared in Accordance with Annex III

As the Netherlands does not operate a research station in Antarctica, no waste management plans in accordance with Annex III, article 9 of the Protocol were made. 


5.	Report pursuant to Annex V, Article 10 of the Environmental Protocol
5.1	Number and nature of permits issued under Annex V of the Protocol during the 2001/2002 season (Annex V, Article 10 (2) of the Protocol)

No permits under the Dutch legislation implementing Annex V (see under 5.3) were issued for
the 2002/2003 season.

5.2	Summary descriptions of activities conducted in SSSIs, ASMAs or ASPAs (Annex V, Article 10 (3) of the Protocol)

During the 2002/2003 season, no activities were undertaken in areas designated as SSSI’s and
ASPAs or ASMAs.

5.3	Measures taken to implement the provisions of Annex V (Annex V, Article 10 (4) of the Protocol)
       
The Act requires one single permit to cover all activities in Antarctica and there are no separate permit requirements for certain activities, such as entry into Antarctic Special Protection Areas. The Act does however recognise the internationally agreed Antarctic Special Protection Areas (ASPAs). Consequently, on the basis of Article 15, g, extra provisions can be included in a permit, if for example it concerns an activity for which the entry into a Special Protection Area is necessary. The Netherlands did not conduct any inspections in SSSIs or ASMAs.
