				
		
XXVI ATCM
						CEP Information Paper
						Submitted by the United Kingdom
Agenda Item No. 4e

Waste disposal and waste management

The removal and clean-up of abandoned British bases and waste dumps in Antarctica

The UK is undertaking a major five-year programme to remove abandoned British stations and waste dumps from Antarctica, in accordance with the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty (1998). The clean-up of these bases and dumps, some of which date back to the mid 1950s and are spread over a wide geographical area, represents a significant logistical challenge for the UK. The £2 million clean-up is a major step forward in the UK efforts to protect the Antarctic environment. 

In 2001/02, the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) removed the disused facilities at Signy Research Station. The UK reported on this clean-up to CEP V (XXV ATCM/IP 22 refers). 

Clean-up during the 2002/03 season concentrated on the excavation and removal of the old waste dump on the ice shelf at Fossil Bluff, Alexander Island, Antarctic Peninsula (Latitude 71o 20’S, Longitude 68o 17’W). Fossil Bluff is one of the most remote bases in Antarctica, and can only be reached by small, ski-equipped aircraft during the austral summer. The base provides a refuelling facility for the BAS Twin Otter aircraft and transit accommodation for scientific field parties. 

The waste dump was located on the ice shelf in George VI Sound, about 500 m away from the base. Most of the wastes on the dump dated from the 1960s and early 1970s. Wastes included a wide variety of general rubbish, such as paper, plastic, clothing, wood, scrap metal, tin cans, glass, coal ashes and a large number of empty 205 litre fuel drums. There were also several hazardous wastes, including medical sharps, lead-acid batteries and tins containing human faeces. Removal of the dump was a technical and logistical challenge because the clean-up team had to set up their own temporary field camp at Fossil Bluff, most of the wastes were trapped in solid ice and difficult to break out, and the complex logistics required to move personnel, cargo and wastes by air between Fossil Bluff and Rothera Research Station.
 
Clean-up at Fossil Bluff began on 11 December 2002 and was completed on 6 February 2003. A team of four specialists from a British construction company – AWG Construction Services – carried out the work, assisted by two BAS staff. Dr John Shears (BAS Environmental Officer) managed the project and supervised the final stages of the clean-up at Fossil Bluff.

Removal and clean-up comprised:

    • Excavation of the entire dump from the ice using a small tractor and hydraulic pecker and hand tools. An area of 1410 m2 was cleared to a depth of up to 2 metres.
    • Removal by air of 50 tonnes (210 m3) of general wastes, including 140 old, empty fuel drums.
    • Removal by air of 2 tonnes (5 m3) of hazardous wastes, including 40 lead-acid batteries, as well as asbestos board, medical syringes, and human faeces.
    • A range of extra technical works at Fossil Bluff, including repairs to the foundations of the base buildings.

The Twin Otter aircraft flew the wastes to Rothera, where they were then loaded onto the BAS vessel RRS Ernest Shackleton and shipped to the Falkland Islands and UK for recycling or safe disposal. A specialist contractor in the UK will dispose of all hazardous wastes.

The clean-up at Fossil Bluff was a complete success with the entire dump being removed. The project was completed on budget and two weeks ahead of schedule, without any loss of scientific research and minimal impact on the environment. The project is an excellent example of how national Antarctic operators can work in effective partnerships with commercial companies to deliver better waste management solutions in Antarctica.

During the 2003/04 season, the BAS are planning to remove the three abandoned British bases (Danco Island, Prospect Point and Detaille Island) along the Antarctic Peninsula as well as carry out a clean-up at Whalers Bay, Deception Island.

The UK, through the BAS and AWG Construction Services, now has considerable experience in undertaking clean-up work in Antarctica. The UK is interested in sharing the knowledge and skills it has gained with other Consultative Parties who are planning similar clean-up activities.

For further information about the UK clean-up programme contact:

Dr John Shears
Environmental Officer
British Antarctic Survey
High Cross
Madingley Road
Cambridge
UK
CB3 OET

E-mail:jrs@bas.ac.uk

Or visit the BAS website at www.antarctica.ac.uk

Photographs:

Photo 1. The excavated waste dump at Fossil Bluff in February 2003, after clean-up works were completed successfully.

Photo 2. The old waste dump at Fossil Bluff in February 2002, before removal works began.
