º



XXVI ATCM
Information paper IP-120
Agenda item: ATCM 9
Submitted by: SCAR
Original: English


International Polar Year 2007–08

The year 2007 will mark the 125th anniversary of the First International Polar Year (IPY) (1882–83), the 75th anniversary of the Second Polar Year (IPY) (1932–33), and the 50th anniversary of the International Geophysical Year (IGY) (1957–58).  The IPYs and IGY were major initiatives, which resulted in significant new insights into global processes, and led to decades of invaluable polar research.  The cooperation that underpinned the IGY provided the basis for negotiations on the Antarctic Treaty, and established the continent as one for peace and science.
In spite of the substantial investment of effort in polar exploration and research over the years, both by individual nations and through internationally coordinated programmes, the relative inaccessibility and challenging environment of these zones have left them less well explored and studied than other key regions of the planet.  As a result, Earth System processes in the polar regions remain less well understood than in more accessible regions.  This is despite the pivotal place of both the Arctic and Antarctic in the Earth System and their numberless connections with other elements both physical and biological.
Given the growing evidence that human activities are driving the Earth System into a state not previously experienced by humans, there is a pressing need to accelerate the coordinated research effort aimed at understanding better how the Earth System functions.  Studies of the polar regions will form a crucial part of that effort.
For this reason, there is rapidly growing interest in organizing in 2007–08 an intensive, internationally coordinated campaign of polar studies.  The aim is to galvanize new and innovative observations and research, both building on and enhancing existing programmes as well as encouraging new initiatives.  This international campaign will play an important role in attracting and developing the next generation of polar scientists, and engaging the public in perceiving and supporting the benefits and challenges of polar exploration and Earth System science.
To this end, the International Council for Science has recently established a Planning Group for an IPY 2007–08, charged with the formulation of a concept for an IPY, and the preparation and oversight of an IPY work plan.
At its recent Congress, the World Meteorological Organization “approved the idea of holding an IPY in 2007–08 in collaboration with other international organisations such as the Arctic Council, the Consultative Conference on the Antarctic Treaty, SCAR, IOC and IASC”, and “approved the establishment of an ad hoc working body to prepare a plan of action in preparation for (a third) IPY and to coordinate its implementation”.
The Antarctic Treaty Area will be a major focus for these bipolar activities.  Parties may wish to consider their response to these initiatives which will focus worldwide attention on the polar regions.

