
º


XXVI ATCM
Information Paper IP- 114
Agenda Item: CEP 4a 
CZECH REPUBLIC
Original : English


Information paper

on drafting of Czech Act on the Antarctic


Czechoslovakia acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 1962. The Czech Republic  succeded to all rights and obligations arising from the Treaty in 1993. The Czech Republic signed the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 1993 but to date has not yet ratified it.

On October 22, 2001, the Government of the Czech Republic approved, by its Resolution No. 1070, the concept of the Act on the Antarctic. Subsequently, the Ministry for the Environment of the Czech Republic drafted the Act on the Antarctic.

The majority of obligations arising from the above Antarctic Treaty and Protocol on Environmental Protection are not of self‑executing nature, i.e. are not so specified and addressing individuals as to provide for their implementation without relevant national legislative measures. The aim of the draft act is therefore the transposition of the international obligations arising from the Treaty and the said Protocol into Czech law. The draft act specifies in particular the rights and duties of natural and legal persons authorized to take part in Czech expeditions arriving in the Antarctic and provides for the relevant execution of state administration with the aim to ensure the overall protection of the environment in the Antarctic, and last but not least it creates conditions for the future development of systematic scientific work of Czech experts in the Antarctic.

The draft of the Czech Act on the Antarctic was approved by the Government in its decree No. 43 on 13th January 2003. After preliminary approval by the plenary session the Lower House of the Parliament, the draft is in these days being processed by the Parliamentary Committee for the Environment Protection and Committee for Foreign Affairs. When this process is finished in the Lower House of the Parliament the draft will be subject to approval of the Senate of the Parliament and subsequently will require signature of the President of the Republic.

Besides processing the Act on the Antarctic in legislative bodies of the Czech Republic, currently is being prepared ratification of the Madrid Protocol which, pursuant to the Constitution, requires approval of the Parliament. The Act on the Antarctic will entry into force as soon as the ratification of the Madrid Protocol is published in the Collection of International Agreements. At the present this publication is expected by the end of the year.

