º

INFORMATION PAPER
POLAND DELEGATION

Report on the 26th expedition to H. Arctowski Station in 2001/2002

Polish 26th expedition stayed at Arctowski station from November 2001 until  December 2002. Transport of the expedition was provided by a Russian ship ‘Georgij  Mikiejev’ and by the  ‘Polar Pionier’. Together with the technical   group the expedition team included 18, and in winter, 13 people .
The scientific team of the 26th  Antarctic expedition of PAN (Polish Academy of Sciences) to Arctowski Station was formed by the following persons:
1. Dr. Paweł Loro
2. Dr. Irena Giełwanowska
3. Mgr. Adam Wiencenciak
4. Dr. Aleksander Voblenko (Ukraine)
During the austral summer (January –February) scientific research was conducted  also by :
1. Professor Dr. hab. Czesław Hołdyński
2. Dr. Marek Krywult
3. Prof. Dr. hab. Maria A. Olech
4. Dr. Włodzimierz Pisarek
5. Dr. Jerzy Smykła

Guest scientists at the station included:  Marie Haydee Castillo G. and  Maria Luiza Tapia both from Chile; Silvano Onofri from Italy, and Stefan Krause from Germany.
The major part of the research was focused on the monography of the grass species Deschampsia antarctica Desv. The purpose of the studies was to answer a number of questions related to the adaptation mechanisms of this species to the habitat and climatic conditions of maritime Antarctica.
The results are the following:
Recognition and  records were made of the present distribution of D. antarctica patchy fields in the free of ice areas at the shores of  Admiralty bay. In summer most of the ice- free areas are colonised by individuals of Deschampsia, and only small such areas in the northern part of the bay remain devoid of the plants.
Several hundred descriptions of the plants were done for 1 m2 squares fields along a transect between the head of the Ecology Glacier and  the edge of Adeli penguins  rookery. A significant expansion was observed of the numbers of Deschampsia individuals at the forefront of the Ecology glacier.
The major routes of expansion of D. antarctica were documented along the edges of rivulets: photographs were taken, and the spatial structure of Deschampsia antarctica was determined with the method of Greig-Smith which has verified the patchy distribution of this species.
The effect of wind on the distribution of Deschampsia seeds was determined.
Twelve ecological forms were recognized. In most cases the individual tufts which have been traditionally considered as individual plants turned out to be of a heterogenic origin, i.e. they developed from many seeds. Determination was made of the morphologic plasticity of Deschampsia individuals originating from different microhabitats. Biometric measurements were taken of the individual ecological forms.
Flower buds of Deschampsia and of Colobanthus quitensis were collected and preserved for embryological studies. The variations of the elements of anatomical structure of Deschampsia were determined in relation to changes of the microhabitat conditions. At chosen places random collections were made of the leaves, stems and roots of Deschampsia antarctica.
The up to the present analysis of the morphological and anatomical  structure of D. antarctica showed the existence of two distinct morphotypes of the plant among the subpopulations inhabiting the area of Arctowski station.
Observations were made of the changes in the activity of nitrogen reduction (NR). More than 600 such measurements were done for six different species: Prasiola crispa, Phormidium sp., Deschampsia antarctica, Colobanthus quitensis, Mastodia tesselata and Usnea antarctica.
The results of experiments showed , that soil samples of 1000 cm3 collected at ten different habitats on King George Island contained 0 to 15 germinating diasporas of Deschampsia antarctica which have originated from generative (regenerative?) reproduction.
It was ascertained , that in spite of both, the high production of diaspores  in the areas overtaken by this species, and a high possibility of an dispersion Deschampsia has a limited capability of colonization of new areas.
Observations were made on the present distribution of  the population of the man introduced Poa annua. The grass has developed at the station, but its distribution has been changing (it moves from the S and SW sampling points towards the N and NE). More observations were made on the distribution of lichens on King George Island (nunataks), and new species were reported.
