
	XXVI ATCM
Information Paper 
Agenda Item::CEP, Item 4a
Italy
Original: English


Annual Report pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

ANNUAL REPORT OF ITALY PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 17 OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

2002-2003

This report is presented in compliance with article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which requires each Party to report annually on the steps taken to implement the Protocol in domestic law, including laws, regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures contemplated by article 13 of the Protocol.

    A. Introduction

1. Italy ratified the Antarctic Treaty in 1981 and became a Consultative Party in 1987 following the launching and development of the Italian Antarctic Research Programme (PNRA). In 1990-91 ITALY took a very active part in the negotiations and drafting of the Madrid Protocol.

2. After the signature of the Protocol in Oct. 1991 in Madrid, the President of ENEA (National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Environment) which had been given the task of implementing the Antarctic Research programme, ordered the Madrid Protocol to be provisionally applied by ENEA-ANTAR, the ENEA unit in charge of the implementation of the Italian Antarctic Research Programme (PNRA), pending its ratification and the adoption of national legislation in the matter.

3. Italy ratified the Madrid Protocol by Law n. 54 of 15 February 1995, which authorised the President of the Republic to express the consent to be bound in accordance with art. 80 of the Constitution. The same law introduced the Madrid Protocol into the Italian legal system. Now the Madrid Protocol forms an integral part of Italian law and must be applied by any public authority and can be invoked by private parties as a source of rights and obligations.

4. Section B of this report spells out the actions taken by ENEA-ANTAR for the effective application of the Madrid Protocol. This is without prejudice to the future adoption of measures implementing the Madrid Protocol.

    B. Provisional Application of the Madrid Protocol

Environmental Impact Assessment

5. At the beginning of the Italian research activities in Antarctica in 1985/86 no EIA was prepared. Neither the Italian legislation at the time, nor the Antarctic Treaty required it. At the XXI ATCM in Christchurch the Italian Delegation presented a paper entitled “An Environmental Overview of the Italian Terra Nova Station”. This paper was not a formal EIA but was prepared following closely Annex I of the Protocol and its aim was to present the efforts made by the Italian Programme in the implementation of the Protocol.
A formal CEE for the Concordia Project, a joint Italian-French project, was presented at the XIX ATCM in Seoul in 1995, during the first meeting of the TEWG, the predecessor of the CEP. This CEE was jointly presented by the French and Italian delegations.

Emergency Response Action

6. The main Italian research station, Terra Nova Bay, and the camp at Dome C where the construction of the CONCORDIA station and the EPICA deep ice drilling are being performed have a contingency plan.  There are also fire protection plans and station personnel receive specific training for dealing with emergencies. Italy is also working with the USA and New Zealand for the development of a contingency plan for the Ross Sea Region. Also the vessel used by the PNRA as a cargo and oceanographic ship has her own oil pollution prevention and control plan.

Co-operation with other Parties

7. Art 6 of the Protocol asks Parties to co-operate in the planning and conduct of Antarctic activities, also in order to reduce impacts on the environment. Italy has a very wide range of international co-operations both in scientific activities and in logistics. In the latter area Italy is part of a logistic pool with the USA and with New Zealand, which has contributed to a rationalisation of the use of aircraft and has shown its great value in cases of medical emergencies.

Waste management

8. A Waste Management plan as a formal document was prepared in 1991, consolidating operating procedures and instructions given to expeditions members since the first campaign. The basic objectives are those expressed in the Annex III to the Protocol. The basic policy has been that all waste from the Italian Antarctic Programme is removed from the Antarctic Treaty area.

9. Terra Nova Bay station is also equipped with a sewage treatment system, in operation since the second campaign in 1986/87. This plant produces a clean effluent which is discharged in the sea and sludges which are transported back to Italy. The sewage treatment plant has been recently upgraded to deal with increased personnel load and both the plant and its effluent are constantly monitored.

Environmental Monitoring

10. The monitoring programme was planned from the first campaign and was started in the second, during the construction of the base in 1986/87. The sampling is done for airborne particulates and for PAH (Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons), characteristic of combustion products. 

11. The data from the monitoring are used for feedback on operations. This is particularly true for the monitoring of the treated effluent of the sewage treatment plant. At present there is a set of monitoring data which goes back for fifteen years. The effluent of the sewage treatment plant is regularly monitored during operation of the plant.





Fuel Storage

12. Fuel is stored in three cylindrical steel tanks, with all welds checked by radiography and with double skin. This ensures a very high level of safety to the fuel storage, coupled with the contingency plan and the good training of the station personnel.

Training of personnel

13. All personnel going to Antarctica receives training on the environmental aspects of their activities there, in particular on the Protocol and its Annexes. This training is going to be widened to the Italian relevant legislation as soon as it will be available.

Permits

14. Permits for access to protected areas, for sampling and for other science activities are given on the authority of the Italian Foreign Ministry.

15. In the 2002-2003 campaign 16 permits for sampling, 6 permits for entering in Specially Protected Areas and 1 permit for importing some seeds for the hydroponic installation were granted. Each permit is released upon an environmental evaluation of the activity.

    C. Implementation

16. Although the Madrid Protocol is fully operative and binding in Italian law, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs decided to establish a committee of legal experts aimed at setting up most precise operational regulations. The committee submitted a draft regulation to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in July 2002. This draft regulation, firstly, provides for the identification of the competent State agencies to issue any permit required by the Madrid Protocol; to monitor compliance with such permit; and to adopt sanctions in cases of non-compliance. It also establishes the competent body to make proposal concerning the designation of specially protected or managed areas. The committee of experts suggested that the competent agencies, identified by this regulation, should act under the authority of an inter-ministerial committee, which should include scientific and legal experts as well as representatives of the Italian Government. Such committee should act as a coordinating body within the office for Antarctica at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

17. Secondly, this regulation sanctions the duty of notification for any operator, who intends to carry out activities in Antarctica. It also establishes the essential elements that the act of notification must contain.

18. Thirdly, this draft law defines the concepts of Initial Impact Assessment and Comprehensive Impact Assessment by listing some examples of activities that can require such assessment. This list is not exhaustive.

19. Finally, the draft regulation provides for the duty to exchange information and the obligation of compensation for any damage arising from the activities carried out in Antarctica by operators acting within the scope of the Madrid Protocol.

20. At present, the draft regulation is being examined by the Legal Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Afterward, the draft may become the content of a bill to be put before the Parliament or just an executive order to be adopted by the competent Ministries.
