


________________________________________________________________
ATCM XXVI
Madrid, Spain
9-20 June 2003



Information Paper on
The Interaction Between National Operators, 
Tourists and Tourism Operators



INTRODUCTION

    1. COMNAP notes that it is expected that a detailed discussion of tourism issues will take place at ATCM XXVI in Madrid.  Accordingly COMNAP has prepared this brief paper that describes the interactions that take place between national operators, tourists and tourist operators.  This updates Information Paper 27 of ATCM XXV presented in Warsaw last year.

    2. The report is based on a questionnaire to the managers of national Antarctic programs. The purpose was to obtain statistical data about the nature and frequency of contacts with tourist activities.  The survey is limited to information from the Austral summer season 2002/03.  COMNAP will continue with similar surveys in future seasons, noting the importance of getting data for a longer period of time and hence also to capture rare events such as emergency rescue operations.

    3. COMNAP repeats what was noted in IP 27 of ATCM XXV, namely that some aspects of the tourist/science interface are not touched upon in this questionnaire.  These include the presence of people in environmentally sensitive areas and the possible impact on research or the cumulative impacts of visits to specific sites.  Nor are the potential risks of accidents (such as oil spills) being assessed. 

    4.     COMNAP notes again that contacts on the practical level, as demonstrated in the survey, between the national operators and the portion of the tourist industry represented by IAATO, function in a very satisfactory way.  This is largely because COMNAP and IAATO make a great deal of effort to coordinate and exchange information with each other as they prepare and plan for their Antarctic operations.    

RESPONSE RATE

    5. Twenty-three (cf. 24 last year) out of 29 national operators have responded (which includes nearly all nations that provide their own logistics and one nation with no national program in Antarctica).  Although the response rate is relatively high, it should be noted that the figures presented below are not complete.  The statistics presented are, however, considered indicative of the situation.
CONTACTS WITH TOURISM IN GENERAL

    6. Fifteen operators (cf. 13) have reported contacts with tourists during the 2002/03 season.  This figure includes visits to stations, shared transports and radio communication (for weather reports etc.).

VISITS TO STATIONS

    7. Fifteen nations (cf. 13) had visits at their research stations at least once during the season.  Since some nations run several stations the total number of stations visited by tourists were 20 (cf. 21).  Eight nations (cf. 10) reported no visits.  It is noted that with the increase in the number of large (300+) passenger vessels, some operators have found that “off-shore lectures” is a useful alternative to stations visits.

FREQUENCY OF VISITS

    8. The number of visits at stations varied considerably.  Eight stations were visited only once while two stations had 20 visits or more during the season.  All visited stations outside the Peninsula area (with the exception of South Pole) had fewer than 5 visits. Around 138 station visits were made in total. The average was approximately 6.6 visits (cf. 7.3) per station.  In total some 6,900 tourists (cf. 9,300) have been reported to visit research stations in Antarctica during the 2002/03 season.  This gives an average of approximately 50 persons/visit (cf. 67), typically varying between 60 and 150 (cf. 30 and 100) (and a couple of exceptions with only 5-6 visitors).  However, the bimodal distribution of visits and visitors means that average numbers can be misleading.  Average visits to the six most visited stations were 19 with an average number of visitors for each visit at 49.  

    9. Ice conditions in the Ross Sea reduced the number of tour ships that were able to visit the stations in that area this season.  Other operators also noted that several vessels were hindered from visiting due to weather conditions. 

    10. Some operators report that they have set limitations/policies on the number of visits that are allowed to their stations during one season.  IAATO membership is sometimes set as a requirement for those visits that are permitted.

TIME SPENT AT STATIONS

    11. The statistics show a very clear pattern.  Approximately half of the visits were short and lasted typically 2 - 4 hours, with small variations, and approximately half the visits lasted up to 12 - 24 hours.  In one instance a visit lasted several days when weather conditions prevented their departure.  The group did, however, set up their own camp.

TRANSPORT

    12. Ten (cf. 16) out of 23 nations (cf. 23) have used ships or airplanes operated for the tourist industry to bring people or goods to or from Antarctica.  In most cases it has been on a small scale where a science party has been picked up from a specific site, although one operator also reports sub-chartering from tour operators to transport a larger group of its expeditioners to its Antarctic station. 

    13. A few of the flights from Cape Town to Dronning Maud Land had a combination of tourist and national operator logistics to take advantage of the economies of scale.

EMERGENCIES

    14. Fortunately there were no major emergencies during the 2002/03 season.  Two national operators have been involved in medical support for tourists.  One operator has been involved in one rescue support operation in search of two pilots.

OTHER CONTACTS 

    15. Radio communication with weather reports etc. is routine between tourist ships and stations.  Roughly half of the national operators have reported such contacts. In addition exchange of information regarding aircraft movements is maintained by a small number of stations with runways and flight operations.  One operator reported that their vessel and station personnel are involved in communication with tourism overflight tours for educational purposes.  Some operators have also been approached by tourist vessels requesting landings, but where the operator has not seen the feasibility of permitting landings.  

HIGH RISK ADVENTURE TOURISM

    16. It is noted that adventure tourism often involves activities with high safety but low environmental risks and hence may not be regulated within the environmental legal framework supporting the Treaty.  Thus, parties may not have the legal powers to require adventurers to undertake contingency planning or carry insurance to reimburse search and rescue costs.  As a consequence, national operators may not be able to recover the high costs associated with any rescue and repatriation operations. 


ANTARCTIC ACCESSIBILITY BY AIR TRANSPORT

    17. The development of new and improved air links to Antarctica may open up opportunities that will attract more visitors to the continent.  It is noted that national operators are not in a position to decide who is flying to Antarctica or why and where to land (unless permission is requested to use airstrips/runways maintained by national programs).  COMNAP notes that national operators could develop universal requirements that air transport operators must meet to qualify as contractors to national programs.

GENERAL REMARKS

    18. The contacts between tourists and national operators in Antarctica are very biased geographically (and with South Pole being a special case).  The dominating issue in the interface between tourism and national operators is the scheduling and preparation for visits at research stations.  Some stations have no or very little contacts with tourist activities while others receive a great number of visitors.  At those stations visitor centres and personnel assigned to meet the tourists and to give information about research seem to have been a successful approach.

    19. Obviously unforeseen events such as medical evacuations or people getting stranded creates problem for all parties involved.  Again certain national operators are much more affected than others.  Collaboration between national operators and tour companies related to transportation does occur, although usually on a small scale, and such arrangements seem to have been positive.


