

ATCM XXVI 
CEP VI
Information Paper IP-xx
Agenda Item ATCM 12 / 13
CEP 4 (e)
AUSTRALIA
Original: English













Prince Charles Mountains Expedition of Germany and Australia (PCMEGA)























Submitted by Australia


Prince Charles Mountains Expedition of Germany and Australia (PCMEGA)

Introduction to the Prince Charles Mountains

The Prince Charles Mountains (PCM) are a major group of mountains in Mac. Robertson Land. Their northern extremity is located about 320 km SSE of the Australian base of Mawson, from which point they extend approximately 380 km southwards in an arc. 

The PCMs are one of a few parts of east Antarctica with significant rock exposure and the only such region to occur substantially (>500 km) inland from the continental margins. Their current exposure above the ice plateau is related to relatively recent uplift along the flanks of the Lambert Graben, one of the most important crustal-scale structures in east Antarctica. This exposure reveals the best geological cross section through the east Antarctic shield. The rugged and remote nature of these mountain ranges, where elevations exceed 3300 m in the southern PCMs and the nearest permanent stations (Davis and Mawson) are approximately 750 km to the north, have restricted previous investigations to reconnaissance field programs. Consequently, this critical region remains the most poorly understood outcrop area in east Antarctica. 

The Prince Charles Mountains Expedition of Germany and Australia

With the aim of improving knowledge of the southern PCMs, a group of thirty-five Australian and German expeditioners, including geologists, geophysicist and support staff, travelled to the southern PCM in December 2002. This expedition was known as the Prince Charles Mountain Expedition of Germany and Australia (PCMEGA), and was successfully completed in February 2003.

Logistics 

A Memorandum of Understanding between Australia and Germany was signed in November 2001, agreeing on joint funding for the AU$3.5 million PCMEGA. The co-ordinating scientists of the program were Professor Chris Wilson from Australia and Dr Norbert Roland from Germany, with Australian Robb Clifton as field leader.

Preparations for the PCMEGA included a traverse made by three tractor trains from Mawson during 2002, which took 6 weeks to make the 1000km round trip. Provisions delivered included substantial amounts of aircraft fuel – 90,000 litres, food, vehicles and camping equipment. 

A DeHaviland Twin Otter aircraft and two Squirrel Aero Spatiale 350B helicopters were among the aircraft used to complete surveys and deliver field parties, including accompanying experienced mountaineers, to isolated mountain peaks areas in the southern PCMs. Quad bikes and other vehicles were also used to transport expeditioners to survey areas.
Environmental Management of the PCMEGA Expedition
The environmental assessment of the proposed expedition was undertaken in accordance with Madrid Protocol requirements and Australia’s legislative requirements. Field party leaders and participants were well briefed of the environmental objectives of the expedition prior to departure.
During the traverse, rubbish deposited from previous expeditions in the areas around Mt Cresswell (1969-1974) and Binders Nunatak (1959/60) was discovered. Australia decided to undertake clean ups at these sites in addition to the existing PCMEGA operational tasks. All rubbish was collected and transported to Mawson Station for treatment and / or return to Australia.  
There were no environmental incidents. The PCMEGA environ plan was implemented consciously and the overall results were very good indeed and entirely consistent with Madrid Protocol obligations.
Science Programs

The scientific program for the PCMEGA included research in geology, geophysics, geodesy and meteorology. 

Geology surveys included extensive coverage of the PCMs through 22 different field camps as well as day trips using Squirrel helicopters to outlying nunataks and other geological features. Approximately 5,000kg of samples were collected from these trips. Three particular areas of work were completed. Firstly, a number of vertical sampling profiles were completed, collecting rock samples for thermochronology studies that will provide information on the recent uplift and landscape evolution of the PCMs. Secondly, ice and sediment sampling was carried out as well as investigations into biological indicators such as petrel colony locations. The third type of work done was mainly sampling and structural work to understand the retreat of the ice masses and climate changes.

The Geophysics program involved aerial surveys that collected information on ice radar, gravity and magnetic data. A Twin Otter aircraft acquired a total of 30 000km of data through line flying, which covered an area of 80,875 km2 within the survey area and 20,000 line km of data outside the survey area. This was an excellent result and in accordance with the expectations for a successful season for the geophysics program. 

Twenty-three locations in the southern PCMs were used to gather geodetic data through use of dual frequency geodetic GPS receivers in conjunction with placement of geodynamically stable survey marks. In addition to the GPS observations taken at each point, relative gravity connections were also made. 

Meteorological observations were made throughout the season on a three hourly basis with five observations each 24 hours. Very good meteorological data was recorded, and observations were passed on to forecasters at the Australian station of Casey who issued twice daily forecasts for the southern PCMs. 

Conclusion

The PCMEGA was a great success, both scientifically and logistically. It was an outstanding example of what can be achieved in Antarctica with international cooperation, and the scientific achievements and value of the expedition was greater than expected. 

For further information about the science conducted during the PCMEGA project contact Prof Chris Wilson at cjlw@unimelb.edu.au. 
