º
XXVI ATCM
Information Paper
IP-092-NL
Agenda Item: VI CEP 4b
NETHERLANDS
Original: English
Advisory Review of the Draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation water sampling of the
Subglacial Lake Vostok
Madrid, 9/20 de junio 2003
Advisory review of the
Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
Water sampling of the subglacial
Lake Vostok, Antarctica
June 3rd, 2003
1353 - 41
ISBN 90-421-1175-5
Utrecht, Commission for Environmental Impact Assessment.
CONTENTS
1.
INTRODUCTION ..........................................................................................1
2.
SUMMARY OF THE DRAFT CEE...............................................................1
3.
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS, REVIEW BY THE COMMISSION ......2
4.
THE COMMISSION’S EVALUATION OF THE DRAFT CEE .....................2
4.1
Added value of sampling the lake water............................................ 3
4.2
Ecological impacts, technical risks, worst case scenario ................. 3
4.3
Optimum results through collaboration............................................ 4
-1-
1. 
INTRODUCTION
The State Secretary for Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment has
requested the Commission for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) to
prepare an advisory review of the Draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation (CEE) Water sampling of the subglacial Lake Vostok, Antarctica,
2003. The State Secretary indicated his wish to use this advice when
preparing the Dutch contribution to discussions in the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CEP) and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(ATCM) to be held in Madrid on 9–20 June 2003.
2. 
SUMMARY OF THE DRAFT CEE
In the Draft CEE a Russian scientific team from the AARI describes a
proposal for ice coring into the subglacial Lake Vostok in Antarctica. The lake
is covered by an approximately four-kilometre thick ice sheet and has long
been isolated from the surrounding environment. The drilling has already
reached the layer of frozen lake water at a depth of 3600 metres and more
below the surface of the ice sheet, but has not yet reached the lake water
itself (see Annex 12 of the Draft CEE).
Research has revealed that the surface of the water in the lake lies about 130
metres below the lowest point of the present borehole. The team wants to drill
down to the water over a period of three (summer) seasons. It is assumed that
the pressure difference between the lake and the borehole will force the water
up the borehole, where it will freeze. It can then be sampled.
The Draft CEE states that the scientific team is investigating the types of
living organisms in the lake. The lake ice recovered from the deepest part of
the present borehole was found to contain bacteria, yeasts and similar
organisms. Only a few species were identified as indigenous to the Lake
Vostok ecosystem.
The project proponent expects the drilling will have no or negligible
environmental impacts on the atmosphere, on the surface, in the ice column,
at the ice-water interface or in the lake. According to the proponent only the
research station itself will have an environmental impact, affecting the
surface of the ice in the surrounding area, but this impact will not be greater
than at present. The drilling fluid, which consists of a mixture of kerosene
and Freon F-141b, has hydrophobic properties and the pressure difference
between the lake and the borehole will force the drilling fluid back up the
borehole. The likelihood of any drilling fluid coming into contact with the lake
water is thought to be small and any effect it may have is expected to be
small. The proponent says that no alternative drilling locations exist and that
the extreme conditions severely limit the scope for using alternative
techniques. The proponent argues that further delay cannot be tolerated
because movement of the ice is deforming the borehole.
-2-
3. 
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS, REVIEW BY THE COMMISSION
The proposed activity falls under the category of the most comprehensive
environmental impact assessments in Annex I of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Article 3 and subsequent
articles in Annex I require that a CEE is conducted for the proposed activity.
The Draft CEE must be submitted for consideration by the states party to the
Protocol and will be discussed at the 26th ATCM in Madrid, 9–20 June 2003.
The CEP advises the ATCM (see Article 3, paragraph 5 of Annex I to the
Protocol).
The Commission for EIA has reviewed the Draft CEE against the provisions of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection. The main provisions relating to this
project are contained in Article 3 of the Protocol, Article 3 of Annex I
(requirements for a CEE) and Annex III (waste disposal and waste
management). The Netherlands is one of the countries that have signed and
ratified both the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental
Protection. The Commission’s advisory review aims to contribute to the Dutch
input to the CEP and the ATCM.
In the Netherlands, environmental impact assessments are carried out for
certain proposed activities. The Commission plays an advisory role in this
process in its capacity as independent expert. It assembles working groups of
experts, who are members of the Commission, for each project (see Annex 2
for the composition of the advisory working group Water sampling of the
subglacial Lake Vostok, Antarctica). The Commission assesses whether the
information presented is sufficient to enable full consideration of the
environmental interests during the decision making process. It focuses on the
essential information, such as the aims of the initiative, possible alternatives
and their environmental impacts. This implies that the Commission restricts
its advice to the main issues and does not address inaccuracies or
shortcomings of minor importance.
In view of the international cooperation under the Antarctic Treaty, in which
the contracting parties inform each other of activities they propose to
undertake in the Antarctic Treaty area, and given the positive spirit of
scientific cooperation between the research activities in the Lake Vostok area
(the Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration expert group of the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research), the Commission trusts that its advice will
help to ensure a role for environmental interests in the further decision
making process.
4. 
THE COMMISSION’S EVALUATION OF THE DRAFT CEE
In the Commission’s opinion the Draft CEE complies for the most part with
the international legal framework (the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on
Environmental Protection). The proponent already possesses considerable
practical experience with drilling and ice coring. In the Draft CEE, the
proponent describes the activities, alternative options and expected impacts
of the proposal in considerable detail. The Commission was impressed by the
information contained in the Draft CEE. However, the Commission
recommends that the concerns discussed below receive attention in the final
CEE.
-3-
4.1 
Added value of sampling the lake water
Lake Vostok is a unique subglacial lake, situated in a ravine and with a
unique ecosystem of great intrinsic value. The precautionary principle implies
that any activity that will or may have negative environmental impacts on this
system must be justified. Section 2.4 of the Draft CEE contains a description
of the need and advisability of the proposal.
There appears to be a scientific consensus that samples of the lake water
could contain information of scientific interest. The Commission understands
that samples taken at a depth of 3600 metres and below consist of frozen
water from the lake. Based on Annex 12 of the Draft CEE, the Commission
concludes that the existing borehole extends into the frozen lake water. In
view of the unique value of the subglacial lake, the Commission recommends
that in the final CEE the proponent includes an indication of the additional
value of drilling through this layer of lake ice and sampling the water itself.
4.2 
Ecological impacts, technical risks, worst case scenario
The proponent has many years experience with drilling and ice coring and
says it will make best use of this expertise in the proposed research activities
at Lake Vostok. The proponent estimates that by using the best available
technology the proposal will have “no impacts” or “impacts less than a minor or
transitory”.
Given the unique ecological situation and the extreme conditions under which
the ice coring operation has to take place, some risks do exist. The lake
system may be highly sensitive to external influences. From studies on lake
ice and sea ice elsewhere in Antarctica we know that the ice-water interface is
a place of relatively high biological activity. If the drilling fluid, which is less
dense than water, comes into contact with the surface of the water it will
spread across this ice-water interface, probably forming a film. Even limited
contamination of the ice-water interface could have a large impact on the
biota of Lake Vostok.
In the final CEE the proponent could include an indication of the state of
equilibrium in the lake ecosystem. Samples that have already been taken
from the frozen lake water may provide an indication of the possible effects of
exogenous viruses and/or microorganisms and any resulting disruption to
the ecological balance.
The Draft CEE does not contain a description of a worst case scenario and its
impacts. In the worst case scenario all the drilling fluid would leak into the
lake water, exposing the lake to contamination with viruses and/or
microorganisms. The Commission suggests to include a description of a worst
case scenario in the final CEE.
In the Draft CEE, the proponent indicates that under the prevailing physical
conditions there can be no gas beneath the ice layer (e.g. thermal gases from
the geological substrate or biogas from organisms). The Commission suggests
to preclude every risk of a blow-out and to determine the measures that could
be taken to reduce this risk as much as possible.
-4-
The drilling fluid will remain in the borehole after drilling has ceased. The
Commission recommends examining the possibility of recovering all or some
of the drilling fluid after the operation has ceased, and recycle or reuse the
fluid. Removal of the drilling fluid from the site is considered by the
proponent to be too drastic a measure, but treatment or reuse options could
be devised in cooperation with other research teams so as to benefit all
parties and the environment.
4.3 
Optimum results through collaboration
The three prime objectives of the Antarctic Treaty are keeping the peace,
safeguarding scientific research and protecting the Antarctic environment. All
three require good international cooperation, and so it is not surprising that
the Antarctic Treaty, many of the adopted Recommendations and the Protocol
on Environmental Protection all emphasise the importance of cooperation.
The CEE procedure contained in Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection highlights the importance of international cooperation and
consultation in identifying and describing the risks and negative impacts of
major projects or activities in Antarctica.
Given the unique character of the subglacial lake, the considerable technical
risks of the operation and the high level of scientific interest, the proponent,
correctly, wants to limit the risks and environmental impacts as much as
possible.  It may be possible through international exchange to make the best
use of the available expertise and technologies, while respecting the
contributions of participating parties and countries, to design the project in a
way that provides a better guarantee of limiting risks and minimising
impacts. This could take place within the framework of scientific cooperation
on research activities in the Lake Vostok area (the Subglacial Antarctic Lake
Exploration expert group of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research).
Above all, cooperation can be a good way of giving more concrete expression
to the precautionary principle: exposing risks and knowledge gaps through
consultation and discussion and jointly exploring the possible consequences
of this information (e.g. possibilities for obtaining knowledge and dealing with
incomplete knowledge during decision making). Cooperation and consultation
can promote a more objective view of the issues. In the light of what has been
stated in Section 4.2, the Commission was struck by the fact that the Draft
CEE devoted relatively little attention to the gaps in knowledge.
By cooperating, research teams can coordinate their efforts to improve the
value of each other’s projects. Obtaining the maximum possible scientific
returns from just one ice coring could even make future drillings, with
negative environmental impacts, unnecessary. Cooperation with other
expeditions could also lead to a lower net impact in the end because fewer
logistical and back up operations (e.g. transport, stations) would be needed.
While the Commission fully recognises that the Protocol on Environmental
Protection does not place the formal decision making responsibility for the
proposed project with the CEP or the ATCM, we believe that the unique
character of this project and the ecological value of the lake are such that the
activities and the assessment of the consequences and risks should first
command widespread recognition from within the international scientific
community.
