

ATCM XXVI 
Information Paper IP-xx
Agenda Item ATCM 13
AUSTRALIA
Original: English













Installation of Wind Turbines at Mawson























Submitted by Australia

Installation of Wind Turbines at Mawson Station

This season saw the culmination of many years of work within Australia’s renewable energy program with the erection and commissioning of two 300 kW wind turbine generators at Mawson Station. 

Preparations for installation of the wind turbines

Monitoring of wind conditions at all stations has occurred since 1993, with a detailed feasibility study in 1999 indicating that the installation of wind turbines at Mawson would be practical. 

Site work for the erection of the wind turbines has spanned two summer seasons with initial work on the first foundation commencing in the 2001/2 summer. Some delays were experienced due to the besetment of the vessel that was delivering steelwork and personnel, and the first foundation was not completed until after the 2002 winter. Also delivered in 2001/2 were the new switchboards for the powerhouse upgrade and the 100 ton crane which had been purchased especially to erect the 34 m turbine towers. 

In the 2002/3 summer two foundations were completed, and the powerhouse control system was replaced with the new one. The new powerhouse system allows the integration of the energy produced by the wind turbines with that produced by the diesel generators, and adjusts the diesel generators to make up the difference between what is produced by the wind and what is required by the station. With the reduced load on the diesel generators, there is a corresponding reduction in the production of waste heat, which is used to heat the station. Therefore there is a need for electric boilers to take over the task of heating the station.

The wind turbines themselves were delivered to the station during the 2002/3 summer. These were erected and commissioned in just 5 weeks. 

Wind turbine operation and fuel savings

This winter the wind turbines will be tested further and fine tuned to produce the maximum energy (and hence fuel savings) possible. The two turbines are presently generating up to 80% of Mawson’s electrical power requirements, resulting in both fuel savings and a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. This is beyond what was predicted as being achievable by the system modelling. A decision has yet to be made on the location of the third turbine which is currently on site.  
 
The initial results are very encouraging, resulting in a fuel savings of between 40 and 50 %. It is expected that when conditions are suitable at Mawson, power will be generated without using diesel generators. 

Australia is very pleased with the success of its wind turbine project, particularly as it will result in cleaner, more environmentally friendly, power generation for the station and will also significantly reduce the costs associated with use of diesel fuelled generators. 

For more information about the Mawson wind turbine project, go to http://www.aad.gov.au/default.asp?casid=2652 or contact Mr Peter Magill at peter.magill@aad.gov.au. 
