º
Review of The List of Historic Sites and Monuments

Historic site and monument Number
HSM 44 (a plaque erected at “Dakshin Gangotri” Station)

Reviewed by
Director 
National Center for Antarctic and Ocean Research, Head Land Sada, 
Vasco da Gama, Goa – 403 804
India 

Does the site still exist, either in whole? or in part
Yes, the site still exists, though the original plaque erected has been buried under snow

Does the site continue to meet the guideline for Historic Sites and Monuments set out in Resolution 8 (1995)
Yes, the foundation of Indian Polar Research Programme in Antarctica was laid during the third Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica in 1983-84 by establishing a permanent base “Dakshin Gangotri” on the shelf of the Princes Astrid Coast, Central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. Indian scientists started carrying out polar research round the year after establishment of this permanent station.
Presently the “Dakshin Gangotri”  station is buried under 3-4 m of ice cover. Since the establishment of this permanent station marks the advent of Indian foray in Antarctic Research, this site has a special significance and place of honor in Indian History

Does the description of the site require amending or updating? 
Amended description is given in annexure 1. Map (1) and photographs (1) and (2) enclosed

Are boundaries required to define the site
Yes, area between Latitudes 70o03’30” S to 70o06’00” S and Longitude 11o58’30” E to 12o06’00” E (map-2 enclosed)

Does the site require special protection or management and if so, should it be designate as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area?
No, the site is recommended as Historical Site only.




In light of this review, should the site be delisted?
Not recommended for delisting from HSM 44


Should other parties be included in, or assume responsibility for, the management of this Historic Site or Monuments?
Not required. Members of Indian Expedition to Antarctica visit the adjoining area (supply base) regularly. They look after the site for its upkeep and maintenance.

Annexure 1
Description of the area

The first permanent Indian station in Antarctica, “Dakshin Gangotri”, is located on ice-shelf on Princess Astrid Coast (70o05’37”S Latitude to 12o00’00” E Longitude). This station was commissioned in 1883-84 and provided excellent contemporary state of the art facilities and well-equipped laboratories to carry out scientific research. The site is located about 10 km from the shelf edge towards the Schirmacher Oasis. The shelf shows a gently rolling topography with an average elevation of 20 m above msl. The shelf thickness is least near the sea and increases towards inland. This portion of the shelf is characterized by numerous melt-water channels usually running in a NE-SW direction and frequently occurring surface ponds and lakes, south of the present site, especially near the Scirmacher Oasis. The shelf shows highs or domes where it rises over basement highs and usually slopes towards the sea-ice interface. The coastline is characterized by several longitudinal tension cracks, which often extends 1-2 km inside the shelf thus forming several bays with a thin cover (3-5) of fast ice. The surface of the shelf region exhibits various glaciological features like sastrugis, grooves, drift deposition etc. indicating the strong influence of wind erosion. Sustained scientific studies on surface morphology of the shelf and ablation intensity and pattern are being carried out by Geological Survey of India near the DG station area.  These studies indicate that this portion of the shelf is comparatively stable (from major calving) and has an annual accumulation rate of about 50 cm. Due to this deposition of snowdrift and natural sinking, the DG station gradually got submerged below the surface. Six hourly met data used to be collected uninterruptedly from 1983-84 to 1989-90 by India Meteorological Department. Scientific experiments on geomagnetic field and magnetic pulsation were conducted here for four years till the station was lost to ever-increasing snow cover. The permanent base was shifted to “Maitri” situated on the Schirmacher Oasis and the DG station was decommissioned in 1990-91. The scientific activities in the adjoining area are still continued by Indian scientists.































