


__________________________________________________________________
ATCM XXVI
Madrid   Spain
9-20 June 2003



COMNAP Report to XXVI ATCM 




ANNUAL COMNAP MEETINGS

    1. The 2002 COMNAP annual meeting was held in Shanghai during July 2002 and a summary of the outcomes was reported by to the Warsaw XXV ATCM in September 2002.  The 2003 COMNAP annual meeting is to be held after the XXVI ATCM in Brest, France from 8-11 July.  As a result of the scheduling of these meetings, it has not been possible for COMNAP to meet in plenary and discuss proposed responses to the tasks allocated to COMNAP at the Warsaw ATCM.  As a consequence, some tasks have yet to be finalised and are not available to be presented to ATCM XXVI/CEP VI.


STATUS OF ATCM/CEP RELATED TASKS

“Worst Case” and “Less that Worst Case” Environmental Scenarios

    2. COMNAP presented an interim paper to the XXV ATCM in Warsaw on the work that had been done up to that time towards answering the questions posed by the ATCM that would assist in determining limits on financial liability, compensation, and insurability of activities in Antarctica.  This paper noted the difficulty of estimating the probabilities and costs of incidents because of the relatively short history of Antarctic activities.  Furthermore risk assessment for actuarial purposes is not within COMNAP’s area of competence.  Nevertheless, COMNAP agreed to provide to the XXVI ATCM with an updated paper of historical data on accidents that may assist in this process.

    3. COMNAP established a specialist ad hoc working group to meet and work on a revised paper inter-sessionally.  To assist with the analysis, data were collected from COMNAP-member programs on the number of incidents that had occurred during shipping and air operations and the number of these that had resulted in an environmental impact.  These data are given in the latest paper, which is available to ATCM XXVI.  It is stressed that COMNAP does not have the competence to assess the probability of these events in a manner suitable for actuarial calculations however the data may provide the basis for more expert analysis.
    4. The paper identifies six “worst case scenarios” and fourteen “less than worse case scenarios”.  A simple numerical ranking process of “environmental significance” was used to help assess the relative seriousness of the various incidents.  This resulted in an overlap between some “less than worse case” and “worst case” incidents, which illustrates that the analysis is not wholly quantitative and the results should not therefore be over-interpreted.  

    5.    Because of limited number of serious environmental incidents in Antarctica and the consequent lack of experience and data on clean-up activities it has proved difficult to determine the cost of such activities.  The paper provides some examples and costs in order to arrive at an order of magnitude of cost that might be incurred following a major environmental incident.  Based on this data it is estimated that the likely costs are in the order of US10 million dollars.


An Analysis of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs)

    6. COMNAP submitted Working Paper to CEP V (XXV ATCM/WP??) summarising the outcomes of a review of IEE’s for various Antarctic activities.  The activities selected were scientific core ice-drilling, station living facilities and fuel storage facilities.  COMNAP’s “Antarctic Environmental Officers Network” (AEON) undertook the analysis.

    7.  The IEEs for bulk storage facilities were rated as being the most complete by the review team, followed by scientific core ice-drilling and station living facilities.  With respect to the sample of IEEs examined it was concluded that some aspects of the IEE process were being done very well while other aspects could be improved.  It was noted that those IEEs prepared since 1999 all ranked at least an “acceptable” average total ranking.  It was recommended that when initiating an IEE process, the proponents should make use of accepted methodologies laid out in past IEEs completed for similar types of activities and in similar environments. 

    8. Following discussion of the COMNAP working paper, several Members requested that a more detailed analysis of the IEEs be provided which clearly identifies strengths and weaknesses and gaps in past IEEs.  It was noted that the identification of impacts was often a weakness in many IEEs. COMNAP noted its continuing interest in this topic and confirmed that it would provide additional details of its analysis to CEP VI.  Following a further review of the paper COMNAP has decided that additional work needs to be undertaken on the report and the revised version will be available for CEP VII.

The Interaction Between National Operators, Tourists and Tourism Operators

    9. COMNAP submitted an Information Paper to the Warsaw ATCM (XXV ATCM/IP27) on the interaction between national programs and tourist operations.  Because of the interest shown by delegates in the report a similar survey was conducted on activities in the 2002/03 season and is presented in another Information Paper.

    10. The report indicates that some 6,900 tourists visited Antarctic stations during the 2002/03 season (cf 9,300 in 2001/02).  Three stations, all in the Peninsula region, had 20 or more visits by tourists whereas four stations were visited only once.  A typical tourist visit to a station lasted three hours with an average of 50 (cf. 67) persons per visit.  It is noted that some national programs are using tourist operations to supplement their logistics operations, albeit usually on a small scale.

    11. COMNAP reiterates two issues that continue to be of concern to national operators.  Firstly, adventure tourism usually involves a high safety risk but low environmental impact and cannot usually be regulated under the domestic legal environmental frameworks that Parties have enacted to implement the requirements of the Madrid Protocol.  This can result in inadequate contingency planning or lack of insurance to reimburse national operators for emergency search and rescue costs.  Secondly, with moves to increase inter-continental air access to Antarctica there is a risk that this may open up more opportunities for air-based tourist activities.


Operation of Aircraft Near Wildlife

    12. At the CEP V meeting in Warsaw, the United Kingdom introduced Working Paper (XXV ATCM/WP26) containing proposed guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds in Antarctica.  The CEP welcomed the guidelines, which would be useful to aircrew operating aircraft in areas where site-specific plans or guidelines did not apply. The Committee invited COMNAP, in consultation with SCAR, to review the guidelines and provide an interim report to CEP VI and a final report to CEP VII with their views.

    13. COMNAP has received several suggestions from members that do not detract from the intent of the guidelines but take into consideration practical constraints in particular circumstances.  The amended guidelines will be considered at the COMNAP annual meeting in July 2003 and a report will be submitted to CEP VII as earlier indicated.


Use of Navigational Notes to Advise Mariners of Protocol Obligations 

    14. ASOC submitted Information Paper XXV ATCM/IP76 to the Warsaw ATCM that suggested one mechanism to improve compliance with Protocol obligations by yacht operators would be to include such information the navigational guides or pilots produced by Parties.  COMNAP advised that one of its member organisations had produced a comprehensive navigational note in conjunction with its national maritime safety authority that included information on the Protocol. COMNAP offered to provide a paper to ATCM XXVI with the navigational note that could be used as a “model” by other Parties if they so wished.

    15. As COMNAP members have not had the opportunity of discussing the proposed “model” navigation the proposed paper has not been provided to ATCM XXVI.  COMNAP has, however, has written to ASOC providing the reference to the navigational note that may be accessed on the Web.


COMNAP Objectives

    • To review, on a regular basis, operational matters and to facilitate regular exchanges of information;
    • to examine, discuss and seek possible solutions to common operational problems;
    • to provide a forum for discussion in order to frame in a timely, efficient and harmonious manner;
        ◦ responses to common issues directed to Antarctic Operators, in particular requests from and Recommendations of the ATCM, and
        ◦ appropriate input to SCAR responses to questions involving science and operations/logistics; and
    • to provide, in conjunction with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the appropriate forum for discussions on international collaboration in operations and logistics.



COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM)

	Dr Karl Erb (USA)			Chairman
	Dr Gerard Jugie (FR)			Member
	Dr Okitsugu Watanabe (JP)		Member
	Mr Kim Pitt (AU)			SCALOP Chairman
	Mr Jack Sayers 			Executive Secretary



COMNAP Secretariat

	Mr Jack Sayers
	COMNAP Secretariat		
	Suite 25			GPO Box 824
	Salamanca Square		Hobart
	Tasmania 7000			Tasmania 7001
	AUSTRALIA			AUSTRALIA
	Tel:	+61-3-6233 5498
	Fax:	+61-3-6233 5497
	E-mail:	jsayers@comnap.aq




Committees

	Executive Committee							EXCOM
	Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations		SCALOP
	Steering Committee on the Antarctic Master Directory		STADM
	Environmental Coordinating Group					ECG
	Coordinating Group on Education and Training 			CEDAT
	


Working Groups

	Air Operations WG							AIROPS
	WG to Monitor the Liability Annex					MOLIBA
	Ship Operations WG							SHIPOPS
	Symposium WG							SYMP
	Tourism and NGOs WG						TANGO
	



Networks

	Antarctic Environmental Managers Network				AEON
	Energy Management Network					ENMANET
	Information Officers Network					INFONET
	Training Officers Network						TRAINET
	


Note:	
A list of COMNAP and SCALOP members and the membership and objectives of the various committees, working groups and networks may be found on the COMNAP Home Page at URL: http//:www.comnap.aq  via the link “ABOUT COMNAP”.







