

ATCM XXVI
Information Paper IP-___
Submitted by Russia
Agenda Item 13
English
Original-Russian


SNOW-ICE RUNWAY
AT THE RUSSIAN NOVOLAZAREVSKAYA STATION,
QUEEN MAUD LAND

Aviation is one of the most important components of the Russian Antarctic logistics. Throughout its 48-year history, the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) used airplanes and helicopters during each season for rotation of personnel, supply of the stations and research studies. The RAE devoted special attention to establishing direct air communication with the Antarctic by organizing transcontinental flights of Russian aircraft.
The first Russian transcontinental flights to the Antarctic were made in 1961 and 1963 when participants of the 7th and 9th Soviet Antarctic Expeditions were delivered from Australia to Mirny station by AN-12 and IL-18 aircraft. Russian aviators laid the shortest air route to East Antarctica in 1980 via Africa. From 1980 to 1991, this route was used for regular intercontinental flights of IL-18 and IL-76 aircraft to the snow-ice airfields at Molodezhnaya and Novolazarevskaya stations. Experience of using snow-ice airfields showed that heavy wheel aircraft can be successfully used on Antarctic ice and compacted snow at insignificant material expenses and with a minimum environmental impact. 
In December 2001, after a 10-year break, the transcontinental flights of Russian-made heavy IL-76 aircraft to the Antarctic were resumed. The renewal of air communication with Antarctica has become possible due to reconstruction of the snow-ice airfield at Novolazarevskaya station. The airfield is located in 15 km to the southeast of Novolazarevskaya station at the ice-free slope of an ice dome. The geographical coordinates of the airfield control point (ACP –runway center) are as follows – 11 35 44 E and 70 50 39 S. The summer time for IL-76 TD from Cape Town to Novolazarevskaya is 6 hours. 
The airfield at Novolazarevskaya station is prepared and used for flights during the summer season from December to February. The flights can be made only in the daytime. The airfield dimensions comprise 2900 x 60 m. The summer airstrip is marked by standard entry signals and side marking signals. The true azimuth airstrip direction is 105o 40’ / 285o 40’. The ACP height is 550 m above the sea level. The airfield has a platform for stationing and servicing aircraft with dimensions of 200 x 200 m. As a result of melting, the airfield is usually unsuitable for receiving aircraft from mid-December to mid-January. Depending on the intensity of melting, the duration of the break of the flights is between 20 to 40 days. 
Prior to the airfield construction, acting in compliance with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the Russian Antarctic Expedition has developed an “Initial Environmental Evaluation for the Project of Reconstruction of the Snow-Ice Airfield at Novolazarevskaya station”.  Based on the results of the Evaluation, it was recognized that the project implementation would have less than a minor impact. The Evaluation was presented as an Information Paper at the XXV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 
The snow-ice airfield at Novolazarevskaya station has undergone national certification by the Commission of the Ministry of Transport of Russia, which examined the airfield in December 2001 and established its suitability for flights of IL-76 aircraft. The Commission entrusted RAE with operation of the airfield at Novolazarevskaya under control of the corresponding Service of Civil Aviation of the Ministry of Transport of Russia.
In accordance with the national procedure, the Russian Antarctic Expedition submitted to the State Commission an application for granting a permit for a new type of activity in the Antarctic  - operation of the snow-ice airfield at Novolazarevskaya station. The State Commission has considered the RAE application and granted a permit for this new type of activity for the period March 4, 2003 to December 21, 2007. 
During the last two seasons, 6 flights of IL-76 TD aircraft were made from Cape Town to Novolazarevskaya including 2 flights during the 2001-2002 season and 4 flights during the 2002-2003 season. Several hundreds of participants of the national Antarctic programs and tens of tons of cargo were shipped. In addition to heavy wheel IL-76 aircraft, the airfield at Novolazarevskaya station was used by the national programs operating at Queen Maud Land and for intercontinental flights of light aircraft. For internal flights, AN-2, Dornier 228, DHC6 Twin Otter and Basler BT-67 aircraft were employed.
The renewed use of the snow-ice airstrip at Novolazarevskaya station opened new perspectives for establishing a cooperative air network at Queen Maud Land. Ten countries including Russia, Germany, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Great Britain, South Africa, Holland, India and Japan carry on negotiations on the DROMLAN Project. The Project envisages using the airfield at Novolazarevskaya as the initial entry point of the cooperative air network providing aviation support for the national programs in East Antarctica in the sector between Halley and Syowa stations. 
The airfield at Novolazarevskaya station has become the first entry point, which will be used by the Russian Antarctic Expedition for intercontinental flights on a regular basis. The runway at Progress station, the future RAE major transportation center will be the next and the main Russian airfield in Antarctica.  
