º



ATCM XXVI
Information Paper
Agenda Item: ATCM 12


Cooperation with Other Parties in Science and Related Activities during the 2002/2003 

	
by
REPUBLIC OF KOREA


Conscious of the importance of collaborations among the parties within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and in accordance with Article 6 of the Protocol, Korea cooperated with several parties during the 2002/2003 in scientific and the related activities.

1. Joint Oceanographic and Marine Biological Studies with Chilean Scientists

Korean and Chilean scientists conducted the third joint fieldwork during the 2002/2003 season to investigate diverse features of marine environment and living organisms in the Antarctic Peninsula regions and southern coastal areas of Chile. This joint program started in the 2000/2001 as a follow-up on Agreement on Scientific, Logistic and Technological Cooperation in Antarctica signed in 1996 between Korea Ocean Research & Development Institute (KORDI) and Instituto Antárctico Chileno (INACH). This cooperation was made possible with generous support from INACH, Universidad de Magallanes (UMAG), Universidad Austral de Chile (UACH), and KORDI. Both countries will endeavor to further develop the joint programs. KORDI confirmed its long-term commitment to this joint research program by opening a KORDI branch office at Punta Arenas. 

Contact point: Dr. Sung-Ho Kang; shkang@kordi.re.kr


2. Trace metal analysis in the 3624-m Vostok Antarctic ice core in cooperation with France

As a cooperative work between Korea and France for the period of 2002-2003, a glaciologist of KORDI analyzed various sections of the 3624-m Vostok deep ice core for reconstructing temporal changes in the occurrence of various heavy metals linked to climate changes during the past 240,000 years BP, which covers the full penultimate glacial period and the preceding interglacial. Full profiles of these variations will be completed for the period spanning the last four climatic cycles that occurred during the past 420,000 years BP as recorded in the 3624-m Vostok ice core.

Contact point: Dr. Sung-Min Hong, smhong@kordi.re.kr 

3. International Antarctic Symposium

Polar Sciences Laboratory, KORDI hosted the 9th International Symposium on Antarctic Science on October 8-10, 2002 in Korea. The symposium has been held in Korea every one or two years since 1988. In this time, ten foreign scientists from eight countries and several dozens of domestic scientists presented talks related to the symposium theme, ‘Environmental Changes in Antarctica: Impacts and Responses.’ 

4. The first Workshop between Korea and Italy on Polar Research

The first Korea-Italy workshop on Polar Research was held in October 4th 2002 at KORDI in Ansan, Korea. This workshop was organized by Polar Sciences Laboratory of KORDI and by Embassy of Italy in Seoul to promote cooperation in polar research. Following brief introduction of each country’s polar programs, research highlights were presented by scientists from both countries. After the presentation session, a discussion was made to identify possible areas for future cooperation.
  
5. Logistic support from Chile, Uruguay and China

Chile and Uruguay, which have amicably neighboring bases on King George Island, aided Korea with airlift service to and from an Antarctic gate way, Punta Arenas, Chile and King George Island again as in the previous seasons. Frequent flight services by Chilean Air Force provided timely services to scientists who had irregular time schedules for their field work. The Uruguayan C-130 ran 2 round trips to and from Punta Arenas and King George Island on 30th Nov. and 20th Dec. 2002, transporting Korean scientists, the new over-wintering party and cargo, which was crucially helpful for us to complete our summer campaign effectively and successfully in time, alleviating a great deal of time loss in the season’s operation. In addition, Chinese R/V, Xuelong, kindly provided a long-range service shipping out 2 obsolete sets of power generators from King Sejong Station to Korea through Shanghai, China at the end of her field duty. We would like to heartily thank these parties for their unsparing efforts exerted.

Contact point: Mr. Ung Yul Francisco Yi, uyyi@kordi.re.kr 


