º



XXVI ATCM
Information paper IP-
Agenda item: CEP 4d
Submitted by: SCAR
Original: English


Antarctic Specially Protected Species


Introduction
1.	At XXV ATCM The Inter-sessional Contact Group on Specially Protected Species reported its conclusions on how best to proceed.  It concluded that there was support for such a designation, that Annex II currently provides inadequate guidelines of how such a designation might be applied and controlled, and that all parties in the Contact Group had agreed that the IUCN criteria, already in use everywhere else in the world, provided a sound scientific basis for assessing the conservation status of Antarctic species.
2.	In XXV ATCM WP-038 SCAR proposed a process for providing the CEP with recommendations for Special Protection based on a robust international assessment of the available scientific evidence.  The SCAR proposal was to undertake the assessment with the appropriate groups in IUCN to establish which species fell into the categories Vulnerable, Endangered and Critically Endangered.
3.	The CEP endorsed this way forward.

Report of actions so far
4.	SCAR has formally approached IUCN in Gland to seek their agreement to this joint approach.  That has been welcomed by IUCN and the appropriate committees informed of the project.
5.	As agreed at XXV ATCM the initial work will be limited to birds.
6.	Birdlife International in Cambridge, UK is managing the Red List assessment process for birds under a contract from IUCN. 
7.	IUCN are at present involved in a global update of the threat status of birds and have agreed to include Antarctic birds as a specific item within this.
8.	The SCAR Group of Experts on Birds, a part of the Life Sciences Standing Scientific Group, is now linked directly with the IUCN birds co-ordinator Deon Nel in South Africa. Population data and trends, where they are available, are being provided to ensure that the Antarctic data provides a complete context for those species that occur both within the Antarctic and outside it.
9.	The international panel appointed by IUCN to assess the evidence will report its findings at the global level in 2004.
10.	At that point the second stage of assessment will begin in which the regional status of Antarctic species will be considered, using the IUCN guidelines for regional assessment.  This second review will intend to identify species that are not threatened or near threatened in respect of global status but which for particular reasons are under threat in the Antarctic.
Future action
11.	Once SCAR has received the recommendations from IUCN at both the global and regional levels a formal and fully documented proposal will be prepared for each species that is deemed to be under threat at either the global or regional level.  The CEP will then have the information available to consider which species should be formally designated as Specially Protected within the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
12.	SCAR will continue to develop its working relationship with the appropriate IUCN committees and will next consider the case for Antarctic seals.

