






                                   XXVI ATCM – Madrid, 
                                         June, 9-20, 2003











REPORT OF  ROMANIA ON THE RATIFICATION 
OF THE PROTOCOL OF MADRID










                                                                      Submitted by 
                                                                      ROMANIA











                                     Inquiries about the Romanian Antarctic Program 
                                                        can be addressed to:

                                       National  Romanian Antarctic Program (NRAP)
                                                Ministry of Education and Research
                                                C.P. 42-29, Bucharest-4, Romania
                                                       Tel/Fax: +401 337 2986 
       




REPORT  OF  ROMANIA  ON THE RATIFICATION 
OF THE PROTOCOL OF MADRID

                  Romania, by the Decree no. 255/1971, adhered to the Antarctic Treaty signed in Washington on December 1st 1959. The Protocol on Environmental Protection and its annexes I-V that have been adopted in Madrid on October 4th, 1991 was signed by Romania that very day.
                  The main objective of the Protocol consists in the protection of the Antarctic environment and of the ecosystems interrelated and associated. Therefore, Antarctica is designated natural reservation, destined for science and peace. 
                        The Protocol of Madrid supplements the Antarctic Treaty without modifying or amending it and does not prejudice the rights and commitments of the member states deriving from other international instruments in force within the Antarctic Treaty system.

                  From the scientific point of view, our country has an old tradition in Antarctic research, as the Romanian scientist Emil Racoviţă was the very first biologist in the world that studied life in this continent. 
                 Romania participation in Antarctica consisted, up to now, in the following activities:	
           - participation in scientific expeditions along with the teams of the states members of the Antarctic Treaty; 
- research projects jointly developed with states members of the Antarctic Treaty in the field of environmental protection in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.

                 In this respect, Romania got involved in international actions of protection of the environment and of the nature in Antarctica. Thus, Romania actively participated in the elaboration of Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (leading group-Argentina), Lima 1999, Guidelines for Antarctic Shipping and Related Activities (Meeting of Experts-Opening address), London, 2000, as well as in the Hague, by means of the analysis of Antarctic Environment and Tourism, Two Components of the Modern Civilization. 

                Considering the above mentioned reasons, the Ministry of External Affaires, the Ministry of Education and Research, the Ministy of Water and Environmental Protection, the Ministry of  Public Finances and the Ministry of Justice, proposed a Law Draft to issued by the Romanian Government, that is the following: 

           DECREE No.556/June 19th, 2002, for the submission for ratification by the Romanian Parliament of the “Protocol on Environmental Protection” of the Antarctic Treaty, adopted in Madrid on October 4th, 1991 

           “On the grounds of the provisions under Articles 91 (1) and 99 of the Romanian Constitution, as well as Articles 1 and 4 of the Law no.4/1991 on Treaty Signing and Ratification,
             Following the proposal of the Romanian Government, in accordance with the Decision no. E182 of May 30, 2002,
             The President of Romania decides:
             Single Article: There is submitted for ratification by the Romanian Parliament the “Protocol on Environmental Protection” of the Antarctic Treaty, adopted in Madrid on October 4th, 1991, and there is ordered the publication of this Decree in Monitorul Oficial al Romaniei (Romanian Official Gazette), Part I.
             PRESIDENT OF ROMANIA
             ION ILIESCU  
            On the grounds of Article 99(2) of the Romanian Constitution, countersigns this Decree:      
            PRIM-MINISTER 
            ADRIAN NASTASE
            Published in the Romanian Official Gazette no. 438 of June 24, 2002.”            
                        The Romanian Parliament Legislative Council approved this Law Draft on the ratification of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, that has been already  included on the Romanian Parliament agenda. 
           
                We have  precisely notified  within the CEP V in Warshaw  the steps of the Romanian Government for the ratification.This Note has been sent to Warshaw in the begining of August 2002. Before September 10, 2002, when the XXV Antarctic Treaty Meeting has began, our Parliament ratified the Protocol and its Annexes. 
                 It was our duty to report to the CEP V the Romania steps already passed in the ratification procedure and we repoted it, even if some of the Member State did not retained our message.   
                 Subsequently, the USA Department of State acknowledged the receipt from the Embassy of Romania of its Note No 366/P, dated January 29, 2003, transmitting the instrument of ratification by Romania to the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, with Annexes I-IV, done at Madrid on October 4, 1991, and Annex V to the Protocol, done at Bonn on October 17, 1991. 
                   The instrument of ratification was received by USA on February 3, 2003, for deposit with the Government of the USA. The Protocol, in accordance with the provisions of Article 23, paragraph 2, thereof, entered into force for Romania on March 5, 2003.
 
                        Taking into consideration the progress recorded  by Romania in the Protocol ratification, we kindly ask the CEP member states to analyse, within its Sixth Meeting in Spain, Romania acceptance as a Member State in the Committee for Environmental Protection in Antarctica.               
 
















