º
XXVI ATCM
Information paper IP-
Agenda item: CEP 4c
Submitted by: SCAR
Original: English


Acoustic technology and the marine ecosystem


Introduction
1.	Marine acoustic technology is widely used throughout the world’s oceans and is now an indispensable part of every ship’s safety equipment for bottom detection.  In addition, it is used for identifying fish and plankton swarms, mapping the sea floor and the rocks beneath it, and controlling the deployment and retrieval of remote equipment.  Without acoustic technology, exploration of many aspects of the oceans would have been impossible and acoustic equipment remains a fundamental tool of scientific research.
2.	Despite its importance, responsible environmental management requires that its impacts on the marine ecosystem be considered and limiting protocols proposed for its use to minimize any proven impacts.
3.	After concerns were raised over the use of acoustic technology in waters around Antarctica, SCAR agreed to undertake an investigation of the present state of scientific knowledge.  SCAR provided a Working Paper (WP XXV/23) which set out the conclusions derived from an international workshop held in Cambridge.  The accompanying Information Paper (IP XXV/24) provided the full text of the Cambridge Workshop report.
4.	At CEP V, Germany expressed doubts about the conclusions from the workshop and agreed to provide SCAR with specific questions that could be answered prior to XXVI ATCM.  Germany also agreed to provide SCAR with the full report from the workshop organized in Berlin on the effects of hydroacoustics.
5.	Unfortunately the comments were only received from Germany in April 2003 leaving insufficient time for the necessary consultations to prepare a properly researched response to XXVI ATCM.  
6.	Germany has also not yet been able to provide a copy of the Berlin workshop report for SCAR to comment on.


Actions
7.	SCAR has now made the report of the workshop more widely available, by posting it on the SCAR web site.
8.	SCAR has noted firstly, that there have been further incidents elsewhere in the world involving the death of marine mammals and secondly, that this is an active research field in which new data are becoming available.
9.	SCAR has recommended to all its National Committees that they follow the practices outlined in the Recommendations from the Cambridge workshop until anything more authoritative is provided.
10.	SCAR has also established an international Action Group of specialists to consider the comments from Germany, any new incidents since the workshop, new research data and the Berlin workshop report when it is available.
11.	SCAR intends to provide further information to the CEP in due course on the effects of acoustics on the Antarctic marine ecosystem.

