
CEP VI
Information Paper IP-___
Submitted by Russia
Agenda Item 4a
English
Original-Russian



Report of the Russian Federation on Implementation of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty (in compliance with Article 17)


Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

1. Legal and administrative actions to ensure compliance with the Protocol.

By the Order No. 12 issued on 14.02.2003 by the Federal Service of Russia for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring (Roshydromet), all Russian Antarctic stations and research ships shall be supplied with the appointed authorized representatives of the Russian Federation in the Antarctic Treaty Area for 2003.

The representatives of the Russian Federation shall be appointed every year and shall be guiding in their activity with the Provisions on the order of appointment of authorized representatives of the Russian Federation and their obligations. 

The obligations of authorized representatives shall imply the following:
    • to control compliance with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;
    • to check that Russian individual persons and legal entities would have national permits for the activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
    • to reveal the differences between actual and declared activity or the activity that is not specified in the issued national permit, and adopt relevant measures to the point of termination of the activity;
    • to prevent the risks of environmental emergencies;
    • to provide the persons performing the activity, with the necessary information on the issues of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, etc.;
    • to provide immediate information concerning environmental emergencies and (or) suspension of the activity in the address of RAE administration and to Roshydromet-based Secretariat of the Commission for considering the applications for activity of Russian individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area and conclusions on them;
    • to make monthly reports describing the above measures taken, all the visits to the area of the representative’s responsibility, the availability of national permits held by Russian individual persons and legal entities, detected infringements and the persons at fault. 

In particular, the reports of the authorized representatives of the Russian Federation in the Antarctic Treaty Area provided the following information: 
    • information about the airplane flights from Cape Town to the aerodrome of the Russian station Novolazarevskaya for delivery of Russian, German and Scandinavian expedition members to the Antarctica;
    • about the presence of Russian-owned sea vessels chartered by foreign companies, in the area of the Russian station Bellingshausen.
    • The obtained information allows to regulate and control the activity of Russian individual and legal persons in the Antarctic Treaty Area, to ensure the compliance with the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Within the years 2002-2003, the Commission issued 7 permits for the activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 

    1. Plans of actions in emergency 
All Russian marine vessels which obtain the permit for activity in Antarctic Treaty Area have the Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plans corresponding to the  requirements of MARPOL 73/78.
The plans of action in emergency for the Russian Antarctic stations are presented in the form of the approved instructions. 
ANNEX 1
    2. Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
After the issuance of the Decision of the RF Government of December 11, 1998 No. 1476 “ On the adoption of the Procedure for consideration and issuance of permits for activities of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area” all types of activity in the Antarctic have to undergo the corresponding procedures before its implementation. They are presented in the Regulations of the Commission on the consideration of the applications for activity of the Russian individual persons and physical entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Based on the submitted documents (including EIA), the Commission makes a decision on granting a permit for the activity.
In order to obtain a permit for the Russian Antarctic Expedition up to 2007 in compliance with Article 1 of Annex 1, the Preliminary EIA stage of the ongoing expedition activity was performed (Russian Antarctic expedition activities. Preliminary Stage, EIA), 2000.
    3. List of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEE)
    1. Runway at the Novolazarevskaja station. 2001.
    2. Icebreaker “Kapitan Dranitsyn” activity in Antarctic Treaty Area. 2002.
    3. Antarctic Expedition “Antarctica – Russia-2002”. 2002.
    4. Heavy wheeled transport aircraft operation at Novolazarevskaja st. 2002.
    5. Passenger vessel “Akademik Shokalskiy” activity in Antarctic Treaty Area. 2002.
    6. Passenger vessel “Professor Multanovskiy”  activity in Antarctic Treaty Area. 2002.

    4. Information of interest
The RAE has prepared  the following documents related to EIA and monitoring:
1. Water sampling of the subglacial lake Vostok. Draft CEE. 2002.
ANNEX II
    5. Exchange of information on flora and fauna
In compliance with Article 6, Annex 2:
a) During the period 1995-2002, no takings of animals or plants by RAE were undertaken.
    6. Quantity and character of permits relating to flora and fauna
During the period of validity of the Procedure for issuance of permits for activity in Antarctica (from December 1999), no permits relating to flora and fauna were requested and issued.

ANNEX III
    7. Preparation of the Waste Management Plans
All Russian marine vessels which obtain the permit for activity in Antarctic Treaty Area have the Shipboard Garbage Management Plans corresponding to the  requirements of MARPOL 73/78.
The garbage disposal at the stations and onboard ships is made in strict compliance with the existing instructions that temporarily replace the Waste Management Plans.
    8. Introduction of Waste Management Plans
It is planned to introduce the Waste Management Plans at the RAE stations during the period 2003-2005.
    9. Inventory of past activities 
The creation of the database on the areas of past RAE activity is at the preparation stage. 

ANNEX V 
    10. Quantity and character of permits relating to the protected areas
One permit for the activity in the Antarctic Specially Protected Area “Haswell Island” were issued for the RAE.
    11. Brief description of activities in the protected areas
During the 44th RAE (1999), the inventory of mammals and birds (determination of the species composition, counts and sampled banding) of the Antarctic Specially Protected Area “Haswell Island” was carried out. Same program is planned for 48 RAE, 2003.
