
Information Paper Nr. 
VI CEP Agenda point 4g
Presented by Argentina



ACTIVITIES ASSOCIATED TO THE HISTORIC SITE AND MONUMENT # 38: NORDENSKJÖLD HUT, SNOW HILL ISLAND 
(Unofficial translation)

As a result of the centenary of the Swedish Expedition’s rescue, accomplished by the Argentine Corvette “Uruguay”, Argentina wishes to inform the Antarctic Treaty System about the activities undertaken in Nordenskjöld hut, which was used by the expedition to over-winter two consecutive years and designated as a Historic Site and Monument #38 by the Antarctic Treaty System. Argentina would also like to inform Parties about the events held to commemorate the 100th anniversary of this unique, and surely one of the most epic, Antarctic episodes. 

Activities undertaken on the Site
In the framework of the MuseoAntar Program (Instituto Antártico Argentino) Argentina started doing restoration works on the Snow Hill Hut back in 1980. At that time, the whole interior of the Hut was occupied by a dense ice-block, which had partly damaged its original structure. Such an ice-block, however, contributed to preserve most of the objects the expedition had left behind.  
Firstly, the ice block had to be removed. While it was being removed, steel cables were fixed to the ground and joined to the hut’s exterior, in order to reinforce its structure. Once this task was completed, and based on photo archives, doors and windows and interior panels were restored, a folding table (similar to the one once in place) was installed, and the original arrange of rooms was reproduced.  Several daily-use objects were also recovered, which, added to those found in the surroundings of the Site, currently constitute a nearly 50-piece assembly. The external wooden walls have been periodically maintained with impermeable paint.  
From the beginning of the maintenance activities, containment works have been carried out on the small levee where the hut is built, to prevent erosive action to progress. A project encompassing the stabilization of the whole levee is currently being considered. 
Indeed, taking into account the increasing number of tourists in the area, explanatory signs, depicting access areas and describing the value of the area as a HSM, have been installed. Leaflets and informative material are also periodically left at the hut.  
All these activities have been undertaken by the Dirección Nacional del Antártico, and supported by personnel from Marambio Station. 
  
Commemorative Events 
An itinerant exposition (“Two years among the ice”) has been organized by the Instituto Antártico Argentino, highlighting the main aspects of Nordensjköld´s expedition. Apart from Nordensjköld himself, G. Bodman, E. Ekeloff, O. Jonassen, G. Akerlund (all of Swedish nationality ) and J. M. Sobral ( Argentine) were also part of the expedition. The exposition was inaugurated in Buenos Aires on April 19th, 2002. On that occasion, the Corvette “Uruguay”, designated National Historic Monument,  took part of the event. The exposition, sponsored by the Swedish Embassy in Argentina, and by Swedish private companies, has been declared “of cultural and educational interest” by the Argentine Senate, and has already visited Posadas and Oberá cities (both in Misiones province), and Ushuaia city (Tierra del Fuego province). During 2003,  the exposition is expected to arrive at Entre Ríos and San Juan provinces as well. 
In addition, a set of stamps has been commissioned to remember Nordensjköld´s 100th anniversary, similarly as Sweden has already done . A set of commemorative coins is also foreseen for 2003.

In this way, Argentina promotes diffusion of Antarctic History and general knowledge about Antarctica, and commits itself to maintaining cultural and educational values of the Antarctic. 

For further information, contact : diriaa@dna.gov.ar

