












KEY ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN BY PERU 
IN ANTARCTIC MATTERS
DURING THE 2002-2003 PERIOD















Madrid, 9/20 de junio 2003
XXVI ATCM/IP15
English
Original: Spanish

Agenda Item: ATCM 15







PERUVIAN ANTARCTIC INSTITUTE
(INANPE)




KEY ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN BY PERU 
IN ANTARCTIC MATTERS
DURING THE 2002-2003 PERIOD




















Submitted by: Peru


PERUVIAN ANTARCTIC INSTITUTE
(INANPE)

KEY ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN BY PERU IN ANTARCTIC MATTERS
DURING THE 2002-2003 PERIOD


To contribute to the Antarctic’s Treaty mandate in respect of information exchange between Consultative Parties, the Antarctic Institute of Peru (INANPE) presents this Report on the main activities conducted by Peruvian scientists in Antarctica during the period 2002-2003. 

All logistical and scientific activities conducted by Peru were carried out so as to ensure conservation and protection of the Antarctic Continent ecosystem, in accordance with the Madrid Protocol. 

The establishment of the Peruvian Antarctic Institute (INANPE), the entity responsible for the Antarctic National Programme, the ANTAR XIV Scientific Campaign which culminated last February with the official visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Allan Wagner, to the Machu Picchu Station (King George Island) and the planning of the next ANTAR XV Campaign, to be initiated next November, are some of the most relevant activities undertaken by Peru within that period. 

I.	The Establishment of the Peruvian Antarctic Institute (INANPE)

Law Nº 27870, dated October 25th 2002, established INANPE as a decentralized official agency vested with administrative, economic, functional, technical and scientific autonomy. The Institute is responsible for the formulation, coordination, execution and supervision of the Antarctic National Policy. All private and public Peruvian activities in Antarctica must be conducted in accordance with the aims of INANPE which are as follows:

    1. To promote active and permanent participation by Peru in Antarctica; 
    2. To preserve the use of Antarctica for exclusively peaceful purposes;
    3. To contribute to the international community’s efforts aiming at the preservation of the Antarctic environment; 
    4. To promote scientific research in Antarctica in order to contribute to national development; 
    5. To encourage Antarctic knowledge, fostering and supporting the participation of universities, research centres and civil society; 
    6. To promote international co-operation between Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and other States sharing interests in the area, as well as with international organisations. 

INANPE is composed of an Executive Council, an Advisory Scientific Committee, an Executive Secretariat, an Operations Bureau and a Bureau for Scientific and Environmental Matters. It also contains an International Co-operation Office and another two Sections responsible for Administration and Computer Services. 

The rules of procedure, internal structure and operational matters related to Peruvian Antarctica are still to be approved. 

In the meantime, INANPE is concentrating on the operational and scientific matters of the next ANTAR XV Antarctic Campaign which will take place in the austral summer of 2003-2004. 

The Peruvian Antarctic Institute has recently created its webpage which can be accessed at the following address: www.rree.gob.pe/inanpe. Any comments, consultations or suggestions can be sent to the following e-mail address: inanpe@rree.gob.pe. This website is also linked to the Permanent Secretariat’s Antarctic Treaty. 


II.	Peruvian Antar Xiv Scientific Antarctic Campaign

1.	General Aim

To implement the Peruvian National Antarctic Policy, the main goals of which are “the consolidation of Peru’s presence on the Antarctic Continent” and the strengthening of co-operation between Consultative Parties.

2.	Specific Aim

2.1	Scientific

Perform field activities and gather information in accordance with approved scientific projects and develop scientific co-operation with countries whose stations are established on King George Island. To that effect, joint projects with Germany and the Czech Republic were continued, within the framework of international co-operation on Antarctic matters. 

2.2	Logistical

Maintenance and rehabilitation of the Peruvian Antarctic Scientific Station’s infrastructure and basic services, as well as offering logistical support to ongoing projects. 

The ANTAR XIV campaign, which lasted 57 days, involved over 100 participants, among them scientific staff, logistical personnel and special guests. All objectives of the campaign were reached. 

3.	Scientific Activities 

    a) Projects and Scientific Studies

During ANTAR XIV campaign, the programme formulated by the National Council for Science and Technology (CONCYTEC), named “PROANTARCYT” 2002-2007 and which started under ANTAR XII, was continued. It includes important interdisciplinary and interdependent scientific projects.

In that framework, the following 3 Peruvian scientific projects were developed:

    a. Wind field modelling and Renewable Energies Assessment in the Antarctic Region

This project is run by the Meteorology and Hydrology National Service (SENAMHI). The 3-year term objective consists in assessing renewable energy use, specifically solar energy potential, and developing a wind field model in the Antarctic region in order to harness the wind energy potential. This project is totally in keeping with the national and international scientific community’s interest to preserve the Antarctic continent for future generations as a clean habitat by reducing the impact of fossil energy use.

To that end, scientists established a temporary Vaisala Meteorological Station and a Sutron Automatic Weather Station (AWS). The data collected by these weather stations will allow us to create time forecasting models of Antarctic climate, in accordance with the above mentioned aims. 

b.	Assessment of Krill species (Euphasia superba) and its relationship to the marine ecosystem

This project was conducted by the Sea Institute of Peru (IMARPE), the entity responsible for Antarctic research since 1988. The study was carried out during the multidisciplinary campaign performed by the BIC HUMBOLDT between 19th and 28th January 2003 and conducted in the Southern Shetland Islands, the Antarctic Peninsula and the outskirts of Elephant Island. The Krill project is significant because it promotes collection of specific information on this crustacean which is part of the Antarctic ecosystem and is the main element of the food chain in the area; it is also an enormous source of proteins, even for potential human consumption. 

The project‘s main objective was to evaluate the Krill biomass and to determine its biological parameters as a function of environmental conditions as well as its relationship with food availability and the presence of its main predators (fowls and mammals), in order to contribute to international efforts for conservation of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. 

Further, during the Oceanographic Cruise, staff of the Hydrography and Navigation Navy Office conducted a study called Physical Oceanography and Dynamics in the Bransfield strait and in the vicinity of Piloto Pardo Islands. 

The objective of this study was to obtain data that would contribute to a better understanding of marine dynamics and of physical oceanography in general, in order to correlate this information with the behaviour of living communities, especially the Krill which is considered as the fundamental species for the balance of the Antarctic ecosystem. 

c.	Underwater and terrestrial biodiversity of Mackellar inlet 

This important project is made up of two parts: underwater biodiversity, conducted by the Sea Institute of Peru (IMARPE) and THETIS Institute of Germany; and terrestrial biodiversity, conducted by the Natural History Museum of San Marcos University. One of the main objectives of the project is to carry out species inventories and to characterise the various types of biological communities that develop in Mackellar inlet. It is important to emphasise the enthusiasm that this project generated among the scientists of the various stations established on King George Island, which showed much interest in knowing the results thereof and in collaborating with its future development. 

Regarding underwater biodiversity, research was focused on the general characteristics of Mackeller Inlet, as well as on the bio-ecological characteristics and diversity of the area. As regards terrestrial biodiversity, scientists assessed the fauna (fowls and mammals) as well as the vegetation of Mackellar inlet and of other areas within Admiralty Bay. 

4.	Scientific Co-Operation with Other Countries 

Besides developing the Biodiversity Project with Germany, Peru also carried out joint research work with other countries. Four foreign scientists, two from the Czech Republic and two from Bolivia, participated in the following ANTAR XIV projects:

    1) Ecophysiological Study of Antarctic lichens and mosses and Study of glacial movements in Antarctica and their influence on the continental climate, developed by the Czech Republic. 
    2) Study on the movement of Antarctic glaciers and its influence on the continental climate, developed by the Czech Republic. 
    3)  Study on the levels of solar ultraviolet radiation in the Southern Shetland Islands region, undertaken by Bolivia. 
    4) Study on possible Antarctic Plankton and Krill defence mechanisms against increased ultraviolet radiation due to the reduction the ozone layer, developed by Bolivia. 

5.	First “Scientific Open House”

The Open House for scientists was one of the most important activities of scientific character carried out during ANTAR XIV. This first scientific event called “Open House” was contributed to by academics, professors and scientists of Poland, Brazil, United States, Bolivia, Czech Republic, Germany and Peru, the host country. This activity, conducted for the first time at the Peruvian Machu Picchu Station, allowed representatives of the above mentioned countries to present the projects they develop in Antarctica. The event also allowed for an exchange of information, views and experiences on issues of common interest among scientists. 

This “Open House” conducted at the Machu Picchu Station gave rise to great expectations and it has therefore been considered appropriate to carry out similar events in years to come. It will allow scientists from other stations to be present each summer so as to present their projects and exchange scientific information.

    6. The Minister for Foreign Affairs’ Visit 

Another highlight was the official visit to Machu Picchu Scientific Station (King George Island) by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Allan Wagner Tizon.

Minister Wagner visited Antarctica between 9th and 16th February, along with the General in Command of Peru’ s Air Force, Air Force General Aurelio Crovetto Yáñez, Ambassador César Castillo, President of the Peruvian Antarctic Institute (INANPE) and a delegation composed of representatives of institutions involved in Antarctic operations, of authorities, military and civil officials, as well as foreign and national journalists. 

Their visit allowed for an extensive cover of activities conducted under ANTAR XIV Scientific Campaign.


    III. Scientific Antar XV Antarctica Campaign 

Since the beginning of the year, INANPE has been planning the next ANTAR XV Scientific Campaign to Antarctica, which is due to start next November (2003), for a period of approximately 70 days. 

With respect to scientific activities, Peru pursues specific research objectives defined under the Science and Technology Antarctic Programme (PROANTARCYT 2002-2007), as follows: Atmosphere and Space Sciences Area-Climatic Changes; Environment Area and Marine and Terrestrial Biodiversity Area. 

To this end, INANPE approved the following scientific projects for ANTAR XV Scientific Campaign:

    1) Wind field modelling and assessment of renewable energy use.
    2) Aerial photogrammetric and bathymetric survey in Admiralty Bay.
    3) New MST Radar installation and operation in Antarctica: Wind characterisation and mesospheric echoes.
    4) Underwater Biodiversity in Admiralty Bay (with the German Thetis Institute).

Likewise, INANPE considers it important to keep inviting foreign researchers and professionals to jointly conduct scientific and/or logistic projects. Thus, INANPE invited a German scientist from Thetis Institute and a professional of Antarctica-New Zealand. 

As regards the logistical aspects of ANTAR XV, efforts will be directed at implementing two terrestrial and marine biology laboratories, building a fixed hangar for a B-212 helicopter that will perform air support actions for the logistical and scientific programmes, installing a refrigerating chamber, a waste-water treatment plant, a double combustion incinerator, a solid residues compactor and other important improvements to the station’s infrastructure and services, seen as steps towards the setting up a permanent station by the year 2005.


IV.	Bilateral Co-operation with Other Countries 

a)	Co-operation with Germany 

The Governments of Peru and of Germany signed a Joint Statement on Antarctic Co-operation on 14th March 2002, in Lima. Likewise, in May 2002, in Berlin, a Logistics and Scientific Agreement on Antarctic Matters Co-operation was entered into by the National Commission on Antarctic Affairs - CONAAN (predecessor of INANPE) and Thetis Institute to extend the joint activities and scientific research under way in Antarctica since the year 2000. 

INANPE intends to negotiate a new agreement between the Peruvian Antarctic Institute and Thetis. 

German scientists visited the facilities on three occasions to participate in the underwater and terrestrial biodiversity project on Mackellar inlet. Thetis Institute donated diving equipment and a high tech microscope. In April this year, Thetis Institute invited Yuri Hooker, a Peruvian biologist, to visit their scientific installations during the month of June 2003. 

During ANTAR XV Campaign (austral summer 2003-4) INANPE will develop with Germany and China a joint project on marine and terrestrial biodiversity which was approved by the Antarctic Peruvian Institute Executive Council (INANPE). Thetis Institute agreed to the organisation, before the end of the year, of a Photo Exhibition called Peru- Antarctica: Terra Australis in Hamburg where the work of photographers Walter Wust and Alejandro Balaguer will be presented. 

Further, three Peruvians scientists took part on board research vessel “Polarstern” in a research campaign called “LAMPOS” conducted in 2002. This Antarctic research activity was organised and promoted by Alfred Wegener Institut (AWI) of Germany where two research projects – among others – proposed by Peru are being implemented: Ecophysiological Adaptations of the Benthic Community Organisms and Antarctic Fishes; and Macrozoobenthonic Structure in the Antarctic Platform Area.

INANPE intends to invite one or two AWI scientists to participate in ANTAR XVI (austral summer 2004-2005). 

b)	Co-operation with the People’s Republic of China 

In March 2002, Peru and the People’s Republic of China signed a Memorandum of Understanding to initiate actions aimed at developing Antarctic co-operation between both countries. 

In November 2002, officials of the State Ocean Administration (SOA) visited Lima and signed an Antarctic Co-operation Agreement with INANPE, reaffirming both countries interest in developing joint projects of a technological, logistical and scientific nature. 

The main aim is to develop joint research projects in the white continent and to exchange scientists specialised in Antarctic studies. As a first joint activity, it was confirmed that a joint project on marine and terrestrial biodiversity will be developed with Germany and China under ANTAR XV Scientific Campaign (austral summer 2003-4). The joint project will be conducted at the “Great Wall” Chinese Antarctic station. 

c)	Co-operation with New Zealand

On 23rd January 2002, in Lima, the Governments of Peru and of New Zealand signed a Joint Statement on Antarctic Co-operation. 

In June of the same year, Peru invited a New Zealander scientist to participate in ANTAR XV Campaign. The New Zealand Government on its part invited an environmental expert to visit SCOTT station, located in Ross Sea Region (December 2002). 

Further, New Zealand granted a scholarship to Peru in respect of a special four months course on Antarctic matters offered at Canterbury University (Christchurch). A Peruvian diplomat successfully attended this special course. 

Peru confirmed an invitation to a New Zealand specialist to participate in ANTAR XV Scientific Campaign (austral summer 2003-2004) to complete the design and possibly to collaborate in the installation of a Sewage Treatment Plant. In case this project does not get of the ground, INANPE would invite a New Zealand scientist to participate in one of the following projects approved under ANTAR XV: Biodiversity study (jointly implemented by Germany and China); MST Radar project; Admiralty Bay aerographic and bathymetric Radar study project (jointly implemented with Brazil); or wind field modelling and renewable energy use in Antarctica. 

d)	Co-operation with the Czech Republic 

Czechs scientists were invited to take part in Antarctic Scientific projects on four occasions. On its part, Masaryk University granted 4 scholarships on Climate studies and Analytical Chemistry and Phytophysiological studies to be carried out in the period September 2003 – December 2004.

Further, a Photo Exhibition on joint Antarctic activities will be presented this year in Prague with the sponsorship of the Peruvian Embassy in the Czech Republic and Masaryk University. 

e)	Co-operation with Canada 

In the course of the year, it is expected that a Joint Statement on Antarctic Matters will be signed by the Governments of Peru and Canada. The final text is still under negotiation. Both countries expressed great interest in developing scientific research projects, in the Arctic as well as in Antarctica. 

f)	Co-operation with Ecuador 

Before the end of the year, a Co-operation Agreement on Antarctic Matters is expected to be signed with Ecuador, to develop joint research projects and exchange of experiences and scientists. Under this Agreement, joint Scientific Campaigns would be organised in Antarctica. 


V.	Exhibitions

During this year, INANPE intends to present in Prague and Hamburg a Photo Exhibition called Peru - Antarctica: Terra Australis, with photos by artists Walter Wust and Alejandro Balaguer. The exhibition presents 35 pictures of the Peruvian Machu Picchu Antarctic Station, BIC Humboldt’s journey, fauna and existing living resources in the vicinity of Admiralty Bay and of activities conducted by Peruvian experts and foreign researchers invited by INANPE on Mackellar inlet (King George Island). 

Antarctic Sciences Activities 
to be Developed Under Antar XV Campaign


    1) Wind field modelling and assessment of renewable energy use.
    2)  Aerial photogrammetrical and bathymetrical survey in Admiralty Bay.
    3) New MST Radar installation and operation in Antarctica: Wind characterisation and mesospheric echoes. 
    4) Underwater and Terrestrial Biodiversity in Admiralty Bay (with Thetis Institute).


