
º
XXVI ATCM
Informational Paper IP-
Agenda Item: ATCM 4a
UKRAINE
Original: English



Ukraine Antarctic Scientific Research (1996-2003)

(Draft of the Supplement to the notification of Ukrainian interest to achieve Consultative Party status Antarctic Treaty)

Introduction

Ukraine acceded to the Antarctic Treaty on September, 17, 1992, in accordance with Article XIII. 

Ukraine has got the status of the Non-Consultative Party of the Antarctic Treaty on October 28, 1992 (Italy) on XVII ATCM in accordance with Article XIII of the Antarctic Treaty.

Ukraine is a member of CCAMLR since 1994, and since September 5 the same year Ukraine became the associated member of SCAR. 

According to the Memorandum of Understanding between the British Antarctic Survey and the Ukrainian Antarctic Centre (UAC) signed in June 1995, the British Antarctic station Faraday was transferred to Ukraine (now – Akademik Vernadsky Antarctic station). According to Article X of the Antarctic Treaty the Ukraine has provided the complex and systematic research in Antarctica since February 6, 1996. 

At the XXIV ATCM the Depository of Antarctic Treaty confirmed the obtaining of the official documents from Ukraine about the acceding to Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations XVI-10 (Annex V to the Protocol). 

Nowadays the Ukraine is implementing the Protocol rules on legislative and practical level into Ukrainian legislation accordance with the Article 3 and 8 of the Protocol. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine resolution of the on "Discharging of the international duties of Ukraine in connection with acceding of the Ukraine to Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” is under consideration. 

The Cabinet Ministry of Ukraine approved the State Research Program in Antarctica for 2002 –2010 period by the act of  September 13, 2001 No 422-r. The law "On Antarctic Activity" are discussed by the Verkhovna Rada (Parliament). 

According to Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty the international inspections in 1999 and 2001 of the Vernadsky station have informed that Ukraine in its Antarctic activity follows the principles and regulations of the Antarctic Treaty System.

The Antarctic activity is one of the parts of the Ukraine strategy on the building up the forth and independent state. The main reason of the Antarctic activity is the scientific research in the field of global climate changes, space weather, and marina resources. Recently the environmental problems have become rather important. The most important principle of the researches is the continuous monitoring of the environment impact of activity in Antarctica. Therefore the most researches are continuous and have round-the-clock all-the-year-round nature. 

The development, approbation and implementation of the new science technologies into the sectors of the national economy, scientific prognoses, energy supply, creating of the space weather conception, communication systems and information transfer, life-support systems in the extreme conditions and creating new informational technologies is other motivating factor of the Antarctic activity. 

The First Ukrainian Antarctic Meeting (1UAM2001) “Five years of the Ukrainian Antarctic researches” was organized and held by UAC and Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine in June, 2001 in Kyiv. More then hundred scientists took part in the Meeting, 106 reports by 174 authors (66 oral reports and 44 posters) were received. During 7 sections and plenary meetings 52 reports and 37 posters were presented and discussed. There were representatives of 13 Ukrainian research institutes and 5 universities, National Space Agency of Ukraine, Institute of Earth Magnetism and Radiowave Propagation (Russia), Russian Antarctic Expedition, Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition and others.

The meeting was proposed to determine the priority directions of the researches at the Akademik Vernadsky station and the marine part of the Ukrainian Antarctic Expeditions: (1) “Research of processes of energy distribution from a surface of the Earth up to ionosphere and magnetosphere" and (2) "Research of sea and coastal ecogeosystem changes of the Antarctic Peninsula, and seas of Western Antarctic Region" (Gozhik, 2002). It was recommend: to start at Akademik Vernadsky station the monitoring of anomalies of Radon and condition of pollution the nearby coast; to provide research of local glaciers dynamics of Argentina Islands Archipelago and nearby Antarctic Peninsula region; to make field and laboratory study of process of carry of atmospheric aerosols and impurities of an organic origin, destroying ozone layer, and glacial-chemical researches; study the remote consequences of the work of winterers in Antarctic Region; to pay attention to ethical aspects during realization the medical biological researches. Scientists realized this recommendations during the Ukrainian Antarctic expeditions at 2001-2002 (Report, 2002).

Since 1997 the Bulletin of the Ukrainian Antarctic Centre has been edited by UAC. This is a scientific magazine where the Ukrainian Antarctic research results are published (Bulletin, 1997, 1998, 2001, 2002). In 2003 the Bulletin was renamed as “Ukrainskij Antarctychnyj Zhurnal”.

1. Ukraine Antarctic Research Activity (1996-2003)

The Ukrainian Antarctic Center (UAC) of the Ministry Education and Science of Ukraine is the organization appointed to undertake, co-ordinate, and provide the logistics supply of the Antarctic research as the national operator of Ukraine in Antarctica. The UAC coordinates the Antarctic research of number institutes of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine and other departments of the state. The eight Ukrainian Antarctic expeditions were organized by the UAC. The preparing to ninth is carried out. 

The research activity of the UAC is concentrated on fields: climate change, upper atmosphere and ionosphere physics, biology, solid-Earth geophysics. In this fields the UAC make an efforts to collaborate with National Antarctic Agencies of Poland Republic, United Kingdom, Germany, Bulgaria, United States of America, and countries of South America. The scientific activity of the UAC is in tight cooperation with Radio Astronomy Institute, Geophysical Institute, Institute of Geology Sciences, Lviv Center of Space Research Institute (Kyiv National Taras Shevchenko University, Odessa Ecology University) and other organizations of Ukraine. 

At the Ukrainian Antarctic station Akademik Vernadsky (65º15'S, 64º15'W) the researches in upper atmosphere and earth magnetic field, observations on total ozone, measurements of the ocean level changes, fundamental meteorological parameters changes observations, biology, glaciology, human biology and medicine, and ecology are carried out by Ukrainian scientists. 

The surface meteorology observations, total ozone and tide measurements, ionosphere soundings, geomagnetic field registration, UV-B observation, EM-radiation observations in VLF, ELF, HF bands (whistlers, Schumann and Alfven resonance, geomagnetic micro pulsations, TID), seismic-acoustic measurements are carried out continuously (Milinevsky, 1998). From 6 to 9 scientists are working at the station during winter. Six technicians provide the station operation. From 15 to 20 scientists perform seasonal researches in the field of upper atmosphere physics, solid Earth physics (Didenko, 2001), glaciology, atmosphere physics and chemistry, oceanography, marina biology at the Vernadsky station and Antarctic Peninsula region during season (Abstracts, 2001). 

The new equipments have been developed at the station recently: 
    • high sensitive magnetometers were installed for magnetosphere parameters, Schumann resonance and Alfven resonance research,
    • the seismic acoustic devices were mounted, 
    • the variation of UV-B radiation measurement was started,
    • the human biology and medicine research project was developed using new equipment: rythmograph, reflotron, Holter sensors, 
    • the winterers organisms ecology state monitoring was provided using XRF analysis method of hair and radioactivity body monitoring ,
    • the hydrology measurements was developed.

The State program of Ukrainian researches in Antarctica for 2002–2010 yrs defined the strategy of Ukraine activity in Antarctic region for development and support of social-economic, ecologic, scientific and technical, national culture and other activity (Program, 2001). The program consist of the research projects in Antarctica and foreseen the development of new technology (Article IX of Antarctic Agreement). The prospects research programs are discussed and approved by the Research Council “Antarctica” established in 1999 under supervising of Ministry Education and Sciences of Ukraine.

Upper Atmosphere and Geospace Physics

Historically the Faraday base (then Akademik Vernadsky station) is well-equipped observatory for upper atmosphere research. The ionosphere and geospace research started by British scientists are well developed now. 

The main topic of the upper atmosphere research at Ukrainian Vernadsky Antarctic Station is the study of energy transfer of natural and man-caused disturbances from the surface of the Earth to geospace height (Abstract, 2001; Ivchenko, 2002; Zaitsev, 2000) according the priority field of research. The new methods of remote sensing radiosounding of geospace are under development.

During 2002-2003 Antarctic summer season the automatic electromagnetic measurement devices were installed and put into operation. They include two (main and reserve) low-noise three-component flux-gate magnetometers. The base line of the main magnetometer during two years suits excellent to intermagnet standards and the reserve magnetometer has extremely low noise level – less than 5 pT at 1 Hz. Other magnetic sensors – ELF receivers - consist of two orthogonal search-coil magnetometers covering frequency band from 0,1 to 300 Hz with extremely low noise level in this band – less than 0,03 pT/ at 10 Hz. The system has also two orthogonal electric lines with Cu-CuSO4 no polarized electrodes. All these sensors are coupled to the automated data collection system, which is organized on the base of PC lab card and computer with corresponding software and large memory volume for data archive. The output data of the main flux-gate magnetometer are also transmitted once per 1 minute via GOES-E satellite to WDC in Canada (Korepanov, 2003).

The systematic researches of the interconnection processes in the different regions of the near-earth area from the neutral atmosphere to the ionosphere heights are held on the Vernadsky station (Yampolski, 2000; Milinevsky, 2002). The three-positional Doppler HF-receiver and ionosonde control the upper part of ionosphere dynamics and structure. The multi channel HF-receiver gives possibility to reconstruct and visualize the TID propagated up to height of F-region. The systematic observations and analysis of Vernadsky data give possibility to study a number of large-scale disturbances in еру atmosphere: (1) to trace the excitation of AGW transfer from the surface of the Earth to ionosphere heights; to monitor the dynamics of global thunderstorm activity and to trace the thunderstorm intensity in main equatorial centres; (2) to monitor the possible electromagnetic pollution in Antarctica is the one of the topics of research; (3) to study the ionosphere Alfven resonator peculiarities; (4) to provide the comparative analysis of long-term magnetic observations with ozone, weather, ionosphere and tide data (Yampolski, 2000а).

The geomagnetic data from Vernadsky have been sent to INTERMAGNET network via satellite. The regular ionosphere sounding is provided using digitized ionosonde ISP-42 (Report, 2002; Milinevsky, 1998). The geomagnetic micropulsations polarization characteristics measurements are carried out for diurnal and season parameter variations study controlled by sources peculiarities and lower ionosphere conductivity (Yampolski, 2001; Yampolski, 1997; Yampolski, 2000b). The Schumann resonance ELF observations are conducted as well. 

The unified set of measurements of the electromagnetic noise level in ELF, VLF, HX bands in order is performed to provide comparative analysis of the Northern hemisphere man-made sources influence upon “Antarctic electromagnetic climate” (Yampolski, 2002).

The resonance Earth magnetic field variations and their relations with the transversal lower ionosphere conductivity in conjugate regions Vernadsky station – Boston region (in collaboration with USA scientists of AFRL, Haystack Observatory, Lowell University) are studied. The Alfven ionosphere resonance oscillations and EM-fields nonlinear interaction effects with near-earth plasma are investigated. The search of the quasi-periodical height electron density profile variations during the AGW propagation close to Earth surface is executed (Yampolski, 2002).

The search of the signs of energy transfer of the long-period oscillations from the troposphere to the ionosphere heights via ozone layer based on the Vernadsky Antarctic station meteorological, magnetic, total ozone and ionosphere data was made. The prospecting research of SAR-arcs with the photometer installed at Vernadsky station has been recently started (Ivchenko, 2002).

The ionosphere research with the purpose of determination of ionosphere effects called by geomagnetic activity, perturbations of a various type in magnetic conjugate region, and revealing of possible effect of seismic activity on condition of the ionosphere above station was provided.

The magnetosphere study based on simultaneous observations of the geomagnetic field (micro pulsations) at Vernadsky and British Antarctic Survey (UK) magnetometers is provided (Clilverd, 2003). The magnetometers data were processed to determine the inner magnetosphere plasma density using the cross-phase technique of paired magnetometers response to pulsations (Korepanov, 2003).

The three-component geomagnetic field registration is continuously carried out to control daily field trends (Milinevsky, 1998). The 3-hours indices every month are sending to International Service of geomagnetic indices (France).

The effect of parameter changes in the solar wind and solar activity in the ionosphere of high geographical latitudes and average geomagnetic latitudes is studied. The study of features of geomagnetic variations in Antarctic Region and influence of magnetic and ionosphere processes in system a magnetosphere - ionosphere - atmosphere, relations between magnetic variations, dynamics ozone layer and other atmospheric parameters will be conducted. 

Atmosphere Physics and Chemistry 

The total ozone measurement is provided the valuate row data obtained before by British scientists (Lambert, 2000). The topics of research are: (1) the research of interrelation of the total ozone and meteorological processes and possible processes in the ionosphere, (2) the study of biologically active ultraviolet radiation using the bio-dosimeter on the basis of transformations of vitamin D (Terenetskaya, 2002; Kravchenko, 2000; Milinevsky, 2001a, 2001b).

The long-term variations study of the atmosphere ozone-depleting organic halides, hydrocarbons in the Antarctic ice and snow samples from glaciers dated from pre-industrial Holocene to nowadays in comparison with their content to up-to-date snow and sea water samples (Bogillo, 2002, 2001, 2002a, 1998, 2001a; Bazylevska, 2002, 2002a; Pokrovskyj, 1999) was carried out last years.

The measurements of the atmosphere Radon concentration and gamma-background using solid-state detectors were started in 2002.

Meteorology, Hydrology, Climate

The main objective of this field research is studing of the long-term climate changes. The complete meteorological observations on the base of standard program of the World Meteorological organization using the modular automatic weather station (MAWS) are realized. The sea tide observations are performed using the mechanic tide gauge and the automatic gauge. The monthly mean weather parameters and CLIMAT data are prepared for WMO and Hydrometeorology Service of Ukraine. The rainfall sampling for MAGATE is performed, sampled and sent to Austria.

The project is performed to determine the local wind circulation peculiarities. The investigations are being carried out to research the ice characteristics changes: its thickness, duration of steady winter ice cover characteristics, number and size of icebergs and fields of the broken ice in Vernadsky region are carried out (Bulgakov, 2000). The atmosphere turbidity is measured, the interactions between ozone layer and synoptic situation in the region are being studied. Hydrological researches at the Academician Vernadsky station was started in 2002 using the Oxy and salinity measuring equipment, bathometers and sea current velocity measuring instruments for providing of hydro chemical and dynamical monitoring of the Argentine Island region (Govorukha, 1998, 1998a).

The search of causes of the changes in the hydrological and hydro chemical processes formation is fulfilled nearby the Vernadsky station. The permanent registration of the temperature, salinity and oxygen concentration in the top layer of water, the measurement of the vertical distribution of temperature, salinity, alkalinity, oxygen concentration are realized.

The meteorology and hydrology anomaly formation is studied in the Antarctic Peninsula region. The frequency of meteorology anomaly is increased last years. That could be consequence of the global warming. We explore the response of local ecosystem on the meteorology anomaly (Pirnach, 1994; Krakovskaia, 1998, 2000, 2002). The hydro meteo anomaly event data bank has been created. Hydrology research at Vernadsky is provided for hydrochemical and dynamical monitoring in Argentine Islands shelter water area. 

Glaciology 

The main topic of research is the study of the ice caps and glaciers dynamics and mass-balance of Argentine Islands Archipelago and Antarctic Peninsula (in the Vernadsky station region). The glaciology observations have been renewed in Argentine Islands Archipelago region. The digital photogrammetric geodesy survey technology was introduced (Milinevsky, 2003). 

The continuous geomorphology survey of the ice caps of the small islands in Antarctic Peninsula region using GIS technology have been recently started. The changes of the size, the shape and the edge position of ice caps on Argentina Island archipelago shows the possibility to use the geodetic survey data of the caps to study the regional climate variability (Glotov, 2003).

The avalanching investigation and drift snow measurements, snow survey, digging a prospect-hole, snow and ice samplings are provided during the season works (Beliavsky, 2000, 2002).

Geodesy 

In the framework of the geodesy cartography program the geodesy survey technology for Argentina Island region was developed to provide the GIS project "Vernadsky-Argentina Islands" introduced for the region of the Vernadsky station and adjacent territory of Antarctic Peninsula (Greku, 2000, 2000a, 2000b, 2001, 2001a; Gozhik, 2000, 2002; Glotov, 2003; Milinevsky, 2003).

Season permanent GPS-survey at the “SCAR GPS 2002” site on Galindez Island within the framework of the GIANT project was started at Vernadsky in 2002. The GPS observations are carried out at the “SCAR GPS 2002” site for 15 days in 2002 and 2003, the error of coordinates in 2002 is 1-2 mm, the data of 2003 are processed (Greku, 2003). More than 300 GPS points have been determined for positioning of different geophysical measurements on islands. 

The program of the GIS development for the Argentina Island archipelago and adjacent Antarctic Peninsula region (GIS project "Vernadsky-Argentina Islands") has been recently started. The main objectives of the project are:· The high precision network creation of the geodesic stations in the vicinity of Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station on the base GPS-positioning data. The large-scale digital maps (1:25,000) development of the Argentina Islands region (including Petermann Island, Berthelot Island, adjacent Antarctic Peninsula area).·The hidden regularities and anomalous events in combined system land-ice-ocean-atmosphere-ionosphere retrieval. There are three stages of GIS development corresponding to the objectives. The software installation and development, data layers composing: geomorphology, ecology, glaciations, birds and plants, geology. Within 2001/2002 season high precision coordinates of geodetic survey marks have being measured and local geodetic network was created on Galindez Island. The bathymetry map of the Argentina Islands archipelago has been obtained on the GIS technology framework. The large-scale digital map (1:1,000) have been created on the base of the photogrammetric survey of the Marina Point of Galindez Island. 

Galindez ice cap and Antarctic Peninsula ice streams mapping have been made with the ERS radar interferometer (Greku, 2000a, 200b). Echo sounding of the Argentine archipelago’s seabed in the shallow unsurveyed area (within the framework of the IBCSO project) has been provided in the Vernadsky Ukrainian Antarctic station region since 1997 (Gozhik, 2000, 2002). Determination of detailed local geoids with the altimeter data of the Bellinsgausen sea has been created out  (Greku 2001a) in collaboration with Institute of Geology Sciences (within the framework of the project ANTEC).

The high precision GPS observations at Vernadsky and SCAR-2002 site were provided in cooperation with scientists of Geodaetisches Institut Universitaet Karlsruhe (Germany) – the continuation of the Antarctic plate movement research according the Geodetic Infrastructure of Antarctica SCAR Program (GAP96, GAP98, SCAR2002).

Biology (Ornithology) 

Research of the adaptation features of separate species is carried out. The research objectives area: (1) the determination specifically and quantitative structure nested and migratory birds, phenology of the basic biological objects; (2) study of the population characteristic distinctions and nested life observation to determine features between species and inside species relations using the birds ringing. 

Research and monitoring of the marine mammals and birds population condition in region of the Vernadsky station are fulfilled, an estimation of number of the basic groups of the species in dynamics and account of volume of consumption by them a krill in region of archipelago the Argentina Islands, study seasonal, in-between-seasonal population with the purpose of making a databank morphological and phenotypic signs.

We provide the seasonal estimation of population of Antarctic krill in the Argentina Islands region, krill population genetic monitoring, analysis of krill population genetic structure and their dynamics. The genetic basis of stability of the krill development and adaptation and research of genetic structure of krill population using the modern methods of biochemical genetics for an estimation of dynamics their genofund and forming of the units of a stock are provided in collaboration with Kiev National Taras Shevchenko University (Bezrukov, 1998, 2002). 

In the framework of the project “Fauna of parasites of the Antarctic fishes (taxonomy, phylogeny, and seasonal dynamics)” the research Antarctic fish peculiarities are provided in the current winter (Utevsky, 1996; Epshtein, 1996, 1996a). The species composition, taxonomy, and host-parasite relationships of Antarctic leeches are important biological issues both in fundamental and in commercial concern. Results of the study will include the list of species of Antarctic leeches and other parasites, revision of the taxonomic positions of a series of species and genera, discovery of the phylogeny of fish leeches and determination of ecological factors that caused the evolution of this group.

Geology and Solid Earth Geophysics 

The project of “Region-scale geological investigation of the subglacial terrains of Antarctica: main rock types identification and terrain-scale geological/metallogenic events determination on a basis of single-grain trace element geochemistry of wide-spread accessory minerals from marine glacial deposits” was developed (Shnyukov, 1997, 1997a, 2002, 2002a). The standard procedures for regional geological/metallogenic investigations and crustal evolution determination are inapplicable within this subglacial region. Comparable results may be derived from single-grain trace element geochemistry of zircon (monazite, apatite etc.) large detrital populations from marine glacial sediments of Antarctic continental shelf that reflect provenance (age and composition of rock types widely distributed within the drained subglacial area). 

In geology research of determination tensely-strained composition of Antarctic Peninsula mountain ridges and adjusted islands the new results on geodynamical reconstruction Argentina Island territory and paleotectonic reconstruction of the Antarctic Peninsula West part in Neozoic age were obtained (Bakhmutov, 2001, 2002). 

The periodic magnetic surveys are made during every summer season. The magnetic profiling with vector and scalar magnetometers recently has been accomplished. The unexpected information about the crust deep structure in the station region was received from the first magnetotelluric, tectonomagnetic and magnetovariational measurements. The modern processing code was produced to develop the geomagnetic and magnetotelluric data (Korepanov, 2003).

The tectonomagnetic investigations in the station region began in 1998. They were aimed at the Earth crust recent tectonic activity monitoring. Three cycles of repeat observations were carried out from 1998 up to 2002, along tectonomagnetic profile which crosses from west to east the main tectonic elements of Argentina Island archipelago. The zone of anomalous magnetic field dynamic variations (‑ 3.5 nT/year) has been detected. On the base of the numerical simulation using the rock magnetic properties experimental data it has been concluded that these temporal variations were caused mostly by the piezomagnetic effect under the influence of tensile stress of sub latitude stretch (Cherepova, 1999; Korepanov, 2003).

According the project “Seismic activity and tectonic conditions research of Antarctic Peninsula region” provides the accumulation of the experimental data for the seismic and acoustic (infrasound) monitoring used for the realization of the researches of general seismic activity in the Antarctic region, study tectonics in region, realization of the global seismic activity supervision, of the icebergs formation and infrasound phenomena monitoring connected to various natural sources of the meteorological origin are fulfilled.

Human Biology and Medicine

The study of the human adaptation to the Antarctic conditions and investigation of geophysical factor of influences on human health (geomagnetic activity, meteorology perturbations, variability of UV-B radiation) are carried out at Vernadsky station. Investigation of the high nervous activities change dynamics in the wintertime, dynamics of state the cardio-lung, nervous, immune and antioxidant people system at the period of Antarctic station conditions. It is being studied the correlations between meteo- and geophysical parameters and genome stability, morbidity and capacity for work of winterers.

The selection of the statistical data of the winterer sickness, accessory phenomena of station personnel were provided regularly. 

Research of the influence of the geophysical factors (ionosphere, geomagnetic, weather disturbances, fluctuating of a flow UV-B radiation on the human health on the basis of the general analysis of temporary variations of a heart rhythm and variations of geophysical parameters in Northern (Kola Peninsula) and Southern (Vernadsky Station) regions. 

The results of winterer medical survey shown that on starting adaptation period a few serious deviation in the health and the organism functional state. However the enlarged numbers of the “non-stationary” and metastable organism states are registered. Then the transition to disease and quasi-disease state is possible (Iljin, 2000, 2001, 2001a; Bezrukov, 2002).

The examinations of overlays of breathe system, circulation of the blood and the physical work ability capacity of the participants of expedition. The condition cardio-respiratory dynamics, nervous, immune and antioxidant systems breath reaction, the blood circulation, gas circulatory systems of the winterers organism on effect of the particular Antarctic factors, such, as breath in conditions of a hypoxia are studied.

Study of processes of a reducing of radioactive contamination of the human organism of the person during winter at the Vernadsky in conditions of the lowest Antarctic contaminated environment is provided.

Marina Biology 

The marina expeditions onboard R/V Ernst Krenkel and R/V Gorizont have been organized by the UAC in 1997, 1998, 2000 and 2002 yrs. The study of state and changes West Antarctica, Antarctic Peninsula seaside region, the study of Antarctic krill population (Euphausia superba Dana) and other main pelagic component of South-Orkney sub-region Scotia Sea and Bransfield Straight (Bezrukov, 1998; Samyshev, 2001, 2002) are made during expeditions.

Research in genetics has been made in the fields: (1) the analysis of krill population genetic structure and their dynamics based on the methods biochemical genetics; (2) genetic basis of stability development and krill adaptation. 

During the 2001/2002 season it was established that krill stock in the region of traditional fishery – Scotia Sea (nearby Coronation Is.) reduced (in comparison to 1998 season research) in 6 times (Samyshev, 2002). The ecosystem state evaluation was received from simultaneous biology and oceanography observations in Bransfield Straight. The seasonal estimation of population of Antarctic krill in the Argentina islands region is carried out. Scientific purposes of research are: studying of composition distribution and productivity of phytoplankton, visual calculation of bird and mammal quantity that are fed the krill, selection of phyto- and bacterio- planktons samples zoo flagellates and infusorians, and their composition study, observations of forms and quantity of birds and mammals (whale, seals) in the Antarctic Peninsula region.

Oceanography

Correlation between hydrodynamic, hydro physic and hydrochemistry processes, their dependence on atmosphere processes changes and regional conditions are studied during marina expeditions. Studying of the hydrometeorology conditions on biology productive zones forming, the structure and variability of oceanographic fields in Atlantic sector of Antarctic, research of dynamic role and “iciness“ in resources potential formation are provided (Artamonov, 2001).

Working out and adaptation to regional conditions the models of hydrographic processes and diagnostic methods of state and forecasting the evolution of oceanographic fields, the methods of satellite monitoring and drift technology; study the structure and dynamics of water, ice variability; discovery of climate characteristics, ocean field peculiarities that develop an biologic productivity and business significance are fulfilled in cooperation with Marina Hydrology Institute (Artamonov, 1998; Greku, 2000).

Establishment of correlation in hydro optic characteristics, biology, and hydrology parameters, study of anthropogenic influences in the station region on hydro optic characteristics of adjacent water are fulfilled (Bulgakov, 2000). 

The complex of experimental works in the fields of marina biology, oceanology, hydro-chemistry, industrial and acoustic oceanography were proposed. Most interesting directions of explorations are: krill, salpas, zooplankton and other factor of environment in the zones of high biological activity (the Patagonia shelf and shelf of the East Cost of Argentina, Scotia Sea. The research topics are: estimation of krill capacity in regions of industrial fishing, dynamics and structure of waters in that regions, explorations of the fronts and large-scale sea currents as factors of creation of the fields increased biological activity, the investigation of typical season changes of wind field over South-West Atlantic and correspondent changes in circulation of the waters for different seasons, investigation of acoustic properties of polar marina media (Artamonov, 1998).

Ecology, environment monitoring

The investigations of global contamination of Earth atmosphere extend and estimate of genetic risks of a little doze of ionize influence have been  started in Antarctica conditions. It is planned to investigate the smooth dynamic of global Earth atmosphere contamination, to define the present natural standard of “pure” air in different regions of Ukraine. The research has been started of the connection between contamination level in penguin feather and purities of micro nuclide frequency in blood red corpuscles as an index of genome stability.

The monitoring of Galindez Island ecosystem has been installed in the purpose of estimation of Antarctic station activity influence on environment pollution. Selection and conservation the moss and lichen samples have been made to the purpose of researching contaminants in them. Collection of samples for definition of quantity concentration the oil-products and toxically substances in seawater near the station has been realized as well. 

It is discussed the study of the influence of growing tourists activity on the Vernadsky station region and adjacent territory of islands. 

Optimization of the vegetable waste treatment biotechnology using the microbial metabolism regulators at Vernadsky is under development. 

The new project “The ecology - geochemical monitoring of the Vernadsky station region” was recently started in 2003 (Andreev, 2003). Environmental monitoring of the Vernadsky area gives a special approach, which is to provide for finding low technogenic anomalies and for their effective identification in a background of mostly lithologic natural geochemical anomalies. It is suggested to apply research (exploration) methodology for low technogenic geochemical anomalies in the conditions of changed lithologic origin of sediments (soil) composition (Shnyukov, 2001; Andreev, 1992). 

The moss, lichen, penguin guano and feather, algae, peat samples, eggshells have been chosen for the environment monitoring at Vernadsky station. The samples for the eco-geochemical monitoring (joint project of UAC and KNU) have been collected in Antarctica. The Cu, Zn, Pb content data using XRF-analysis of samples after preparation and pre treatment was obtained. The data are variable in wide range and can’t be used for the regional environmental condition evaluation and tracking dynamics. Therefore the environmental monitoring of the man-caused geochemical anomalies has to consider mineral contamination of biogenic samples. Lithologic factor influence on the level of geochemical background should be eliminated by instrumental quantitative determination of micro- and macro elements in the sediments (Andreev, 2003).






2. Research Projects in the Framework of Ukrainian International Cooperation. 

Climatology: The efficiency of the UV-B2 radiation investigation, UV-B and UV-A monitoring at Vernadsky, the energy exchange (radiation and heating) between ground surface, natural biology substrates and atmosphere study (Czech Republic). 

Plant Physiology: Investigations of stress physiology of plant complex (moss, lichen) in the Antarctic Peninsula conditions. Studying of main physiological plant function (photosynthesis) dependence on nutritious substances transferring, physical and chemical conditions of the environment (Czech Republic).

Upper Atmosphere Physics: The resonance variations of the Earth magnetic field research and their correlation to cross conductivity in lower ionosphere at the conjugate regions of Vernadsky station - Boston area. (USA - AFRL, Haystack observatory, Lowell University).

Upper Atmosphere Physics: Simultaneous observations of geomagnetic field in cooperation with BAS (Great Britain). 

Atmosphere Physics: The long-term variations study of atmosphere ozone-depleting organic halides, hydrocarbons in the Antarctic ice and snow samples from dergraded glaciers (Germany, USA).

Biology (Ornithology): An investigation of gentoo penguins populations structure, analysis of genetic variability and genetic structure of populations, the level of genetic diversity of populations, and the problem of changing of genetic structure of populations under ecological impact (Bulgaria).

Biology: Parasitology researches of Antarctic fish at the Vernadsky station and Antarctic Peninsula shelf region (Poland).

Biology: Biological researches of sea and land invertebrates within King George Island ecosystem on Antarctic station Arctowsky (Poland).




Bibliography of Ukrainian Contributions to Antarctic Science

Bulletin Ukrainian Antarctic Center //1997. Issue 1. Kyiv.  331 p.
Bulletin Ukrainian Antarctic Center //1998. Issue 2. Kyiv.  299 p.
Bulletin Ukrainian Antarctic Center, 2000. Second Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition. Report 1997/1998 // Issue 3. Kyiv.  369 p.
Bulletin Ukrainian Antarctic Center // 2002. Issue 4.Kyiv, . 267 p. 
First Ukrainian Antarctic Meeting, 1UAM2001, Kyiv, Ukraine. June 4-7, 2001. Abstracts. 129 p.
Milinevsky G.P. Research at Ukrainian Antarctic Station Akademik Vernadsky // Radiophysics and Radio Astronomy. 1997. Vol. 2, No 3. P. 255-266 (in Russian).
Program, 2001 – State Program of Ukrainian Research in Antarctica in 2002-2010. // Kyiv, Cabinet of Ministry of Ukraine, Act No 422-r, 13 September 2002. 23 p. (in Ukraine)
Report, 2002 – Ukrainian Antarctic Center. Preparing and Providing of 6th Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition // Report. UAC, No 0101U002097. 2002. 145 p. (in Ukraine)

Upper Atmosphere and Geospace Physics

Clilverd M.A., Menk F.W., Milinevsky G.P. et al. In-Situ and Ground-Based Intercalibration Measurement of Plasma Density at L=2.5. // Journ.Geoph.Res., 2003. P. 1-25. (in print).
Ivchenko V.N., Lizunov G.V., Milinevsky G.P. et al. Ionospheric and Magnitospheric Research. // Space Research in Ukraine 2000-2002. National Space Agency of Ukraine. Kyiv. 2002. P. 41-46.
Korepanov V., G. Milinevsky, V. Maksymchuk, B. Ladanivsky, Ye. Nakalov Vernadsky Antarctic Station Geomagnetic Observatory – Recent Upgrade and Results Survey // Abstracts, ISAES IX Symposium, Potsdam, 2003 (in print).
Milinevsky G.P., Yampolski Yu.M. Upper Atmosphere and Geospace Research at Vernadsky Antarctic Station. // Report on XXVII SCAR, July 15–19, 2002. Shanghai, China.
Yampolski Yu., Galushko V., Reinisch B., Beley V. HF Radar Sounding of TID's with the use of the DPS System and signal from Broadcasting Stations, - Proceedings, Progress in Electromagnetics Research Simposium. (PIERS 2000), Cambridge, Mass, USA, 2000, p. 461.
Yampolski Yu., Sinitsin V., Groves K.. Ionospheric Observations in Conjugate Areas, - Proceedings, AGU 2002 Spring Meeting, Washington, DC, USA, 2002, p. 134.
Yampolski Yu., Sinitsin V.. HF Radar Magnetometry of the Ionosphere, - Proceedings, Progress in Electromagnetics Research Symposiums. (PIERS 2000), Cambridge, Mass, USA, 2000.
Yampolski Yu., Zalizovsky A., Sinitsin V. Polarisation of Pc3/Pc4 geomagnetic pulsation in the Southern and Northern hemispheres: experimental date and numerical simulation (in russian), - Radiofizika and Radioastronomiya V6, N4, 2001, p. 302-309.
Yampolski Yu.M., Belenov A.F., Ponomarenko P.V.. Interaction between artificial Ionospheric turbulence and geomagnetic pulsations, - Journal of Atmospheric and Solar - Terrestrial Physics, 59, N18, 1997, p. 2367-2372.
Yampolski Yu.M., Zalizovsky A.V., Korepanov V.E., Dotsenko I.F.. Polarization Effects of Pc3, Pc4 Geomagnetic Pulsations at Vernadsky Antarctic Station (''the Sun flower Effect'') (in russian), - Radiofizika and Radioastronomiya, V.5, N2, 2000b, p. 118-122. (in Russian).
Zaitsev S.N., Gritsai Z.I., Evtushevsky A.M., Milinevsky G.P. Characteristics of the filamentation process in the artificial ionospheres cloud: optical data and simulation // Proc. of International Symposium "From solar corona into Earth's magnetosphere: Interball". – Kyiv. - 2000. - P. 191-194.

Atmosphere Physics and Chemistry, Ozone

Bazylevska M.S., Bogillo V.I.  Description of Air/Surface Partitioning for Volatile Organic Pollutants in Antarctic Environment // Proceedings of II Intern. Conference “Interfaces against Pollution - 2002, May 27 – 29, 2002, Miskolc, Hungary.
Bazylevska M.S., Bogillo V.I.  Use of Inverse Gas Chromatography in Characterization of the Environmental Surfaces // Proceedings of VII International Conference on Physical Methods and Means for Testing the Beds, Materials and Products (“LEOTEST – 2002”), 18-23 Febr. 2002a, Slavsko, Ukraine.
Bogillo V.I.  QSARs in Adsorption of Volatile Pollutants on Environmental Surfaces // Abstracts of the participants of European Research Course on Atmospheres (ERCA2001), 9 January- 9 February, 2001, Grenoble, France. – Grenoble, 2001a. – P. 9.
Bogillo V.I. and Bazylevska M.S. Physico-Chemical Parameters of Polymers, their Fillers and Pigments as Revealed by Inverse Gas Chromatography // Proceedings of VII International Conference on Physical Methods and Means for Testing the Beds, Materials and Products (“LEOTEST – 2002”), 18-23 Febr. 2002, Slavsko, Ukraine.
Bogillo V.I., Bazylevska M.S.  Use of Inverse Gas Chromatography Data in Characterisation of Environmental Surfaces // Abstracts Book of 1st International Conference on Inverse Gas Chromatography, September 17th-19th, 2001, Imperial College, London, England, pp. 92-95.
Bogillo V.I., Bazylevska M.S., Borchers R.  Past and Future for Ozone-Depleting Halocarbons in Antarctic Environment // Proceedings of II Intern. Conference “Interfaces against Pollution” (May 27 – 29, 2002, Miskolc, Hungary). – Hungary, 2002. 
Bogillo V.I., Pokrovskiy V.A., Kuraev O.V., Gozhyk P.F.  The Ozone-Depleting Organic Compounds in Antarctic Ice Environ // Sci.&Pollut. Res., 1998. – V. 5, No 3. – P. 136.
Gritsai Z.I., Evtushevsky A.M., Leonov N.A., Milinevsky G.P. Comparison of ground-based and TOMS-EP total ozone data for Antarctica and northern midlatitude stations (1996-1999) // Phys. Chem. Earth (B). - 2000. - Vol.25, № 5-6. - P. 459-461.
Kravchenko V.A., Milinevsky G.P., Suprunenko A.A., Evtushevsky A.M., Leonov N.A. The search of the long-term oscillations in the geomagnetic field and ozone data from аntarctic station Akademik Vernadsky // Proc. of International Symposium "From solar corona into Earth's magnetosphere: Interball".- Kyiv. - 2000. - P. 149-152. 
Lambert J.-C., Roozendael M.Van, Simon P.C., Pommereau J.-P., Goutail F., Gleason J.F., Andersen S.B., Arlander D.W., Bui Van N.A., Claude H., De La Noл J., De Maziure M., Dorokhov V., Eriksen P., Green A., Karlsen Trnkvist K., Kеstad Hiskar B.A., Kyrц E., Leveau J., Merienne M.-F., Milinevsky G., Roscoe H.K., Sarkissian A., Shanklin J.D., Stдhelin J., Wahlstrшm Tellefsen C., and Vaughan G. Combined Characterisation of GOME and TOMS Total Ozone Measurements From Space Using Ground-Based Observations From the NDSC // Adv. Space Res.- 2000.- V. 26, No 12, pp. 1931-1940,
Milinevsky G., Leonov M., Gritsai Z., Evtushevsky O., Katinas I. Cloudiness and Divergence Between Ground-Based and Satellite Total Ozone Measurements// 28th Annual European Meeting on Atmospheric Studies by Optical Methods, August 19-24, 2001a.
Milinevsky G., Leonov M., Gritsai Z., Evtushevsky O., Kravchenko V. The Changes of Total Ozone Over Antarctic Peninsula and Ukraine for 1996-2001// 28th Annual European Meeting on Atmospheric Studies by Optical Methods, August 19-24, 2001b.
Pokrovskiy V.A., Bogillo V.I., Dabrowski A..  Adsorption and Chemisorption of Organic Pollutants on the Solid Aerosols Surface // Adsorption and its Application in Industry and Environmental Protection / A. Dabrowski, Ed. – Elsevier; Amsterdam, 1999. – Pp. 571-634.
Terenetskaya I.P. A possibility of ozone depletion monitoring in conditions of opaque atmosphere using ‘D-dosimeter’, In: Ultraviolet Ground and Space -based measurements, Models and Effects. Eds Slusser JR, Herman JR and Gao W., SPIE vol. 4482. 2002. P. 305-312.

Meteorology, Hydrology, Climate, Glaciology

Beliavsky A.V., Bogillo V.I., Gozhyk P.F., Grischenko V.F., Kovalyukh N.N., Kostezh A.B., Kruchenitsky G.M., Kurmey N.F., Laptev G.V., Makarenko T.I., Mel’nichenko G.N.  Preliminary Results for Studies of Ice Probes Sampled during I and II Ukrainian Antarctic-Sea Research Expeditions 1997-1998 // Data of Glaciological Studies. – Moscow, 2002. 
	Belyavsky A.V., Bogillo V.I., Grishchenko V.F. and others. Impurity studies in 1000 year old Antarctic ice // Functional materials. Kharkiv, Vol. 7, № 3, July-September 2000, P.495-500.
Bulgakov M.P., Artamonov Yu.V., Grischenko V.F. et al. The peculiarities of ice condition in Antactic Peninsula region and Scotia Sea in autmn 1998 on Results the Second Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition // Dopovidi NAS of Ukraine, 2000. No 1, P. 107-110.(in Ukrainian).
Glotov V. M., Kovalenok S.B., Milinevsky G.P., Nakаlov E.F., Fulitka Yu.V. Small Island Ice Cep Geomorphology as Indicator for Climate Changes in Antarctic Peninsula Region. // Ukrajnskij Antarctychnyj Jurnal. 2003. No 1. (in print).
Govorukha L.S., Timofeyev V.E. New Look on Antarctic Peninsula Region Climatology Scientific Results of the 1-st. Ukranian Antarctic Expediation at Vernadsky Base-Former UK Faraday // Procedings of the Acsys Conference on Polar Processes and Global Climate. World Climate Research Programme, July 1998, 106–908, Rosario, Orcas Island, WA, USA. – P. 71.
Govorukha L.S., Timofeyev V.E. On the statement of Antarctic Peninsula glacioclimate system // Polish Polar Studies. 25-th International polar symposium, Warszawa. – 1998a. – P. 95–101.
Krakovskaia, S.V. and A.M. Pirnach, 1998: Theoretical study of the microphysical structure of mixed stratiform frontal clouds and their precipitation // Atmospheric Research, 47-48, pp.491-503.
Krakovskaia, S.V. and A.M. Pirnach, 2000: Theoretical study formation and development of Antarctic cloudiness under different intensity of ice and cloud droplet nucleation // Printed in: American Institute of Physics, conference proceedings of 15th ICNAA, Melville, NY, Vol. 534, pp. 467-470.
Krakovskaia, S.V., 2002: Climate warming in the Antarctic Peninsula region // Proc. of Sci. Conf. on Results of Studies in Hydrometeorology and Environment Monitoring in CIS, St.Peterburg (Russia), Sect. 3, pp.25-27 (in Russian).
Pirnach, A.M. and S.V. Krakovskaya, 1994: Numerical studies of dynamics and cloud microphysics of the frontal rainbands // Atmospheric Research, 33, 333-365.

Geodesy 

	Gozhik P.F., Greku R.Kh., Greku D.R., Saryan D.V., Seredinin E.S., Greku T.R., Ishuk A.A., Shvaiko V.G.  Investigation of the Antarctic and Ukrainian Regions with the ERS SAR Data // Space Research in Ukraine, 1998-1999. – Kyiv: NSAU, 2000.
Gozhik P.F., Greku R.Kh., Usenko V.P. et al. The Bathymetry Map of Shelf Zone Argentina Island Archipelago in the Region of Ukrainian Antarctic Station Akademik Vernadsky // Geol. Journ. - 2002. – No 1. – P.128-131 (in Russian). 
	Greku R., P. Gozhyk. ERS radar measurements for geological, glaciological and geodetic research of Antarctic  // Abst. First Ukrainian Antarctic Meeting, Ukraine, Kyiv, 2001a, p. 103. 
	Greku R.Kh. , D.B.Sarjan. Interferometry method ERS SAR radar pictures for Antarctic using ERDAS IMAGINE. // Report of International Meeting "GIS-Forum 2000", 13-16 - November, 2000b, Kiev. 
	Greku R.Kh., D.V. Saryan. Features of Topography and Dynamics of Glaciers at the Western Antarctic Peninsula by the ERS SAR Interferomatry // ERS-ENVISAT Symposium ''Looking down to Earth in the New Millennium''. Gothenburg, Sweden, 16-20 October 2000. - ERS Publications Division, The Netherlands, 2000a, European Space Agency. CD Production. 
	Greku R.Kh., Gozhik P.F. Research of thopography and structure properties of sea, ground and sea-ice surface by satellite radar methods // Geol. J. (Ukrainian), № 2   2001.
Greku R.Kh., Milinevsky G.P., Ladanovsky Yu. V., Bahmach P.V. Argentine Island Archipelago topography, bathymetry and geodetic GPS Survey // Abstracts, ISAES IX Symposium, Potsdam, 2003 (in print).
Milinevsky G.P., R.Kh. Greku, V.N. Glotov and S.B. Kovalenok. GIS project "Vernadsky-Argentina Islands" // 2-nd International Antarctic GIS Workshop. SCAR GIS Technical Experts Meeting 2003 Freiburg, Germany, April 7-11, 2003. 




Biology

Bezrukov V.F., Alekseenko, V.R., Tereschenko, K.V., Stepanskaya, E.R., Lukashov, D.V. Biochemical and morphological variability of Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba).// In: First International Workshop on adaptation capacity in marine invertebrates. Gdansk-Sobieszewo, (Poland), 6-11 July, 1998, p.6
Bezrukov V., Lazarenko L. Environmetal impact on age-related dynamics of karyotypical instability in plants // Mutation Research, 2002, Volume  1-2 pp. 113-118. 

Geology and Solid Earth Geophysics

Bakhmutov V.G. Paleoclimatology changes relations to secular geomagnetic field variations // Dopovidi NAS of Ukraine. 2001. 2. P. 116-122 (in Ukraine). 
Bakhmutov V.G., Tretjak A.N. The Results of Paleomagnetic Study Cretaceous - Early Neozoic rocks of West Antarctica (Argentina Island Archipelago) // Geophys. Journal.  2002. Vol. 25. No 5. P. 28-41 (in Russian).
Cherepova E., Reznik V. The peculiarities of magmatism of the Antarktic peninsula (Argentina Islands) // Journal of Conference Abstracts.- 1999, vol.4// Terra Abstracts.- 1999, vol.11.
Didenko A.N., Tikhonov L.V., Peyve A.A. Magnetic petrology and variations of basalt’s along the Mid-Oceanic Ridge near Bouvet Triple Junction // InterRige News. – 2001. – V.10, N1. – P.41-44. 
Gozik P., Ivanik O. Geological-geomorphological Researches of East-Antarctic Seae of the Southern Ocean. // Kyiv. 2002. NAS of Ukraine. 144 p (in Ukrainian).
Gozik P.F., Greku R.Kh., Greku D.R., Saryan D.V., Seredinin E.S., Greku T.R., Ishuk A.A., Shvaiko V.G.  Investigation of the Antarctic and Ukrainian Regions with the ERS SAR Data // Space Research in Ukraine, 1998-1999. – Kyiv: NSAU, 2000.
Shnyukov S.E., Andreev A.V., Belousova E.A., Savenok S.P. XRF-analysis of microquantities of Geochemistry of the “through” accesor minerals: research possibilities in comparison to local analytical methods // Mineralogy Journal. 2002a. Vol. 24. No 1. P. 80-95.(in Russian). 
Shnyukov S.E., Andreev A.V., Savenok S.P. Admixture elements in zircons and apatites: a tool for provenance studies of terrigenous sedimentary rocks // EUG 9, 23-27 March 1997, Strasbourg (France). - Terra Nova. - 1997. - V. 9. (Abstract Supplement № 1). - P. 597. 
Shnyukov S.E., Andreev A.V., Savenok S.P. Monitoring of the region-scale geological/metallogenic events on a basis of single-grain trace element geochemistry of zircon, monazite and apatite large detrital populations: Ukrainian Shield and some other regions as an example // International symposium “Metallogeny of Precambrian Shields”, Kiev, Ukraine, September 18-20, 2002 (Abstracts).
Shnyukov S.E., Andreev A.V., Savenok S.P. Trace elements in zircons from flysch deposits of the Crimea (Ukraine) as indicators of the source rocks. // 18th Regional European Meeting of Sedimentology, 2-4 September 1997a, Heidelberg, Germany (Abstracts). 
Shnyukov S.E., Cheburkin A., Andreev A.V. Geochemistry of the “through” accesor minerals and its importance in endo- and exogenous research of geology processes // Geology Journal. 1989. No 2. P. 107-114 (in Russian). 

Human Biology and Medicine

Bezrukov V.F., Moiseenko E.V., Rushkovsky et al. The genome instability level estimation. // Visnyk Kyivskogo Universitetu. Biology. 2002. Issue 36-37. P. 19-22 (in Ukrainian).
Iljin V.V. The Implementation Theoryof Ultrastable Systems for evaluation of functional state of human organism // Ultrastable Systems and Medicine. 2000. No 1. P. 14–19 (in Russian).
Iljin V.V., Kalnysh V.V., Kurdanov Kh.A. Strusture-Linguistic of the Functional State of Human Organism  // Dopovidi NAS of Ukraine. 2001a. No 6. P.185-189 (in Ukrainian).
Iljin V.V., Moiseenko E.V. The Functional State of Human Organism During the Period of re-Adaptation After Long Stay in Antarctica // Xth International Symposium “Eco-Physiology Adaptation Problems”. Moscow. Russia. 2001. P. 205-206 (in Russian).

Marina Biology

Bezrukov V.F., Alekseenko, V.R., Tereschenko, K.V., Stepanskaya, E.R., Lukashov, D.V. Biochemical and morphological variability of Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba).// In: First International Workshop on adaptation capacity in marine invertebrates. Gdansk-Sobieszewo, (Poland), 6-11 July, 1998, p.6.
Epshtein V. M., Utevsky A. Yu., Utevsky S. Yu. Evolution of parasite-host relationships in Hirudinea // Origin and Evolution. Fifth International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology.- Budapest.- 1996.
Epshtein V. M., Utevsky A. Yu., Utevsky S. Yu. Fish leeches (Hirudinea; Piscicolidae): geographical distribution in the World Ocean and its evolutionary interpritation // Origin and Evolution. Fifth International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology.- Budapest.- 1996a.
Samyshev E.Z. Antarctic krill and structure of planctonic community in its distribution area. // Ecosystem.  Sevastopol. 2002. 268 p.
Samyshev E.Z. To the conditions of study Antarctic ecosystem. The Research Results and Tasks for Ukraine // Sea Ecology, No57. 2001. P.13-18 (in Russian).
Utevsky A. Yu. Origin of Antarctic leech fauna // Origin and Evolution. Fifth International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology.- Budapest.- 1996.

Oceanography

Artamonov Yu.V., Bulgakov N.V., Lomakin P.D. Currents System of South sub-tropic anticyclone vortex and year variability // Ecology Safety of Littoral and Shelf Zone and the Shelf Resources Complex Research. 2001. Issue 3. P. 96-105 (in Russian).
Greku T.R. Extension and Types of Sea Ice with the ERS-1 Scatterometry in Surroundings of the Antarctic Peninsula // Symposium “Looking down to Earth in the New Millennium”, Gothenburg, Sweden, 16-20 October 2000. – ESA Publications Division, The Netherlands, 2000, European Space Agency. CD Production.

Ecology, environment monitoring

Andreev A.V. Modern Possibilities of the General Pb Method in Radiogeochronology research // Geology Journ. 1992.No 6. P. 125-130 (in Russian). 
Andreev A.V., G.P.Milinevsky and S.B.Kovalenok. The geochemical monitoring of the Vernadsky Ukrainian Antarctic station environment: preliminary results // Abstracts. The 8th Analytical Russian-German-Ukrainian Symposium (ARGUS), Hamburg 31st August -5th September, 2003 (in print).
Shnyukov S.E., Andreev A.V., Zajats O.V., Savenok S.P., Margulev V.M. Precision Calculation of the Background Conditions as the Base of the Monitoring and Prognosis Technogeneous Geochemical Anomaly // Environment Ecology and Vital Functions Safety. No 5-6. 2001. (in Ukrainian).



2. Perspective and Long-term Research Projects in Antarctica

No
Project title
Project objectives 
Institution
1
Long-term climate changes investigation
Pattern of the atmosphere circulation in the Antarctic Peninsular region. Determination of the trace and velocity cyclones removing. Composing of the data bank of the hydro-meteorological anomaly. 
OEU, USCME, UAC
2
Investigation of the near-Earth space and electromagnetic field in Antarctica 
Measurements of the polarization characteristic ELF field near maximum Schumann resonance. Investigations of the thunderstorm activity VLF monitoring. 
IRA, UAC


Retrieval of the long-period atmosphere, ozone layer, and ionosphere variations.
RL “Antarctica”
UAC-KNU
3
Investigation of the ozone layer
Determination of the ozone layer modification mechanism of the flow of the ultra-violet radiation over the Antarctic Peninsula.
RL “Antarctica” UAC-KNU


Photometer investigation of the UVB radiation.
IP, UAC
4
Western part of the Antarctic Peninsula in the late Age of Reptiles – Age of Mammals
Research the dynamic of the Antarctic Peninsula block as the pattern of the disintegrated Gondwana.
IG, UAC
5
Investigation of the seismic activity in the Antarctic peninsular region
Seismic and acoustic (infrasound) monitoring, the iceberg monitoring. 
NSA, UAC
6
Assessment of the Antarctic ecosystems state at the modern change climate conditions 
Correlation analysis of the climate and ecosystems modification of the Antarctic peninsular region. 
 USCME, OEU, UAC
7
Environment monitoring
Bioecosystem monitoring of the Argentina Island region
UAC, KNU


Research of the connection between contamination level in penguin feather and purities of micro nuclide frequency in blood red corpuscles as an index of genome stability.
KNU, UAC
8
Krill population genetic structure
The analysis of krill population genetic structure and their dynamics based on the methods biochemical genetics. Genetic basis of stability development and krill adaptation.
IBSS, KNU
9
Antarctic fish parasites fauna
Fauna of parasites of the Antarctic fishes (taxonomy, phylogeny, and seasonal dynamics).
KhNU
10
The human adaptation mechanisms in Antarctica
The biorhythm correction methodics introduction for human adaptation. Study of fatigability mechanisms and sub-cell disruption of human immunity.
UAC, BIP
11
Study of heart rate variability caused by fluctuation of geomagnetic field
Investigation the principles of influences of geomagnetic activity on formation of heart rate variability (HRV) in very low and ultra low frequency domains.
КНУ UAC
12
 The forecasting of 
  hypertonic crises 
The forecasting of hypertonic crises on synchronous measurements with the help of EHF-dielectrometry method, low-frequency electromagnetic fields of lightning and variation of a magnetic field of the Earth. 
UAC, BIP,
KNU, IRE

13
Influence Antarctic conditions on human genome stability
Study of human genome stability dependencies from individual peculiarities. 
KNU, UAC 
14
Pulse-Doppler ionosphere sounding of drifts in Antarctica
Research and representation of     troposphere, mesosphere ionosphere. Study of energy transfer of disturbances from the Earth surface to geospace height.
IRA, UAC 
15
Region-scale geological investigation of the subglacial terrains of Antarctica 

The main rock types identification and terrain-scale geological metallogenic events determination on a basis of single-grain trace element geochemistry of widespread accessory minerals from marine glacial deposits. 
UAC, KNU
16
Electromagnetic monitoring

Study of the crust deep structure in the station region using magnetotelluric, tectonomagnetic and magnetovariational measurements.
NULP, UAC
17
The Antarctic Peninsula block horizontal movement 
Geodynamical reconstruction Argentina Island territory and paleotectonic reconstruction of the Antarctic Peninsula West part in Neozoic age.
IG

18
Petrophysic investigation at high thermodynamic parameters
The determined differentiation of the some kinds of rocks for its physical parameters will be analyzed.
IG
19
Neotectonic, dynamic of landscape and ice cover of the West Antarctica
Geodetic and Geomorphology research for detailed mapping of the land and seabed topography, observations for the crust and ice cover moving with ground and satellite remote sensing methods. 
IGS, UAC
20
The dynamical and thermal regime study of the glaciers
Glaciology and meteorology observation; snow, firn and ice sampling; investigation of the condition and glaciometrical works on glaciers of Argentine Island archipelago. 
UAC, USRHI

21
Creation of geodetic and geodynamical network
Creation of geodetic and geodynamical network of territory of Argentina Islands.
NULP
22
GIS project "Vernadsky-Argentina Islands"
GIS and database development for spatial, “pointed” data, visualization of data.
UAC, NULP, KNU
23
An investigation of gentoo penguins populations structure
An investigation of gentoo penguins populations structure (Pygoscelis papua) on Peterman Is. and Livingston Is.
KNU
24
Low temperature biochemical adaptation mechanisms
Biochemical research of pelagic to study low temperature biochemical adaptation mechanisms.
KNU
25
The ecology - geochemical  monitoring of the Vernadsky station region
Research (exploration) low technogenic geochemical anomalies in the conditions of changed lithologic origin of sediments composition. 
KNU, UAC

26
Vegetable waste treatment biotechnology (microbial metabolism regulators)
Optimization of the vegetable waste treatment biotechnology using the microbial metabolism regulators.
ІМВ, UAC 

3. Ukrainian Government and Scientific Organization with Respect to Ukrainian Antarctic Research Program

Organizations
E-mail, phone/fax
Bogomolets Institute of Physiology of National Academy of Science of Ukraine (BIP)
gulyar@serv.biph.kiev.ua
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (CMU)
+38 044 254 0546
Central Geophysical Observatory of National Academy of Science of Ukrainian (CGO)
aup@gda.freenet.kiev.ua
Institute of Biology of Southern Seas by Kovalevsky of National Academy Science of Ukraine (IBSS)
ibss@ibss.inf.net
Institute of Geological Sciences of National Academy Science of Ukraine (IGS)
ignnanu@geolog.freenet.kiev.ua
vbog@carrier.kiev.ua
Institute of Geophysics of National Academy Science of Ukraine (IG)
earth@igph.kiev.ua

Institute of Microbiology and Virology of National Academy Science of Ukraine (IMV)
tach@i.com.ua
+38 044 266 2379
Institute of Physics of National Academy Science of Ukraine (IP)
teren@iop.kiev.ua
Institute of Radio Astronomy of National Academy Science of Ukraine (IRA)
yampol@rian.ira.kharkov.ua
Institute of Radio Electronics of National Academy Science of Ukraine (IRE)
selena@ire.kharkov.ua
Kharkov National University (KhNU)
http://www.fac.com.ua
Kyiv National Taras Shevchenko University (KNU) 
bvf@bvf.carrier.kiev.ua
Lviv Center of the Space Research Institute of National Space Agency and National Academy of Science of Ukraine (LCSRI)
vakor@fmi.lviv.ua

Marine Hydrophysical Institute of National Academy of Science of Ukraine (MHI)
ocean@mhi2.sebastopol.ua
Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources of Ukraine (MENR)
+38 044 229 8383
Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine (MES)
ministry@mon.gov.ua
Ministry of the Foreign Affairs of Ukraine (MFA)
dpu@mfa.gov, zsmfa@mfa.gov.ua
+38 044 238 1884
National Academy of Science of Ukraine (NASU)
prez@nas.gov.ua
National Space Agency of Ukraine (NSAU)
+38 044 269 5058
National University “Lvivska Polytechnica” (NULP)
kornel@polynet.lviv.ua
Odessa Ecological University of Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine (OEU)
meteo@ogmi.farlep.odessa.ua
Southern Scientific Research Institute of Marine Fisheries and Oceanography of the State Fish Committee of Ukraine (SSRIMFO)
+38 0656121 572
State Committee of the Hydrometeorology of Ukraine (SCH)
+38 044 229 1080
bojko@ukrweather.kiev.ua
Ukrainian Antarctic Center of the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine (UAC)
antarc@carrier.kiev.ua
Ukrainian Scientific Centre of the Ecology of Sea of the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources of Ukraine (USCES)
accem@te.net.ua
Ukrainian Scientific Hydro Meteorologyl Institute of the State Committee of the Hydro Meteorology of Ukraine (USRHI)
hanna@ozsol.kiev.ua

