º

Information Paper submitted by Norway

Norway establishes year-round research activities at Troll Station, Dronning Maud Land 
Norway has conducted extensive research activities in Antarctica since the 1950s. It led the first international research expedition to Antarctica in 1949-52 and took part in IGY with Norway station from 1956-1960. 
The Norwegian delegation would like to inform the ATCM that Norway will now upgrade the Troll station in Dronning Maud Land in order to establish year-round research activities in Antarctica (see enclosed press statement from the Royal Ministry of the Environment).
Antarctica is the least spoiled wilderness in the world. Norway is committed to protecting this untouched continent and taking part in the international cooperation on environmental management of Antarctica. Through a continuous presence at Troll, we will get an even stronger platform for this work.
The polar regions are of fundamental importance to the global climate and the circulation of the world oceans. Models indicate that climate changes will be detected first in the polar regions and that these regions also will be strongly affected. The Norwegian climate research therefore specially aims at increasing the knowledge on basic climate processes in the polar regions, and on the effects of climate change on ecosystem and human societies.
Over the past years, Norway has significantly increased its efforts in research in the Arctic, based on Svalbard as a monitoring and research platform. Based on the clear linkage between Antarctica and Arctic, Norway further sees the need to increase its effort in research in Antarctica. The upgrading of Troll will allow Norway to run important year-round research activities in this continent as well.
The construction of the station is planned for the 2004-2005 period, including the 2005 winter. The construction will be in the form of upgrading/expansion of the present station, and will focus on “green” technology such as use of energy-saving solutions, alternative energy and minimizing waste production. An IEE for the upgrading is under preparation. If this process should indicate the need for a CEE then a draft CEE will be transmitted to Consultative Parties and the CEP so that this can be considered at ATCM XXVII. 


























