º

XXVI  ATCM
INFORMATION PAPER
IP-110-IND
Agenda Item :ATCM 12
INDIA
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH


Cost Sharing mechanism in relation to establishment of ATCM
Secretariat at Buenos Aires

	At the XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) held at St. Petersburg during 2001, the Consultative Parties recognizing the need to establish a permanent Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to assist the ATCM and the Committee for Environment Protection (CEP) in performing their functions and taking into consideration the offer made by Argentina in July 1992 decided that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat shall be established at Buenos Aires, following the development of necessary modalities and agreements which the parties shall urgently pursue. In the first informal meeting on the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat held at Buenos Aires, Argentina during 24-27 June 2002, the Consultative Parties (CPs) considered and debated at length, about the principles, that may have to be kept in view, to prescribe the scale of assessment and quantum of contributions of various CPs. General feeling of the CPs was, that, unless scale of assessment is determined first, desired progress for the establishment of the Secretariat, may not be made.

2.	All the CPs were unanimous that any mechanism to assess the contributions of the respective CPs should be a transparent one. Regarding the principles to be followed in arriving at the scale of assessment, two distinct view points emerged. One group of CPs felt that the scale of assessment may be linked to UN pattern of funding, which reflected the capacity of respective CPs to pay. That pattern has evolved quite well over the past five decades and is a completely transparent one. However, the other group of CPs was of the view that UN pattern of funding was not acceptable to them. They were of the view that ,  as all the CPs are free to undertake scientific research in Antarctica, they should contribute equally to meet the cost of  establishment of the ATCM Secretariat. A third group of CPs showed somewhat flexibility and expressed the view that, scale of assessment reflecting mix of contributions on equal share basis and the respective capacity of the CPs to pay, may work towards the objective to evolve consensus ont eh issue.

3.	The issue was further debated in XXV ATCM at Warsaw. However, consensus failed to emerge. The ATCM meeting at Warsaw was helpful, as more CPs shared their desire to be more flexible in their stand to bring about consensus.

4.	At the second informal meeting of the CPs for establishment of ATCM Secretariat, the idea was to have scale of assessment (of contributions) based on mix of a part reflecting equal share and a part linked to the capacity of CPs to pay was further pursued. Argentina had submitted a paper – WP-BAIRES/3, which proposed model, based upon cost sharing comprising of a component on equal share basis and another component reflecting the capacity of the respective CPs to pay. The proposal further envisaged a small component of cost sharing linked to the usage of Secretariat facilities by various CPs. There was consensus on the point that, it would be difficult to quantify usage of ATCM Secretariat facilities by various ATCPs and as such any cost component depending upon this factor may not be amenable to proper assessment and therefore the CPs pursued the discussion on cost sharing comprising of only two components, i.e., a component determined on equal share basis and another determined on the basis of capacity of a CP to pay.

(ii)	Several proposals/alternatives apart from already circulated working paper (WP-BAIRES/3) authored by Argentina were circulated during the course of meeting at Buenos Aires. In essence all the alternatives/proposals, were arithmetical variations of BAIRES/3 proposed model, based on the cost sharing comprising of component on equal share basis and a component reflecting the capacities of the respective ATCPs to pay. All these proposals, though mentioned, that 50% of the contributions may be o equal share basis and there was not much disagreement on that. However, in relation to the other part, all the proposals sought to link the capacity of the CPs to pay, to contributions which the ATCPs are making for Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SACR).Thus, a new dimension was sought to be given to the phrase ‘capacity to pay’. The argument advanced, was that the CPs are free to choose their own level of contributions for SCAR and as such dependent upon their own capacity to pay, the respective CPs are fee to determine their own level of contributions. At the first informal meeting for the establishment of ATCM Secretariat at Buenos Aires, on e of the cogent and relevant argument given against the UN pattern of funding was, that United Nations and ATCPs comprised of entirely different groups of nations. It was pointed out by many delegates that same was true of SCAR contributions, as some of the non-ATCPs also contribute for SCAR. Further it was pointed out that apart from scientific activities, other commercial activities are also being pursued by the CPs. Further, many delegates expressed the view that scale of assessment should be devised independent of any existing mechanism on contributions.

(iii)	There was consensus amongst all the parties that contributions for the establishment of ATCM Secretariat may comprise of the following:

(a)		50% of the assessment based upon equal share basis;
(b)		50% of the assessment based on capacity of the ATCPs to pay.       

As far as sub para (a) above is concerned, there was consensus among the ATCPs. As far sub para (b) is concerned, there is limited consensus only in relation to the linkage of contributions to the capacity of ATCPs to pay. The consensus eluded when the capacity of ATCPs to pay was sought to be linked to SCAR contributions, on the debatable ground that the CPs are free to choose their level of contributions based upon five level of assessment, as at SCAR. Several delegates felt that any mechanism based specifically upo scale of assessment operating for SCAR could not reflect the capacity of the CPs to pay; as principles determining contributions for SCAR were initially based on number of persons wintering and they were never related to the capacity of CPs to pay. Further some non CPs are also contributing at SCAR and apart from science, many other commercial activities are also keeping pursued.

    (iv) (a)  A transparent workable model may be – (a) 50% of the contributions are made on equal share basis; (b) 50% of contributions made on the basis of self assessment by the respective ATCPs, reflecting their capacity to pay.

(b) To determine scale of assessment reflecting capacity of the respective CPs to pay, five levels may be indicated by the ATCM itself. The levels would be determined by fixing a ceiling and floor limit for contributions and determining appropriately intermediate levels. CPs at the ATCM may be asked to choose one of the levels depending upon their capacity to pay. Should any shortfall be witnessed, proportional adjustment may be affected. This would be the most transparent and appropriate way of determining the scale of assessment. Already there was consensus among all the CPs that they should be allowed to indicate their own level of contribution reflecting their capacity to pay. The most transparent way of achieving this would be to indicate five or more levels of contributions by the ATCM itself and then requesting CPs to choose one of the levels, reflecting their capacity to pay at the ATCM itself.

(c) Article 4 of the draft measures may be appropriately worded accordingly
