º























ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING 
AND IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE 
INDIAN PERMANENT STATION-MAITRI
PURSUANT TO THE PROTOCOL ON 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AND IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE
INDIAN PERMANENT STATION-MAITRI, PURSUANT TO THE PROTOCOL ON
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY



Introduction
In accordance with the recommendation XV-5 of the Fifteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting, held in Paris in 1989, there are a series of activities that should be monitored. Through continuous monitoring the environmental change can be observed which would setup valuable benchmark to evaluate the state of Antarctic environment. According to the Protocol on Environmental Protection (article 8 and annex I), environmental impact assessment (EIA) procedure has been developed for activities undertaken in the Antarctic. This paper represents the environmental monitoring and post-EIA conducted at Indian permanent station “Maitri” at Antarctica. India initiated towards the ratification of Antarctica Treaty and following measures represents the active role;  
    • India admitted to the Antarctic Treaty on August 19, 1983 and soon after obtained a consultative status on September 12, 1983
    • India was admitted as a member of Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) on October 1, 1984.
    • India became the member of Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLER) in 1986.
    • India ratified he Environment Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty in 1997, thus upholding its commitment to preserve the pristine continent

From India first expedition was launched to Antarctica in the year of 1981 and first wintering expedition conducted the various scientific experiments from permanent station Dakshin Gangotri that was built in the year 1983. After that in the year 1988-89 India built its second indigenous station Maitri, which is well equipped and facilitated to stay scientists, round the year to conduct the scientific experiments. India also became the chairman of CCAMLR in 1998 for a period of two years. As the matter of International cooperation according to the Article 6 of the Protocol, where it is mentioned that participating parties to co-operate in the planning and conduct of Antarctic activities, -

    • Three German scientists from the University of Dresden, Germany, participated in the XVII Indian Antarctic expedition to establish a permanent GPS station at Maitri. The observatory was successfully established and commissioned as a part of a collaborative program involving NGRI (National Geophysical Research Institute) and SOI (Survey of India) from India. 
    • As a part of regional cooperation between IOC nations, an Iranian biologist from Iranian National Centre for Oceanography (INCO) participated in the summer component of XVIII Indian Antarctic Expedition to undertake a collaborative experiment on Antarctic fresh water lake biology.
    • As a part of cooperation with France in the field of polar sciences, an expert was invited from the Institute of Glaciology, Grenoble to deliver a CEP course at SASE, Manali in the first week of May 1998.
    • In pursuance of a MoU on cooperation between India and Peru signed in 1997, a Peruvian geologist from the National University of Engineers participated in the XIX Indian Antarctic expedition as a summer member. In reciprocation, an Indian fisheries expert from Fisheries Survey of India participated in the Peruvian Antarctic expedition for studies on krill biology.

    • India launched its expedition in the year 1999 first time from the Cape town (South Africa) This has given tremendous logistic advantage in addition to the opening new vistas for international cooperation with other countries.

For Madrid Protocol our activities aim at:
    • Implementation of suggested steps in EMP, to minimize the adverse impact to conserve the Antarctic Environment and introduction of EMS.
    • Providing valuable environmental and technological data, useful for the development national and international research
    • Development of strategy to built cooperation with the research programme of other countries for environmental protection


Monitoring Programme
Maitri can accommodate around 25 people during winter (and around 45 people accommodate in summer huts built in front of the Maitri) and was built to keep the environment impact minimum. Sewage treatment is done by the two Rotating Biological Contactor (RBC), to treat the waste obtained from two different sources as urinal and bathroom and from kitchen. The treated waste is collected in oxidation pond, which further partially treat the waste and discharge safely around 300 m away in small pond. The incinerators, electrical generators and effluent of sewage treatment plant are considered to be source of pollution, which is being monitored directly and indirectly. The continuous monitoring programme has improved the environmental status of the Maitri station and surrounding area

The first, second and third continuous monitoring was carried out by the Babha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai  (A premier versatile, technological and multi-disciplinary nuclear research centre of Government of India) for air, water, terrestrial and biological environment during the 8th,9th,and 10th Indian Antarctic expedition in the year 1988,1989 and 1990 respectively, in summer period. The parameters were collected: radon levels around Maitri, indoor radon levels in Maitri station, Gamma dose distribution, heavy metels in air particles (lead, cadmium, copper, zinc), methane levels. Parameters for water environment collected as tritium, heavy metals in seawater, fresh water and Ice (lead, cadmium, copper, zinc). In terrestrial environment concentration of uranium and thorium, heavy metals (lead, cadmium, copper and zinc) in soil samples around Maitri were analyzed. In biological environment the radioactivity levels in biotic samples were collected and analyzed.

 Fourth environmental monitoring programme was implemented in the year 1993 to identify the potential of impacts due to various scientific activities and to keep the negative impact under control on the Antarctic environment due to scientific and logistic activity. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is also prepared to mitigate the adverse impact, which would have arisen due to unforeseen reasons. A significant database is generated by monitoring and analysis of various environmental components viz, air, water, noise, biological and soil. Article 3 of the Protocol also state about the environmental principles for Antarctic activities, providing general guidance for human activities in the Antarctic Treaty area and makes specific reference to monitoring requirement. 

This monitoring was carried out in summer in the year of 1993 during thirteenth expedition by India’s premier institute in environmental research, National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) which is a laboratory of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research CSIR), Government of India. During study the level of oxygen, CO and CO2 are carried out at different location in and around Maitri. Noise monitoring was conducted for various sources to compare with Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHAs). Water, wastewater, noise, sediments and soil samples were collected to evaluate the biotic and abiotic components, physico-chemical parameters, nutrients and demands and heavy metals. Around 200 barrels of solid waste mainly, plastic metal, glass, ash, can and 200 liters of liquid wastes mainly, photographic, chemicals, unserviceable lubricants, and oil, which was collected during the year, removed from the area of Antarctica Treaty and brought back to the country for recycle and safe disposal. An environmental management plan suggested to improve the efficiency of biodisc (RBC), replacement of antifreeze, Methyl Ethylene Glycol (MEG) that was hazardous and was in use to cover the drinking water pipeline, control oil spillage at site. The monitoring results and analysis data are published in “ Technical Publication No 11, Scientific Report, Thirteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Department of Ocean Development 1997, CGO Complex Lodi Road New Delhi,”

Fifth consecutive environmental monitoring was carried out during the fourteen expedition to Antarctica in the year of 1994 in summer period by NEERI. This year the suspended particulate matter (SPM) SO2 and NOx was monitored in ambient air quality of Maitri. Simultaneously samples were collected of water, wastewater, and soil and analyzed for various physicochemical (i.e. pH, temperature, conductivity, turbidity, alkalinity, total hardness, chloride, sulphate, sodium, potassium, nitrate, nitrite, ammonical nitrogen, total phosphate, dissolved oxygen, biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, oil and grease, hydrocarbon and heavy metals like cadmium, copper, chromium, lead, iron and zinc) and biological parameter were also analyzed. The quantification of solid waste including the hazardous waste was also carried, noise monitoring is carried out and all the monitoring results compared with previous year data to find out the level of change in the quality and quantity of the environment. This year the total 240 barrels solid waste is removed from Antarctica Treaty area and brought back to country for safe disposal. Based on the observations and monitoring an environmental management plan was prepared to take corrective measures. This year the suggestions made in earlier EMP was tried to implement i.e. segregation of waste, close burning of waste rather than in open, efforts made to control of wastewater seepage towards lake and surrounding environmental cleaning. “ Technical Publication No 12, Scientific Report, Fourteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Department of Ocean Development 1998, CGO Complex Lodi Road New Delhi,”

Sixth continuous monitoring was carried out during fifteen expeditions to Antarctica in the year of 1995 during summer period. From the station the pollution is observed from stack (small) emission of incinerators, generators and exhaust of vehicles, wastewater from biodisc, household solid and liquid waste, waste generated from experiments such as equipment cover, chemicals etc. This may affect to water, air, soil and biological activity in lake. The monitoring plan was carried out with respect to the indicators i.e. liquid waste from station (sewage and gray), fuel (storage and handling), vehicle and helicopter operation, ambient air quality, biological indicators (only at lake), solid waste (hazardous and non hazardous). To quantify the environmental indicators the sample were collected for air, noise, soil, water and biological component and analyzed. Environmental cleaning was carried out surrounding to the station to clean the scattered material, which were flown during the blizzard. 
Seventh environmental monitoring was carried out during the 18 th expedition where the samples from 38 lakes around the Maitri station were collected and analyzed for various physico-chemical parameters.

Environmental Impact Assessment and 8th Environmental Monitoring
According to the Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica (SCAR, 1996) the monitoring improvement is carried out and implemented which was the intact part of the Post- Environmental Impact Assessment study of during the nineteenth expedition during summer period in the year of 1999. In this year the monitoring was carried out for air (SPM, SO2 and NOx), water/wastewater (pH, temperature, conductivity, turbidity, alkalinity, total hardness, chloride, sulphate, sodium, potassium, nitrate, nitrite, ammonical nitrogen, total phosphate, dissolved oxygen, biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand oil and grease, hydrocarbon and heavy metals like cadmium, copper, chromium, lead, iron and zinc), ambient noise levels were collected on the basis of day-night (Leq) as well as machine noise levels, soil (particle size distribution, bulk density, water holding capacity, porosity, calcium, sodium, potassium, magnesium, oil and grease and hydrocarbons), phytoplankton and zooplankton in water.

This year an attempt is made to validate the air quality model, Industrial Source Complex Short Term Version-3 (ISCST-3) for Maitri station and mixing height is calculated based on the radiosonde dada available from the nearby Russian station. Depth of Priyadarshini lake (source of drinking water) is measured at various places and depth area relation ship is obtained to find out the total quantity of water available and also the during summer the total quantity of water melted and stored in Priyadarshiny lake is also measured form day to day basis of height increment and surface area relationship.
During this year in continuations of earlier expeditions once in 15 days an environmental cleaning of surrounding of Maitri station is carried out. The previous expedition logistic team already removed the antifreeze and other hazardous chemicals that were suggested in previous EMP, to remove from Antarctica treaty and the drinking water pipe is covered with electrical coil heating system to avoid freezing of drinking water source pipeline. 

In continuation of monitoring programme an Environmental Lab is setup at Maitri station to analyse the collected sample there itself and based on the results to control the point source pollution if necessary. It has given new dimensions to the monitoring programme. The physico-chemical analysis of air and water is possible at the laboratory i.e. concentration in air of SO2, NOx, and NH3 and biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, turbidity, pH, oil and grease, dissolved oxygen, and temperature in water and wastewater is possible.

Performance evaluation of biodisc was done to carryout the treatment efficiency of biodisc. The result obtained in the laboratory and found that the performance of biodisc is around 50% so measures were taken to improve the efficiency upto 67% and 76%. A laboratory experiment of tertiary treatment of wastewater is carried out using activated carbon method, which gave the BOD removal upto 84%. An environmental management plan was prepared to mitigate the adverse impact including health and safety of the occupants.

9th environmental monitoring for air and noise is carried out in the year 2000 during twentieth scientific expedition to Antarctica and laboratory experiment conducted to seek the possibility of wastewater treatment by physicochemical method

Tenth environmental monitoring was done during the recent twenty-second expedition in summer and the monitoring is carried out by VJ Technological Institute. During the study the samples of water from various lake and wastewater from the treatment plant are collected and analyzed for the few parameters in the environmental lab at Maitri also. The parameters analyzed i.e. temperature, pH, conductivity, chloride, sulphate, magnesium, aluminum, iron, dissolved oxygen, nitrate in water and pH, total solids, nitrate, chemical oxygen demand, chloride in wastewater sample. Soil sample were also collected and analyzed for physico-chemical parameters.
A continuous measurement of CO2 for throughout the year (started in year 2002, January) is made using automated gas chromatograph at Maitri by National Physical Laboratory. This year since January 2003 a continuous monitoring of Methane and Carbon Monoxide is being monitored and shall be continued throughout the year apart from continuous monitoring of CO2 . 

All the monitoring data and results can be obtained from the data bank and library of
The Diector
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
Head Land Sada, Vasco da Gama
Goa, 403 804
India
Website: www.ncaor.org

 
Waste Management
Station has the systems to collect and segregate the waste as per nature of the waste i.e. bio degradable and non-biodegradable. Further biodegradable waste is also segregated as papers, rags and food waste. Paper rags etc are burnt in a closed room by incinerator and ash is collected in the drums similarly the human excreta is incinerated and the ash are collected into the drum and all the solid waste is removed from the Antarctica and bring to country for safe disposal. The basic aim of this activity to remove the waste from the Antarctica treaty area. In the year 2001-2002 a new incinerator with better performance was installed and old one was dismantled and brought back to India. It was also tested for its efficiency by emission monitoring.


 All the personnel who visit to Antarctica as part of scientific study or logistic support are given environmental training including the fire fighting training which is a measure taken towards safety of the personnel in case of emergency 

Fuel Storage and Handling
The basic fuel used at Maitri station is ATF (Aviation Turbine Fuel) and Petrol in snow scooters. Fuels are stored in barrels in separate place far away from the Maitri station in downwind direction. Proper instructions are given and close monitoring is done by Station-in –charge or the person designated by him as environmental officer.   Fuel transfer from barrel is carried out either on the concrete platform or over the iron sheet pan, which controls the oil spillage as well as oil recovery is possible. 

Conclusion
The environmental monitoring programme at the Indian scientific permanent station was started in the year of 1993 and is continued and discontinued after three years. Further it was enhanced again in the year 1999 and is continued. Environmental component are selected for monitoring are air, water, noise, soil and biological. At Maitri station, based on the EMP suggested each year by the group of environmental scientist is implemented year-to-year basis, which result into improvement in the quality and aesthetics of the station. Due to collection of the data a significant database is generated for future comparison. Indian team members are working also in close cooperation with other country i.e. Peru, Germany, Iran, France, Russia and South Africa. The analysis of data does not shows the significant change in environmental indicator except the increment of Iron in drinking water and presence of biological indicator, which is attributed to use of old iron pipe and seepage of treated wastewater n Priyadarshini lake during summer. However the efficiency of biodisc is improved and further improvement is required for better result. Measures are taken to block the seepage treated water and further improvement is required. This need to continue the regular monitoring activity in order to keep under control any negative impact on the Antarctic environment, surrounding to the Maitri station. The monitoring will be developed in close collaboration with all scientists working during the scientific expedition. An environmental lab is also setup in the station which is a major step towards environmental monitoring programme and which will be strengthened further in coming expeditions.
This is also planned to implement the ISO 14001 certification to the station Maitri to upgrade and proper implementation of environmental management system.

