

ATCM XXVI 
CEP VI
Information Paper IP-xx
Agenda Item ATCM 13/ 
CEP 4 (e)
AUSTRALIA
Original: English













Clean Up of Thala Valley Waste Disposal Site near Casey.
























Submitted by Australia

Introduction

Thala Valley is located near the Australian station of Casey. The Thala Valley rubbish site is relatively small at approximately 2500m3, and was the depository for wastes from Casey station until the late1980s. A wide range of materials, including equipment, food scraps, and workshop waste is contained in the site. 

An earlier attempt to remove large items of debris at Thala Valley was made in the 1995/ 6 season. Monitoring of this activity indicated that it resulted in the release of contaminated materials into the surrounding area, and clean up activities were temporarily ceased.

Under Annex III to the Madrid Protocol, Parties are obliged to remove wastes from Antarctica, however care must be taken to ensure that the removal of waste materials does not result in greater adverse environmental impacts than leaving the waste material in situ. Australia has been very careful in establishing its current operational procedures and concurrent monitoring system to ensure that the clean up of Thala Valley results in a net environmental gain. 

Thala Valley Monitoring Program

The Madrid Protocol places a number of environmental requirements on Parties when planning and conducting activities in Antarctica. In relation to monitoring, these include a requirement for regular and effective monitoring of the impacts of ongoing activities, including the verification of predicted impacts (emphasis added), and also to facilitate early detection of possible unforeseen effects of activities. 

Monitoring the removal of the Thala Valley site is to be conducted using a three tiered approach incorporating short, medium and long term monitoring. Each of these tiers were designed to meet obligations arising under the Madrid Protocol.

Short term monitoring was specifically designed to test predictions about the environmental impacts of the clean up process, as required under the Madrid Protocol. By providing real time data on the impact of operations, it provides the capability to modify clean up procedures if adverse effects are detected and will also facilitate early detection of possible unforeseen effects of the clean up. Monitoring of chemicals contained in tip run-off and sediment material in the adjacent bay will indicate whether contaminants are being dispersed into surrounding areas. Biological monitoring will also be used to determine whether contaminants are absorbed by resident organisms and are entering the food chain.

Medium term monitoring was designed to confirm that the clean up activities did not result in greater adverse environmental impacts to the Thala Valley site and surrounding areas. Contaminants in nearby sediments and within marine organisms will be measured and changes in recruitment rates of local marine organisms will be monitored. Recruitment was selected as this is a key process in determining the future characteristics of a biological community and involves the sensitive early developmental stages of many species. 

Long term monitoring of the Thala Valley site will provide data on whether a net environmental benefit has been achieved or not. Any changes in the structure of the benthic communities in the surrounding waters and at control locations will be monitored and will provide an indication of recovery of the local marine system from contaminants and assist in assessing the long term effects of clean up activities at Thala Valley.

Thala Valley Clean Up Operations

During the 2002/3 season a team of scientists studied the site to determine the type and extent of contaminants present. This work will provide information on how to handle and dispose of contaminated materials to ensure all wastes are removed and treated appropriately according to the type of waste, in accordance with Australian contaminated site requirements. Knowledge of the sites contaminants will also be used to guide clean up operations and determine the boundaries of the clean-up area. 

Preparations for the Thala Valley clean up have now been completed, and Australia is ready to commence operational procedures to remove waste material from Thala Valley. These preparatory measures have included delivery of large pieces of equipment such as a water treatment system, a 30 ton heavy excavator, and over 240 ¼ height containers, as well as testing and establishing drainage systems and barriers and development of particle separation technology. 

Australia intends to remove approximately 80% of the waste material while still frozen before the annual summer melt begins. Clean up activities will begin at the front side of the Thala Valley site, nearest the sea, and work backwards from there. The ¼ height containers will be used in conjunction with geofabric barriers to contain any dislodged contaminants during the waste removal process. If necessary, these could remain frozen in the ground until the next season if removal of materials does not progress as far as hoped. 

Once waste materials are loaded into containers, these will be shipped back to Australia and disposed of appropriately.

Conclusion

Australia is committed to responsible waste management in Antarctica, including cleaning up previous waste sites, provided no further environmental disturbance results in accordance with Annex III of the Madrid Protocol. The three tiered monitoring system Australia has developed for Thala Valley was designed to meet the obligations of the Madrid Protocol, and will not only ensure that clean up operations reach this target, but will also provide further scientific insights into human impacts in Antarctica. 

For further information on the monitoring program undertaken at Thala Valley, please contact Dr Martin Riddle at Martin.Riddle@aad.gov.au. 

For further information on the logistics and operational project undertaken at Thala Valley, please contact Mr Chris Paterson at Chris.Paterson@aad.gov.au.  








