

CEP V
Information Paper IP - ?
CEP Agenda Item 3

Original: English





















Report of the CEP Observer to SC-CCAMLR XXI, 
21 to 25 October 2002





















Submitted by
Australia
Report of the CEP Observer to SC-CCAMLR XXI, 
21 to 25 october 2002

At the second meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), the Chairman of CCAMLR’s Scientific Committee, who attended the CEP as an observer, proposed a reciprocal arrangement whereby a representative of the CEP should attend meetings of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR (SC-CAMLR) as an observer. At CEP-V, Dr Tony Press (Australia) was appointed to represent the CEP at SC-CAMLR XXI (October 2002).
SC-CAMLR XXI was held in Hobart, from 21 to 25 October 2002.  All CCAMLR Members attended. Contracting Parties to the CCAMLR Convention were invited to attend, however none were represented. As part of CCAMLR’s continuing efforts to develop improved relations with non-Contracting Parties with interests in fishing in the Convention Area or trade in toothfish, a number of non-Contracting Parties were invited to attend CCAMLR XXI. Of these non-Contracting Parties, the People’s Republic of China, Mauritius, Mozambique and Seychelles were represented. 
Both the Scientific Committee and the Commission noted that the CEP was represented by Dr Tony Press (Australia).

SC-CAMLR XXI
Ecosystem Monitoring and Management
The Scientific Committee noted that work is continuing on the subdivision of large CCAMLR statistical areas into ecologically based harvesting units. These harvesting units may be further refined as those areas over which CCAMLR conservation objectives will need to be achieved. 

The Scientific Committee endorsed the small scale management units (SSMUs) for Subareas 48.1, 48.2 and 48.3 and also noted that these SSMUs may be useful in developing management procedures for krill fisheries that can adequately account for localised effects on krill predators.

The Scientific Committee considered a review of the Ross Sea marine ecosystem and concluded that the region had experienced relatively little commercial exploitation, had a long history of scientific exploration, and constituted a unique natural location to study the effects of climate change on ecosystem processes.

The Scientific Committee reviewed the report of the Interim Steering Committee for the CEMP Review and endorsed the intersessional work plan. A Workshop on the Review of CEMP will be held during the 2003 meeting of WG-EMM with agreed terms of reference. 
Fishery Status and Trends
Thirteen CCAMLR Members participated in eight fisheries under Conservation Measures in force in the 2001/02 season (1 December 2001 to 30 November 2002). A further five fisheries were undertaken inside EEZs within the Convention Area. The majority of these fisheries targeted Dissostichus spp., while fisheries for icefish, krill and crabs were also undertaken.
Finfish resources - Nine fisheries, including two exploratory fisheries, were carried out for finfish under Conservation Measures in force during the 2001/02 fishing season. Other fisheries were undertaken in the EEZs of the Republic of South Africa and France. It was decided by the Scientific Committee that only catches within the Convention Area available at the start of the Scientific Committee meeting would be considered and that future Scientific Committee meetings will use this approach.

The following table provides information on the reported catches of Dissostichus spp. in 2001/02. 
Table 1. Reported Catches of Dissostichus spp 
Subarea/Division
Total Catch
(tonnes)

2001/02
2000/01
48.3
 5 618

58.5.1 (inside French EEZ)
 2 930

58.5.2 (inside Australian EEZ)
 1 812

58.6 (inside French EEZ)
    989

58.6 (inside Republic of South Africa’s EEZ)
      56

58.7 (inside Republic of South Africa’s EEZ)
      37

88.1 
  1 333

88.2
       41

Convention Area
12 817
13 725
Outside Convention Area*
25 054
33 918
* Most of this catch was reportedly taken from FAO Statistical Areas 51, 57 and 87.
The Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) estimated that illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) toothfish catches for the 2001/02 fishing season totalled 10 898 tonnes, compared with 8 802 tonnes for the 2000/01 fishing season. The Scientific Committee reviewed the historical trends in IUU activity and evaluated the threats arising from IUU fishing. It expressed concern that continued IUU fishing would increase the potential for catastrophic and precipitous declines in stock biomass, and result in dramatic changes in estimates of sustainable yield. The Scientific Committee noted the advice of WG-FSA, where principal concern was directed at the continued high levels of IUU catch reported from FAO Statistical Area 51. WG-FSA undertook a preliminary analysis to address the feasibility of such large catches from FAO Statistical Area 51 and concluded that it is extremely unlikely that such large catches could be taken from the limited available seabed area. There was strong agreement from the Scientific Committee that catches reported from FAO Statistical Area 51 were in fact IUU catches from the Convention Area.
The total reported catch of mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari) for the 2002/02 season was 3 506 tonnes, compared with 2 559 tonnes in the previous season. These fisheries were undertaken in Subarea 48.3 and Division 58.5.2.
Krill resources -  A total of 118 705 tonnes of krill (Euphausia superba) were caught during the 2001/02 fishing season, compared with 93 572 tonnes in 2000/01. The total catch was taken from Area 48 in the South Atlantic by Japan, Poland, Republic of Korea, Ukraine and the USA. The location of fishing activities by Subareas could not be reported at the time because of differences in format of the catch data submitted.
The Scientific Committee noted that the information currently provided from krill fishing nations on their future plans is generally less accurate than is necessary to indicate future trends in the krill fishery. It was agreed that the interpretation of catch per unit effort (CPUE) data from the krill fishery would not be possible without additional information, including vessel type, product type, and that data on such parameters should be sought. 
The Scientific Committee welcomed the market analysis reported by the US krill fishing operation, as well as technological information from patent databases, in an effort to understand the potential development to the fishery. Apparent trends include the increased use of krill for aquaculture and pharmaceutical products rather than human consumption; developments in harvesting methods that may enable production of new products derived from krill; and the expansion of interest from traditional fishing nations to companies from other countries in the development of new products derived from krill.
The Scientific Committee also recognised the importance of identifying the market forces critical to the krill fishery and of evaluating how these might be monitored to assess the development potential of the fishery. The Scientific Committee also noted that the subdivision of the precautionary catch limit of krill in Area 48 into small scale management units (SSMUs) will require a greater degree of fine-scale catch reporting than currently required. It was also noted that the consistency and timeliness of the data reporting was deteriorating. This meant that important relevant aspects of the work of the Scientific Committee were not able to proceed. The Scientific Committee reaffirmed the need for detailed data on catch and effort from krill fisheries.
Crab and squid resource - A single Japanese vessel undertook commercial pot fishing for crabs in Subarea 48.3 in the 2001/02 fishing season. The fishery targeted two species, Paralomis spinosissima and P. Formosa with reported total catches of 56 and 57 tonnes respectively. There was no directed fishery for squid during the 2001/02 season. 
Incidental mortality - The Scientific Committee noted that in respect of by-catch of seabirds, skates, rays and others, there is a need to develop a definition of what constitutes a ‘catch’ and also consider how the categories ‘dead’ and ‘alive’ might be defined to aide scientific observations in fishing seasons.
Analysis of 2002 data for seabird by-catch for regulated fishing in the Convention Area showed a reduction in the seabird by-catch rate in Subareas 58.6 and 58.7 from 199 birds in 2001 to zero observed seabird bycatch in 2002. The reason for this marked reduction is unknown, although fishing effort was greatly reduced. The estimated seabird by-catch for Subarea 48 was 0.0015 birds/thousand hooks (or 6 birds) and similar to last year’s value (0.0014). There was no seabird by-catch reported for Subarea 88.1 or Subarea 88.2. 
The total seabird by-catch for the whole Convention Area for IUU longline fishing in 2001/02 was estimated at 39 000 - 52 000 (lower level) to 70 000 - 93 000 (higher level). This compares with 36 000 - 69 000 (lower level) to 48 000 - 90 000 (higher level) for 2000/01. Since 1996 the overall total estimated potential bycatch is 278 000 - 700 000 seabirds. This comprises of 74 000 - 144 000 albatrosses, 13 000 - 24 000 giant petrels, and 203 000 -378 000 white-chinned petrels.
The Scientific Committee noted that seabird mortality through IUU by-catch affects juvenile as well as adult birds and that the consequences, in terms of measurable changes in breeding populations, will continue to be evident for at least another decade, even if IUU fishing ceased next year. It was also noted that it is possible that future reductions in estimated by-catch rates of seabirds might simply be attributable to the reduced size of populations of seabirds at risk, rather than to genuine improvements in fishing practice.
The Scientific Committee noted and endorsed the advice concerning mitigation measures and indicated its support for incorporating appropriate advice into Conservation Measure 29/XIX, specifically regarding the use of scupper screens to prevent offal discharge, the emerging developments of streamer lines, undertaking trials on bait loss, monitoring the success of underwater setting, and further trialing of line weighting. The Scientific Committee requested that Members further support these research developments.
The Scientific Committee noted that in the Convention Area in 2002 there were no reports of marine mammal mortality in the longline fishery; that one southern elephant seal was reported killed by a trawl vessel in Division 58.5.2; and that one penguin was found dead in the net of a krill trawler in Subarea 48.2. 

Issues taken from SC-CCAMLR to CCAMLR XXI
Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area
The estimated IUU catch for all areas in the 2001/02 fishing season was 10 898 tonnes, compared with an estimated 8 802 tonnes in 2000/01 season. The estimated IUU catch within the Convention Area was 46% of the total catch in 2001/02 compared with 39% in 2000/01. When the 25 054 tonnes of toothfish reported via the CDS as caught outside the Convention Area are added, the total global removal of toothfish in the 2001/02 season is estimated at 48 769 tonnes, compared to 56 445 tonnes during the 2000/01 season. The Commission noted with great concern that the information presented by the Scientific Committee indicated continued high levels of IUU fishing in the Convention Area. The Commission also noted that current levels of IUU fishing have depleted stocks in Division 58.4.4 and in Subareas 58.6 and 58.7, and that catch rates in Division 58.5.1 have substantially declined. 
The majority of the Commission concluded that catches reported from FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57 were not credible and that the veracity of information reported in catch documents did not match available knowledge of toothfish distribution and potential biomass for waters outside the Convention Area in these two adjacent areas. The Commission also noted that current levels of IUU fishing would substantially reduce populations of seabirds which have been taken as by-catch in longline fishing operations.
The Commission endorsed a proposal for a Joint Assessment Group (JAG) comprising members of both the Scientific Committee and the Standing Committee on Inspection and Compliance (SCIC)1. The Commission requested that in the intersessional period the JAG convener develop the terms of reference for the group, create an appropriate membership for the group, and prepare reports to WG-FSA and SCIC. 
The Commission welcomed the development of cooperation with a number of non-Party States to eliminate IUU fishing. It also noted the continued work of the Secretariat in developing a CCAMLR Vessel Database and decided that the Secretariat should continue to collect vessel details and information on vessels’ activities, including a history of IUU activities. 
The Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp., adopted by the Commission at CCAMLR XVIII, requires that Parties document the nature and origin of all toothfish catches, transhipments, landings and imports involving their flag vessels, ports and markets. The CDS came into force on 7 May 2000. The Commission requested all Members fishing for toothfish on the high seas outside the Convention Area to again submit reports next year on vessel monitoring schemes (VMS) and other catch verification procedures. The Commission adopted a set of revised and new conservation measures and resolutions related to the implementation of the CDS, the use of VMS, compliance by Contracting and non-Contracting party vessels with CCAMLR measure, port inspections of vessels carrying toothfish, and harvesting of toothfish outside the Convention Area in FAO Statistical Areas 51 & 57. 
The Commission approved a proposal for a pilot electronic web based CDS in 2002/03. The pilot project will be run in parallel with the current paper system. It will be evaluated and prior to a decision on its implementation in full by the Commission. 
Assessment and avoidance of incidental mortality of Antarctic marine living resources
The Commission reiterated the recommendation of the Scientific Committee that the Secretariat annually produce a report of status and trends relating to observations of marine debris. 
The Commission noted the results of surveys of marine debris on beaches, of entanglement of marine mammals in debris, and of marine debris associated with seabird colonies. It noted that the results of these surveys provided few indications of improvements in the levels of beached marine debris, or of its effects on marine mammals and birds. It was also noted that packaging bands continue to be reported in the debris surveys in Area 48, and that these may also derive from IUU vessels or from fisheries in adjacent areas. 
The Commission endorsed the report of the Scientific Committee in respect of assessment and avoidance of incidental mortality of Antarctic marine living resources and noted:
    • the levels and rates of seabird by-catch in longline fisheries in the Convention Area in 2002 had been the lowest ever recorded;
    • the level of compliance with Conservation Measure 29/XIX2 in 2002 had substantially improved, particularly in respect of the line-weighting element of the measure (for the first time a majority of vessels fishing in the Convention Area had attained at least 95% compliance with all elements of the measure);
    • the progress achieved with research into, and development of, mitigation measures relevant to Conservation Measure 29/XIX, in particular to autoline vessels; and
    • with concern, estimates of potential seabird by-catch associated with IUU longline fisheries in the Convention Area in 2002, which continues to be at levels unsustainable for the populations concerned. 
It also endorsed the advice of the Scientific Committee including: reaffirmation of support for, and encouragement of, Members’ contributions towards a key experiment concerning mitigation measures for the Spanish system longline fishery; and the need for continued submission by Members of data on seabird populations, sizes, foraging ranges and provenance by-catch. 
The Commission expressed concern at the absence of by-catch data from longline vessels fishing in French EEZs in Subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1, given the apparent high by-catch rates of white-chinned petrels in these areas.
The Commission noted that there had been limited and unsatisfactory intersessional contact with Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMOs) with competences in areas adjacent to the Convention Area regarding the issue of incidental mortality of seabirds. It requested that Members, who are also members of other RFMOs, ensure that the issue of seabird by-catch is included on the agendas of appropriate meetings of all relevant RFMOs.
The Commission endorsed the advice of the Scientific Committee that a catch limit of 20 birds per vessel should not restrict most of the fishing fleet but could suffice as an appropriate interim measure for protecting seabirds while maintaining by-catch rates at levels not dissimilar from the longline fishery in the area.
New and Exploratory Fisheries, Precautionary Catch Limits, and By-catch
The Commission noted that 13 notifications of new or exploratory fisheries had been made in 2001/02 but that fishing occurred in respect of only two of these in Subareas 88.1 and 88.2, and that only New Zealand-flagged vessels had participated in these fisheries. 
Eight notifications of exploratory fisheries were made for 2002/03 and there were no notifications of new fisheries. As in previous years, the Commission also noted that there had been a large number of notifications for Subareas 48.6, 88.1 and 88.2, and Division 58.4.4. In fisheries with low precautionary catch limits, this implied that if all vessels operated simultaneously, the available catch per vessel could be lower than that required for economic viability. 
The Scientific Committee estimated the precautionary catch limits for toothfish in Subarea 88.1 and 88.2 using new data, however, it was unable to provide new advice on precautionary catch limits in new or exploratory fisheries in 2002/03 in the other areas. The Commission noted that the increased revised estimates of yield for Subareas 88.1 and 88.2 should be treated with considerable caution. Further, it was noted that the Scientific Committee had advised that the approach employed to estimate yield for Subareas 88.1 and 88.2 may no longer be applicable and this would be reviewed at the 2003 meeting of WG-FSA. The Commission agreed that the catch limit in Subareas 88.1 and 88.2 in 2001/02 would not be increased by more than 50%. 
Conservation Measures
A total of twenty-two new Conservation Measures were adopted by the Commission, twelve Measures were revised, and two new Resolutions adopted. The Measures dealt with the CDS, the compliance of vessels with CCAMLR Measures, research plans, prohibition of directed fisheries, experimental line-weighting trails, precautionary and total catch limits for established fisheries, and new and exploratory longline and trawl fisheries for toothfish and other finfish species.
At CCAMLR XXI, the Commission introduced a new numbering system for Conservation Measures in force. The numbering system for Resolutions remains unchanged.
Assessment of Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas which include Marine Areas
The Commission noted that on 24 May 2002, Annex V of the Protocol on the Environmental Protection came into force. As a result, management plans for four protected areas with marine components were forwarded to CCAMLR for review. Three of the sites had already been afforded protection as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) under the Antarctic Treaty. These were SSSI Nos. 1 (Cape Royds), 35 (Western Bransfield Strait), and 36 (Eastern Dallman Bay). The fourth site proposed was a new protected area in Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. On advice from the Scientific Committee, the Commission approved the four management plans and agreed to transmit recommendations for improvements to the originators of the four plans.
The Commission commended Italy for bringing forward the Terra Nova Bay proposal. This was the first time that the procedures agreed between the ATCM and CCAMLR on protected areas with marine components had been fully implemented.
The Commission endorsed the new name and future tasks of the WG-EMM subgroup ‘Advisory Subgroup on Protected Areas’.
