º


















26 ATCM (2003)

Information Paper
Scoping Paper on
intersessional consultation process between the Secretariat and ATCM
Submitted by Japan

This non-paper relates to the question of possible inter-sessional consultation mechanism between the secretariat and the ATCM (Article 3 paragraph 3 of the draft Measure).  The purpose of this paper is to clarify the issues surrounding this question, by re-examining the provisions of the several documents on the establishment of the AT Secretariat.

The paper tries to identify those provisions that may require (1) some kind of intersessional consultation process (without prejudice to the nature of that process) between the Secretariat and the ATCM（▲）, and (2) some kind of intersessional decision-making by the ATCM（●）.

In Japan’s opinion, first, the question relating to intersessional consultation (1=▲) and that relating to intersessional decision-making (2=●) should be clearly distinguished.  Second, for those issues which may require intersessional consultation between the secretariat and the ATCM, the question then becomes whether we should set up a formalized consultation mechanism beyond everyday informal contacts between the secretariat and the Consultative Parties.

Measure:
▲Article 2 paragraph 2 chapeau: general functions of the secretariat
These functions are to be performed “under the direction and supervision of ATCM.”　→　normal contacts with CPs or a mechanism to consult with the ATCM?
  Article 3 paragraph 3: appointment of Executive Secretary
Appointed at the ATCM meeting.  
If accident happens to him between the meetings, the second ranking officer will assume his duties until the next ATCM meeting. →Staff Regulation + normal contacts with the CPs.
▲Article 4 paragraph ?:  Financial management and budgetary matters
ATCM authorizes the ES to manage the finance of the secretariat in accordance with the Financial Regulations.  Supervision of the financial management → normal contacts with the CPs or a mechanism to consult with the ATCM (see particular Australian proposal to establish a standing committee, ATCM XXV Inf. Paper)?
  Article 5 paragraph 3:  Exercise of legal capacitites
ATCM, by adopting this measure, authorizes the listed capacities to be excercised.  No need to consult with ATCM. → Normal contacts with the CPs.
●Article 5 paragraph 4:  Exercise of specific capacities: immovable property and legal proceedings.
Need prior approval of the ATCM. →　May require intersessional decision on behalf of the ATCM.

HQ Agreement:
　Article 2 paragraph 1 and 2:  Exercise of legal capacity under ATCM authorization.
See above on Measure Article 5 paragraphs 3 and 4. 
●Article 5 paragraph 2:  Waiver of privileges and immunities
	Must be waived by the ATCM.  May require intersessional decision on behalf of the ATCM.
  Article 22: consultation between Argentine government and the secretariat
Referral of matters to the ATCM. → normal contacts with the CPs?

Financial Regulations:  Substantial revisions will still be made and, therefore, the following is a preliminary analysis.

▲Rule 3.1: Preparation of a budget
Mandate of the Executive Secretary, but may need input from Consultative Parties: →　budget format decided by the ATCM (Rule 3.4); budget discussion can take place during ATCM within a WG; normal contacts with the CPs or a mechanism for intersessional consultation (See particular comment by UK for Rule 3.7.)?
　　Rule 4.2: financial obligations incurred against future years
Authorization from the ATCM required. →　during ATCM.
●Rule 6.3 : Establishment of Trust and Special Funds.
Established by the secretariat at the direction of the ATCM.  → May require intersessional decision or wait until the next ATCM?
▲Rule 7.2: Acceptance of voluntary contribution from Parties.
For evaluation as to their consistency with the purpose of the Treaty. →　May require intersessional consultation or wait until next ATCM?
●Rule 7.2: Acceptance of voluntary contributions from non-Parties.
Requires agreement by the ATCM. → May require intersessional decision or wait until next ATCM?
  Rule 8.2 (b): longer-term investment of moneys
Requires authorization by the ATCM. → wait until next ATCM?
※Rule 11.4: External auditor reporting to ATCM as to any doubts on accounts
May require intersessional consultation between the external auditor and the ATCM.

Staff Regulations:  Substantial revisions will still be made and, therefore, the following is a preliminary analysis.

●Rule 2.5: Release of information for official purposes
Authorization from ATCM or the Exe. Secretary, as the case may be, is required.  → May require intersessional decision on behalf of the ATCM.
  Rule 2.6: Other employment by the Exe. Secretary.
Prior authorization is required.  →　May require intersessional decision, or wait until the next ATCM?
  Rule 5.5: Promotion of Exe. Secretary to higher salary level.
Prior approval is required. → During the ATCMs.
●Rule 10.1 and 10.2: Prior notification for resignation of Exe. Secretary
Lesser period of notification with approval of ATCM and ATCM’s right to decide whether repatriation expenses be paid. → May require intersessional decision by the ATCM.
▲Rule 10.3: termination of appointment of staff members by the Exe. Secretary
Consultation with ATCM is usual for such an important decision by the Exe. Secretary. → May require intersessional consultation.
▲Rule 12.1: doubts as to the application of the Regulations
Consultation with the ATCM is required. → May require intersessional sconsultation.
▲●Rule 12.2: all matters not foreseen in the Regulations to be brought to the ATCM’s attention. → Depending on the nature of the matter, may require intersessional consultation with and/or decision by the ATCM.





