

ATCM XXVI 
Information Paper IP-xx
Agenda Item ATCM 10
CEP item 4(c)
AUSTRALIA
Original: English













COMPARISON OF EIA PROCESSES 
FOR ANTARCTIC NON-GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES 























Submitted by Australia
COMPARISON OF EIA PROCESSES
FOR ANTARCTIC NON-GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES

1.	Introduction

This paper summarises the findings and conclusions of a study conducted in 2002 by a student at the University of Tasmania. The study involved a survey of the environmental impact assessment (EIA) processes and requirements of Parties to the Antarctic Treaty as applied to non-government activities in Antarctica. The survey involved a series of questions (see Appendix 1) on implementation of the Madrid Protocol and its EIA processes. The Parties who responded to the survey were Australia, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, the United States of America and the United Kingdom, and one of its overseas territories.

2.	Ratification of the Madrid Protocol and implementation of EIA processes

Parties whose nationals operate or participate in non-government activities in Antarctica generally have legal provisions in place to regulate these activities and their impact on the Antarctic environment. Annex I of the Madrid Protocol provides guidance on EIA processes for all activities in Antarctica, including non-government operations. All Parties surveyed have ratified the Protocol.

Most Parties surveyed have implemented their EIA obligations in domestic law. Different implementation devices are used such as declarations, legislation and regulations depending on the legal systems of the Parties. A discussion of differences between the content of domestic legal provisions appears at Section 5. Generally, the EIA processes of the Parties surveyed closely reflect the Protocol and Annex I, although some Parties surveyed do not appear to meet the requirement for a public consultation period for Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs).

Under Parties’ domestic law, most EIAs for government and non-government expeditions are assessed in a similiar way with the exception of one Party which has an additional mechanism aimed at greater public accountability for governmental activites. By assessing applications in a consistent way, a high degree of uniformity is achieved and it is easier for Parties to assess the cumulative impacts of their nationals. 

As well as an EIA process, many Parties have a permitting system of some form in place to control activities in Antarctica. Of the Parties surveyed, four Parties require permits for all non-government Antarctic activities. Other Parties only require permits under certain circumstances, for example in relation to a particular activity such as taking flora or fauna, or entry into a protected area. 
	
Administrative arrangements for EIAs differ between Parties with respect to the agencies responsible for assessment and approvals. For most Parties surveyed, environmental agencies assess tourism EIAs, although for two Parties this is done by their foreign ministries.
 
Most Parties have a separate assessing officer and approvals officer. In addition, all assessment officers have suitable environmental experience to assess applications, or use the services of experts to make an assessment. 

Most Parties monitor activities for compliance, although one does not, and one Party relies on operators to self monitor. Observers are used on some activities by two Parties as a form of independent verification of adherence to EIA provisions. Some Parties have provision for enforcement and penalty provisions, including fines and imprisonment, for breaches of EIA approvals. No Parties have refused a permit for non-government activities; indeed the EIA system of one Party prevents it from refusing a permit.  

3.	Minor and transitory impacts

None of the Parties surveyed had defined the terms ‘minor’ or ‘transitory’, although one Party has regulated the term ‘more than minor or transitory’ to mean the same as ‘significant’ under other relevant domestic environmental regulations. 

The ambiguous nature of this term, along with the lack of common guidelines in the Protocol appears to create an issue of consistency between Parties. A common problem identified by survey respondents with evaluation of  EIA applications was that operators did not provide enough information, or did not have an adequate understanding of what impacts should be included as part of the EIA process. The comment has been made that an agreed standard, or even examples of minor and transitory impacts, would assist operators and assessors alike in the EIA process. 

4.	Cumulative environmental impacts

Cumulative environmental impacts may occur when there are multiple visits to one area over time, or multiple visits to adjoining areas. Article 2, 1 (b) of Annex I of the Protocol requires that an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) must include consideration of cumulative impacts in the light of existing and known planned activities. 

The survey showed that, in general, Parties have put in place EIA assessment processes that allow them to conform to the Annex I requirement, however, consideration of cumulative of impacts and provision of information on its effects is done by operators rather than national authorities. It may be unreasonable to expect tour operators to assess their input to cumulative impacts, as this may be more effectively undertaken by national authorities unless particular operators are the only visitors to particular sites. 

Currently, one of the main barriers to effective evaluation of cumulative impacts appears to be the lack of available quantitative and comparable data in EIAs or from other sources. Without knowing the type and extent of impacts that can be attributed to other non-government operators in a particular area, it can be impossible for individual operators to assess cumulative impacts. 

If operators are to accurately report on their potential cumulative impacts, they must have access to criteria and methods for measuring those impacts as well as with baseline or current data for the areas that they propose to visit. A database of EIAs assessed by Parties would be very beneficial in assessing cumulative impacts. Likewise, a database or GIS system with locations of operations would assist assessment by Parties of the potential impacts of tourism on previously unvisited sites.







5.	Consistency between Parties in assessment processes

While most Parties surveyed have an EIA assessment process in place under domestic law, the processes differ. Characteristics that vary between Parties include:

    • The time an EIA should be submitted before departure vaired from six weeks to one year, with the most common period between three to six months. 

    • With the exception of three respondents, Parties required or encouraged proponents to consult with environmental experts when preparing their EIAs. The assessment of mechanisms for environmental training and guidance for tourism operators are not present in any of the EIA processes, although some Parties require that passengers receive environmental information and / or training (such as notification of legal obligations). 

    • Two Parties required operators to pay an assessment fee.

    • Most Parties required public consultation at the CEE level. Only one Party required public consultation at the IEE level with others making it a standard practice. One Party provides details of IEE assessments to the public via a website. 

    • Two Parties have implemented special EIA arrangements that allow for multi-season activities. 

6.	Multi-Party operations and jurisdictional issues

The nature of Antarctic tourism activities is such that they may encompass areas administered by different Parties. There are currently no prescribed methods of consultation or co-approval of multi-jurisdictional non-government operations. 

Most Parties recognise EIA approvals undertaken by other Parties, although some may require the assessment to be of an equivalent standard, and not in conflict with relevant domestic legislation. Only one Party indicated that they would liase with another Party if an assessment it was undertaking involved the jurisdiction of that Party / Parties. 

The report suggested that a database of all Antarctic non-government EIA assessments endorsed by Parties could assist in inter-Party co-operation in relation to multi-jurisdictional operations. It would also facilitate better knowledge for individual Parties to know what their own nationals are doing. The report also suggested that Parties could consider implementing a system whereby non-government proponents are required to provide information in their EIAs on whether other Parties have been consulted or are to be consulted as part of the EIA process. 

7.	Conclusion

Preliminary results of a comparison between the EIA processes of Parties in relation to non-government activities in Antarctica indicate that there are a number of differences between them, but that generally the objectives and obligations of the Protocol are being implemented. 

It also appears that a structure to facilitate the exchange information on non-government EIAs would be useful in assisting Parties when assessing cumulative impacts and fulfilling Protocol obligations. A database of non-government EIA assessments may assist such an exchange of information. 

For further information or to obtain raw data from the survey, please contact the Australian Antarctic Division at  tourism@aad.gov.au. 

Appendix 1

SURVEY QUESTIONS


*Note that the term Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was taken to include Preliminary Assessments and Initial Environmental Evaluations, as these may be the usual terms used to describe the EIA process.

1. 	What domestic legislation is applicable to the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process?

2. 	What government agency assesses for non-government activities? (for example, which parts of government assess or approve the EIA?)

3. 	What are the steps/procedures undertaken as part of that EIA assessment?
Which officer undertakes and/or authorises the EIA? (i.e. Is the authorising officer the same person as the assessing officer?)

4. 	Is there a standard form or document used by non-government expeditions and/or tourism operators for preparing an EIA or for guiding proponents in the preparation of their EIA? 
(If so, can you provide a copy?)
Does that document and/or relevant domestic legislation define “minor” or “transitory” impact?

5. 	How long before departure of the non-government activity should an EIA be submitted? 

6. 	Is public consultation required in the EIA process?
If so, at what stage in the process and for what level of assessment (i.e. Preliminary Assessment, Initial Environmental Evaluation & Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation)?

7. 	Are the EIA assessment and authorisation procedures the same for both government and non-government expeditions and/or for large versus small non-government operators?
If not, how do they differ?

8. 	Are there any special arrangements made for assessment of EIAs for particular operators (such as granting of multi-year approvals)?

9. 	Are EIA proponents obliged/encouraged to consult with environmental experts during preparation of the EIA and/or use an environmental expert to prepare the EIA?

10. 	Are potential cumulative impacts of non-government activities considered in the EIA process?

11. 	How do you assess the potential impacts of non-government activities on previously unvisited sites?

12. 	Are issues other than environmental factors considered during the EIA process (for example, safety or potential disruption to national or scientific programs)?

13. 	Is a formal permit required/issued for any non-government activities?
If so, which government agency/officer issues it, under what domestic legislation and for what types of activities/circumstances?

14. 	Do non-government operators pay a fee for EIA assessment or for the issuing of a permit?
If so, how much does the assessment cost?

15. 	Are non-government activities required to have insurance to cover emergencies or to indemnify national programs?
If so, is a particular level of insurance required?

16. 	Is any compliance monitoring undertaken or required for non-government activities (e.g. use of observers on non-government expeditions and/or provision of post-expedition reports)?
 If so, how are any breaches of EIA approvals addressed?

17. 	Do you accept EIA approvals undertaken by other Antarctic Treaty Parties (in place of your own approvals) and, if so, under what circumstances?
If the EIA involves another Treaty Party (e.g. the proposed activity involves the territorial claim of another treaty party), how do you liaise with other treaty parties over the EIA?

18. 	Do you have mechanisms for providing environmental training/guidance to non-government operators to assist with their Antarctic activities? 
If so, who provides the training and at what cost to the operator? 
Is there a requirement that passengers receive environmental training/information prior to/during the voyage as part of the EIA approval process?
(Please provide copies of any environmental guidance material if available).

19. 	Have you ever refused a non-government activity and if so, what were the circumstances/reasons?

20. 	Are there any common problems that you have encountered in undertaking non-government EIA assessments (for example, insufficient information provided by proponents)?














