MADRID, 9/20 • 06 • 2003

XXVI ATCM
Information Paper
IP-068-CZ
Agenda Item: VI CEP 4b
Czech Republic
Original: English

CZECH SCIENTIFIC STATION IN ANTARCTICA
CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION

Madrid, 9/20 de junio 2003
Draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation
for

Czech Scientific
Station in Antarctica
Construction and Operation

Ministry of the Environment
the Czech Republic

April 2003
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Contents                                                                     page

1. Desription of the purpose and need of the activity                          4
    1. 1. Basic data on the project                                            4
    1. 2. Context and reasons for the station's construction                  5
    1. 3. History of the project                                               6

2. Description of the proposed activities                                     9
    2. 1. Location                                                            9
    2. 2. Scientific activities proposed for Czech Antarctic station          9
    2. 3. Brief description of the station design                            10
    2. 4. Brief description of the buildings                                 12
    2. 5. Transport requirements and other infrastructures                  16

3. Description of the initial environmental reference state and prediction of the
environment state in absence of the activity                                 17
    3. 1. Air                                                                17
    3. 2. Soil                                                               17
    3. 3. Water                                                              18
    3. 4. Environmental geofactors                                           18
    3. 5. Fauna and flora                                                    19
    3. 6. Ecological stability and the nature of the landscape               22
    3. 7. Protected areas and historical monuments                           22
    3. 8. Areas of mineral resources                                         23
    3. 9. Other characteristics of the environment                          23

4. Direct impacts of the planned activity                                    24
    4. 1. Air and climate                                                    24
    4. 2. Water                                                              24
    4. 3. Impacts on soil, land and bedrock                                  25

5. Waste                                                                     26
    5. 1. Waste from the station's construction                              26
    5. 2. Waste resulting from the station's operation                       26
    5. 3. Waste water                                                        28
    5. 4. Waste management plan                                              29

6. Noise, vibrations                                                         30

7. Radioactive and electromagnetic radiation                                30

8. Impacts on flora and fauna                                                31

9. Impacts on ecosystems                                                     31

10. Impacts on the anthropogenic systems, their components and functions     31

11. Description of the operational safety risks                              32

12. Minimization of the environment impacts                                  32
    12. 1. Description of proposed alternative solutions                     32

13. Description of the proposed measures to prevent, eliminate, minimize or compensate
environmental impacts                                                        35

14. Description of methods and data used to forecast impact                  36

15. Outline of monitoring programme                                          36

16. Gaps and uncertainties affecting the EIA                                 37

17. Conclusions                                                             38

18. Non-technical summary                                                    39

19. References/Sources                                                       40

Annexes of CEE                                                               41
                                                                             2
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 1   Area of Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula with locations of sites assessed in connection with        42
              the intention of the station's construction    

Annex No. 2   Satellite photograph of James Ross Islad with the research interest area marked                        43

Annex No. 3   Northern part of James Ross Island - 8 assessed alternatives, arrow pointed at the final location        44

Annex No. 4   Aerial photograph of Site No. 4, construction site marked (photo by J. Strelin)                        45

Annex No. 5   Temperatures, wind direction and intensity on James Ross Island (J. Strelin)                        46

Annex No. 6   Table of the analysis of compared alternatives of the project                                          47

Annex No. 7   The influence of station's operation on air quality -dispersion study                                  48

Annex No. 8   Acoustic study                                                                                       57

                                                                                                                                             3
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

1. Description of the purpose and need of the activity

This Draft CEE follows the requirements in Annex I, Article 3 of the Protocol on Enviromental 
Protection to the Antartic Treaty. Annex I provides for different impact categories (less than, equal 
to and more than minor or transitory) and establishes a basic principle to carry out Enviromental 
Impact Assessment (EIA). The proposed activity needs to be preceded by a Comprehensive 
Enviromental Evaluation (CEE), if the predicted impacts are to be more than minor or transitory. 
This will include specific measures, monitoring and auditing to minimize the enviromental impacts 
of the project within the limits predicted in the CEE.

Information about the project was submitted at XXV ATCM Warsaw, Poland, 9 - 20 September 
2002 on the meeting CEP V and is published as Information paper No. IP 93 4c on the website 
http://www.npolar.no/cep/Content/cep_archive/CEP_V_Documents.htm

1.1.  Basic data on the project

Applicant:
Masaryk University in Brno, Faculty of Science, Žerotínovo náměstí, Brno, authorized by the 
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic.

Contact person: Prof. Pavel Prosek, PhD., prosek@geogr.muni.cz, Tel. +420 541 220 421, Fax. 
+420 542 123 301

Project designer:
Investprojekt spol. s r.o. Zlín, bří Jaroňků 4079 , CZ - 760 01 Zlín
Contact person: Ing. Alois Suchánek, E-mail: suchanek@psg.cz, Te. +420 577 436 324

CEE Editor:
Vlastimil Kostkan Werichova 14, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech Republic, Kost@prfnw.upol.cz
CEE co-authors: Alois Suchánek, Pavel Prošek, Libor Ládiš, Kateřina Karlová, Marek Vach, 
Kateřina Čechová, Pavlína Samsonová

Starting period of construction:
Year 2003

Finishing period of construction:
Year 2004, full operation should start in 2005. Suggested lifetime of the station is 20 - 30 years.

Expected costs:
The costs of the station's construction and equipment are expected to amount to approximately 
1,600.000 USD.

Comments to Draft CEE should be addressed to:
Zdenek Venera, Ministry of the Environment, Vrsovicka 65, Prague 100 10, Czech Republic 
venera@env.cz, tel.+420 267 122 051, fax +420 272 743 767
copy to:
Vlastimil Kostkan Werichova 14, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech Republic, Kost@prfnw.upol.cz
                                                                                             4
1.2.  Context and reasons for the station's construction

The Czech Republic has become an active participant in the scientific research of the Antarctica 
and in the protection of its environment.

• The Czech Republic intends to participate in international organizations which co-ordinate the 
scientific research and the environmental protection of the Antarctica.

• The Czech Republic intends to achieve a consultative status in the Antarctic Treaty Parties.

• The Czech Republic is going to prepare and sing agreements concerning the co-operation in 
scientific research in the Antarctic with other countries in case of joint interest.

• The systematic activities of the Czech scientists in the Antarctic would open possibilities to 
establish the National Institute for Antarctic Research.

• The financial budget given by the Czech government is not high enough to provide a systematic 
research under conditions offered by countries which possess stations in the Antarctica.

A plan for the construction of an original Czech scientific station was set up following many 
years' activities of Czech scientists in the Antarctic area, in particular during the last seven years, 
and also following the recommendation of leading international scientific institutions, notably Scott 
Institute of Polar Research, Cambridge University, represented by Dr. Bernard Stonehouse. The 
station should be located in such a place that would enable by its accessibility a seasonal function, 
i.e. providing conditions for several-months' systematic work. At the same time, the location must 
be easily accessible during summer for transport of persons and material as well as for emergency 
cases, e.g. acute diseases, etc.

Due to the above-mentioned facts and the tradition of Czech research activities in Antarctica 
during the fifties and sixties (astrophysics, geophysics, meteorology, geology), and also following the 
experience of research programmes in the nineties, a group of Czech scientists from several 
institutions decided to formulate a plan for the construction of the first official Czech Antarctic 
station, which is a necessary condition for future successful development of research activities.

Among the leading institutions that have participated in research programmes in the polar areas, 
we can mention especially the departments of geography, plant physiology and anatomy, zoology 
and ecology and also the department of analytic chemistry by the Faculty of Science of Masaryk 
University in Brno, where continuous and consistent research of polar areas has been carried out. 
Botanical Institute of the Academy of Science of the Czech Republic, the Department of the 
Environment of the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering of Czech Technical University in Prague 
and other scientific institutions permanently cooperate on the projects. The operation of the station 
should also extend international collaboration. All aforesaid institutions have systematically supplied 
technical means, i.e. monitoring stations for various geographic measurements and researches, 
devices for the measurements of the properties of the environment of flora and the parameters 
defining the living conditions of flora and fauna as well as for the research of the most universal 
conditions of global climate and the problems of common aspects of the environment.

Besides the above described professional readiness of the Czech scientists acquired mainly 
during several expeditions to Spitsbergen, to the Canadian Arctic and to the Antarctic, the 
construction of the official Czech station is also supported by the knowledge of the function of 
several polar stations, their technology and logistics.

Based on our own knowledge of and experience with terrain research, the site of Turret Point on 
King George Island in the South Shetlands was assessed as the first alternative. An advance team 
visited this locality in austral summer 2000. For this locality, a detailed construction plan of the
5
station was drawn. Terrain research aimed at the station's location and the accessibility of the subjects of research program interest was carried out, as well as a model dispersion study on the influence of the station on air quality, and a noise study. The locality was investigated with respect to the occurrence of organisms and the site's importance as a potential bird nesting area, or as a locality for resting and breeding of pinnipeds.

Trying to locate the station with respect to its minimum environmental impact, we also considered the use of old and currently not-operating stations of other countries that could be reconstructed or replaced by a new station at a previously used site. Consequently, we also considered the possibility of carrying out research projects at new localities, as well as near the former stations Danco and Rothera. This possibility was rejected, and our attention shifted to the area of relatively little-researched islands to the east of Antarctic Peninsula. Based on consultation with and recommendation of BAS specialists in Cambridge, we assessed Brandy Bay on James Ross Island as another potentially suitable site. Then, after specific terrain reconnaissance and the recommendation of Instituto Antarctico Argentino (IAA) in Buenos Aires, seven further sites on this island were assessed.

This documentation on environmental impact evaluation of the proposed structures is, therefore, a summary of theoretical and terrain survey of the Turret Point location on King George Island. It also comprises a brief analysis of the possible utilization of old and currently not-operating stations within the interest area.

1. 3. History of the project

In the late eighties, when the eastern political block started to collapse, Czech scientists started to work in polar research. Masaryk University in Brno and former Czechoslovak Academy of Science organized several research expeditions to the Spitsbergen area. Later opportunities to participate in international research projects quickly increased. Czech researchers took part, for example, in research projects on Ellesmere Island in the Canadian Arctic, in the South Shetlands, and elsewhere. Currently, several projects have been conducted in the Arctic and Antarctic. Our activities cover a wide spectrum of scientific disciplines focused mainly on terrestrial and freshwater ecology and biology, bioclimatology, and meteorology.

We started to discuss the possibility of the construction of a Czech national research station in Antarctica during our research project at the Polish station, H. Arctowski, in Admiralty Bay on King George Island, South Shetlands Archipelago. Since we were familiar with the environment of the South Shetlands, we proposed to build the Czech scientific station at Turret Point in the north-eastern part of King George Island. The Czech government via the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports started to finance the station's construction in 2001. Professor Pavel Prosek of Masaryk University in Brno became the head of the project. The project was introduced at the Antarctic Treaty Meeting held in St. Petersburg, Russia, in 2001. A discussion concerning the project arose because some Antarctic Treaty countries did not recommend the construction at Turret Point. The main reason for their concern was the current existence of a number of stations on King George Island. British and Ukraine delegations kindly offered their help with the survey of further localities around the Antarctic Peninsula that could be suitable for the station's location.

In October 2001, we were invited by BAS representatives to Cambridge to discuss the problematics, and we were offered several sites where BAS had carried out research. Danco Station (Danco Island in the Anvers Islands area) appeared the most suitable due to the possibility of logistic cooperation. 
6
Prof. P. Prosek (head of the project) and Ing. A. Suchánek (chief engineer) visited the island with 
a Ukraine vessel at the beginning of 2002. They concluded that the proposed island area is not 
suitable because the deglaciated area, which would be available for research activities, is highly 
limited.

Dr. Z. Venera and Dr. J. Elster were invited by BAS to participate in the Ernest Shackleton 
research cruise from the Falkland Islands to Rothera Station and back. During the trip, they 
discussed the construction of a Czech scientific station with Captain Stuart Lawrence, other 
members of the vessel's crew, and Rothera Station workers. They also studied various maps and 
literature at Rothera Station and in the ship's library. Finally, James Ross Island near the north-
eastern edge of the Antarctic Peninsula was proposed as a locality suitable for the station's location. 
Large areas of the island are deglaciated and comprise a wide spectrum of various freshwater and 
terrestrial habitats. BAS organized several geological research programmes on James Ross Island but 
no research station has been constructed there. The only structure in this area is the Argentinean 
Refugio near Brandy Bay. Because the Ernest Shackleton vessel had to return quickly to the 
Falkland Islands to meet the time schedule, the group did not manage to visit James Ross Island.

Because of the need to have another (reserve) site for the station's location, we asked BAS 
representatives to extend Dr. Elster's stay on board the Ernest Shackleton for the journey to the 
South Orkney (Signy Island) and South Georgia. The geographical and natural conditions of the 
South Orkney, especially Signy Island, were discussed again with Captain Lawrence, and written 
sources were studied again.

Based on the gathered data, another expedition to the area was organized for March 2003 to 
survey the proposed part of Brandy Bay on James Ross Island. It was led by Prof. Pavel Prosek – 
climatologist and the head of the project; other members included Ing. Alois Suchanek – 
construction engineer and the station's chief engineer, Dr. Vlastimil Kostkan – biologist and editor 
of CEE, and Dr. Vladimir Vascenko – geophysicist and the deputy head for logistic operation of the 
Ukraine Antarctic Center. This expedition was organized with the kind help of Prof. Enrique 
Marschoff – the head of Instituto Antartico Argentino (IAA), in close collaboration with specialists 
from this institute, namely Dr. Jorge Strelin – geomorphologist and the employee of IAA and Centro 
Austral de Investigaciones Cientificas (CADIC), and Dr. Cesar A. Torielli – geologist and 
geomorphologist, the employee of Universidad Cordoba, who have been working on James Ross 
Island for many years and have sound knowledge of the area.

After the air transport to an Argentinean military base Marambio, deplaning on the site should 
have taken place. However, the plan had to be changed due to limited chances of helicopter 
utilization during the supplying operations at Marambio and Esperanza stations as well as poor 
accessibility of the locations at the end of austral summer by Twin Otter, which can land on glaciers. 
Therefore, upon their return to Buenos Aires, the expedition members carried out a week's 
theoretical analysis of James Ross Island together with IAA experts. The source materials were 
supplied mainly by the above mentioned Argentinean colleagues, and by Dr. Juan Manuel Lirio – 
geologist and IAA employee who has been working in the area as well.

There were analyzed satellite and detailed aerial photographs of James Ross' northern coast, 
geological and geomorphological maps, detailed aerial photographs and photo-documentation of the 
terrain of the island's north coast. Besides the aforesaid data, the terrain experience of IAA experts 
proved valuable, especially their knowledge of climatic conditions of individual parts of the island, 
geological conditions, accessibility for disembarkation, construction and provision, of location, yield 
and quality of water sources, orientation of locations with respect to solar and wind sources of 
energy, etc.
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

After a week's work, altogether eight locations on the coast of the northern part of the island were selected. Sequential exclusion analysis, using a advantage-disadvantage matrix, resulted in the choice of a priority location, so far called "Site No. 4".

                                                                                                                                             8
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

2. Description of the proposed activities

2. 1. Location

James Ross Island, "Site No. 4"
(see Annex 3 and 4)

| Alternatives | James Ross Island, 8 possible sites in the north of the island |
|             | King George Island, South Shetlands Archipelago, Turret Point       |
|             | former British station on Danco Island, Anvers Islands, Port Lockroy Island, Livingston Island, Signy Island |

2. 2. Scientific activities proposed for the Czech Antarctic station

(for more details see Information Paper 93, ATCM XXV/CEP V)

Czech terrestrial research programme is proposed as an interdisciplinary long-term ecological project. The programme is established on previous research experience of Czech scientists in the Arctic and the Antarctic, and it covers the following scientific fields:

· PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY (geology and geomorphology, climatology, hydrology, glaciology and pedology)

· CHEMISTRY (analytical and physical chemistry, biochemistry of low temperatures)

· BIOLOGY (terrestrial ecology, wetland ecology - limnology, soil biology, microbiology, botany 
- algology, lichenology, bryology, zoology - vertebrate ecology, ornithology, entomology, 
paleoecology, stress physiology, and taxonomy)

The mentioned interdisciplinary long-term ecological programme is motivated by the fact that until now there are not sufficiently recognized the internal bindings of the Antarctic subsystems (rocks, moraines, soils, water, ice, snow and the atmosphere on one side and biota on the other), mainly from these points:

· transport and transformation of substances and energy in system frame (regime of supply from outside, losses - outwards, transfer and conversion - inside of the system)

· effect of external factors upon the system

· responses of biota occurring in the system to the environmental conditions and dynamics of their changes

For a sufficiently detailed understanding of these processes, it is necessary to obtain information from the above mentioned scientific disciplines. It is mainly a matter of:

1. Monitoring of contemporary geomorphological, pedological and glaciological processes in time. These processes are understood as the result of the lithological predisposition of the studied 
9
area and the effect of climatic and hydrologic factors. The aim of this monitoring is an 
evaluation of mechanisms of erosion, transportation and accumulation of material.

2. Monitoring of climatic conditions on the level of macroclimate (standard measurements and 
evaluation of climatic fluctuations), local climate and microclimate (special activities with the 
application of updated automatic systems). Simultaneously with the above mentioned activities, 
the measurement of energy exchange in the systems land surface - atmosphere and land surface 
- substrate (including separate measurement of UV and PhAR intensities) will be performed.

3. Studies of pedogenetic processes together with determination of biogenetic and essential 
elements rate of flow in the substrate and in water.

4. Monitoring of biota species diversity and its changes in time, inorganic-organic carbon and 
mineral nutrient cycles.

5. Monitoring of anthropogenic impacts on the local biota.

2. 3. Brief description of the station design:

The Czech Scientific Station is proposed as a small seasonal (summer) base for 15 people 
including the technical personnel. The station would be used for about 5 months (November - 
April) each year.

The foundations of all structures must be laid on relatively solid subsoil. The chosen site 
located in an area with a flat and slightly lengthwise sloping profile, east-west (E-W) longitudinal 
axis orientation, and with a minimal need for landscaping. A site at risk to flooding must be 
avoided in order to prevent damage to the station but also to avoid the risk of washing out of 
harmful substances, in particular from flooded generators and fuel storage.

The longitudinal E-W axis of the main structure reflects the need for a direct orientation of 
the front towards the sun for maximum accumulation of solar energy. The position of the corners 
of the main structure was marked directly in the field and fixed with little stone mounds 
approximately 400 mm high. It roughly marks the outer dimensions of the main building. The 
placing of other structures follows the requirements and functions of the main structure. We 
assume that the conditions for placing the container design structures will be favorable, and the 
existing subsoil will be, after slight adjustments, acceptable.

Accessibility of the construction site

All the alternative construction sites, mainly at Turret Point - King George Island and 
locations on James Ross Island, are accessible only from the sea. The particular building site, and 
the system of constructions and individual components of the structure, must be chosen with 
respect to this fact. Such a prerequisite corresponds to logistic requirements for the landing, 
transport and basic assembly on site, and the station's provision during its operation.

The construction site is situated with respect to landing needs, such as anchoring the transport 
ship as close to the coast as possible, finding a suitable place on the beach where disembarkation 
could be directed and from which the material could be easily transported to the construction 
site. Based on the gathered data, the north coast and Brandy Bay of James Ross Island as well as 
Turret Point on King George Island appear suitable. At other localities, the major obstacles were, 
for example, steep or unstable terrain, sea level frozen till late spring, and so on.

10
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Experts, especially from Polish, Ukraine, Argentinean and Chilean institutions, were consulted on the specific conditions of landing operations and subsequent transport of the material to the construction site.

Assumed extent of the construction site, build-up concept, and structure of buildings

The proposed construction site will cover an area of approximately 78 x 30 m. There is a need to reduce the concentration of structures with respect both to their location in the terrain and operation safety. The aim is to separate the structures with a potential mutual hazard, such as fire and safety risks, and also to separate the structures whose operations are not mutually related. The conception of the arrangement of buildings respects these requirements.

The main operation and accommodation building is proposed as a solid structure with three basic functions:
- provide for scientific and other sorts of work
- provide for accommodation, essential human and social needs
- serve as the center of a technical complex that will provide thermo-technical and hygienic conditions

Due to the transport and function conditions, other structures are proposed as conventional cargo containers. However, these containers will have a more durable surface finish than usual, with pre-assembled technology and equipment for special functions. The structures will be interconnected only by cable lines where it is purposeful. Marked unpaved paths will connect the structures.

Technical structure of the station

The basic conditions for the preparation of the project, production, transport, and construction on site must be adjusted with respect to the assumed possibilities of the station's construction and its seasonal character. The structure itself is divided into construction buildings and operational sets due to methodical and concept complexity reasons. Modification is possible if needed.

Buildings of the station

SO 01 Operation and accommodation building
SO 02 Waste treatment
SO 03 Generators storage
SO 04 Engine room of power supply equipment
SO 05 Diesel generator
SO 06 Cold stores
      06/1 Intermediate storage
      06/2 Fuel storage
      06/3 Spare parts storage
SO 07 Water intake and distribution
SO 08 Waste water treatment
SO 09 Watercraft storage
SO 10 Launching ramp
SO 11 External cable distribution system
                                                                                    11
2. 4. Brief description of the buildings

SO1 Operation and accommodation building.

The building is intended as a main building of the station and is designed as a one-story structure, fully erected from the K-Kontrol construction system. The system comprises sandwich panels consisting of two OSB chipboards with an inner insulation layer of self-extinguishing polystyrene. Due to climatic conditions, the building is designed as a simple structure of minimal height above the ground. The thermo-technical properties, transport and erection aspects, and the need for minimized heat losses influenced the choice of the construction type. Floor and roof panels are 320 mm, external walls 265 mm thick. The panel will be 170 mm thick where a solar collector wall will be installed. Statically, the building will be a quasi-three-wing structure with two inner longitudinal supporting walls. The structure will be compact because of its box arrangement of horizontal and vertical elements that are firmly interconnected. The building has a rectangular ground plan 10 530 x 26 530 mm. It is covered with a pent roof of an approximate 5% slope.

With respect to the prevailing wind direction, the proposed location in the terrain maximizes the catchment area of solar energy by orienting the longitudinal axis E-W with the higher frontage facing north. Typologically, the layout follows requirements of the proposed operation rather than cardinal points. The E-W orientation maximizes the catchment area of solar collectors. With respect to the station's location in the coastal wind exposed area, the foundation of the building is proposed adjacent to the terrain to minimize drought under the floor. Foreign experts recommend the use of wooden pier grillage.

The building will be assembled of pre-fabricated elements slightly adjusted on site. It will be erected on a conditioned floor area. In the panels, the fillings of the openings - windows and doors - will be prepared and pre-tested for assembly. The roof of 320 mm thick sandwich panels will be covered with rubber foil, mechanically anchored, and glued to the base. Strips of roof covering will be approximately 5700 mm long. The roof will drain to the ground without gutters.

Surface finish of the outer walls is proposed in alternatives. Coating the outer walls with waterproof plywood 6 mm thick on lath grill is preferred. It would only protect the building against corrosion by saltwater spray during wind exposures, and mechanical abrasion by over-frozen snow and wind during the winter. Its expected lifetime is approximately 10 - 15 years. Then, it would be renewed. The surface would be painted with a basic color acrylate paint of a glazing type. When the outer treatment gradually wears off, such a solution enables an easy repair. All proposed painting systems are based on water diluted materials, and carbohydrate-diluters-free materials.

The heating system would use hot air. A system of air conditioning equipment provides the heating of air by heat recovery from hot air collectors, heat pump, and by recuperation of heated air from the interior around the exhaust of the ventilation system.

Sanitary installations of a standard kind of predominantly plastic fixtures will be used. Plastic pipelines will be insulated with cavity blocks. The interior sewerage will be also made of plastic. All piping will run on the surface for easy inspection. The sewerage outlet from the building will contain control shafts with covers.

Electrical installations - lighting and distribution systems for appliances. In the building, the internal power supply system will include a distribution net for lighting, sockets, and the main switchboard. The station will be supplied with electric energy in combined ways.
The laboratory equipment will contain, besides typical workbenches, a bench with a 
stainless-steel worktop, a fume chamber, a desk for scales, and supplementary furniture. The 
instrumentation will vary according to the needs and character of scientific work.

Other furniture will be standard. To specify complete furnishings, interior documentation is 
prepared as a separate part of the project.

    Built-up area     280 m^(2)
    Built-in volume  1033 m^(3).

SO 02  Waste treatment

The structure is located with a direct relationship to the main building of the station. It is 
accessible through a technical entrance from the eastern front, directly from an entrance ramp. 
The structure comprises a modified cargo container 20 feet long (6055 x 2438 x 2591 mm). It 
will contain waste management facilities following the requirements of waste treatment, disposal 
or modification prior to the transport of waste from the area in accordance with the Madrid 
Protocol of AT. Due to its location, the structure will be consequently used to produce hot 
service water. The system of hot waste processing is based on the solar warm-water collectors 
with the primary circuit filled with antifreeze. The container will contain equipment for solid 
waste disposal - incinerator OG 120 SW, a product of TEAMTEC Norway. Such incinerators are 
currently in use in the area. The container will provide storage, manipulation and treatment of 
incinerable wastes, and storage of wastes to be removed from the Antarctic area.

    Built-up area     14.78 m^(2)
    Built-in volume  38.30 m^(3)

SO 03  Generators storage

It is a modified cargo container 20 feet long. The structure will serve for storing generators 
during the wintering break. Wind-generators, means of small manipulation machinery and spare 
parts for the complex of generators will be stored there. The structure will be connected to the 
system of electric distribution, lighting and sockets. The container will be provided with a wind-
powered generator.

    Built-up area     14.78 m^(2)
    Built-in volume  38.30 m^(3)

SO 04  Engine room of power supply equipment

The engine room comprises of a 20 feet long standard cargo container. It will be equipped, 
already in the Czech Republic, with all necessary machinery for the production and distribution 
of electric energy. It will contain main switching room of the electrocomplex of the station, 
location of transformers, accumulators and spare parts of this technical system. The container 
will be thermally insulated and it will carry a mast for wind-powered generator.

    Built-up area     14.78 m^(2)
    Built-in volume  38.30 m^(3)

SO 05  Diesel generator

The structure consists of a cargo container 20 feet long with both permanently mounted and 
mobile diesel generators for the production of electricity. The generators will be anchored to the 
floor of the container, and complementary elements for the completion of a diesel power plant 
will be placed within the container. From the inside, the system is insulated with a sandwich 
    13
layer of thermal and acoustic insulation to reduce noise immission to the surroundings and the accommodation structure. The container will carry a wind-powered generator.

    Built-up area    14.78 m^(2)
    Built-in volume  38.30 m^(3)

SO 06  Cold stores

These storage structures complement a cluster of single-purpose technical container structures.

SO 06/1 Intermediate storage

It serves as storage for the reserves of preserved food that must be kept in a cool place. Large packages of foodstuffs are stored on shelves or loose in the container. During the primary transport, part of the container will contain durable dry food. The remaining space will be used for the transport of harmless material. This is a standard container without thermal insulation and it will carry a wind-powered generator.

    Built-up area    14.78 m^(2)
    Built-in volume  38.30 m^(3)

SO 06/2 Fuel storage

It serves as storage for diesel oil and gasoline.

The cargo container is adjusted to correspond with safety and ecological requirements for the storage of oil products. The container has a double floor that creates 200-liter retention reservoirs. They are distributed throughout the container's floor and covered with pore-grill-boards of zinc-coated steel. Steel drums with a volume of 200 liters will be stored on the floor. The structure is situated furthest from the accommodation building but at the same time closest to the disembarkation site on the beach with respect to necessary manipulation during periodic fuel supply. The structure will carry a wind-powered generator.

    Built-up area    14.78 m^(2)
    Built-in volume  38.30 m^(3)

SO 06/3  Spare parts storage

It will serve as a storage for spare parts and material that will be used according to the needs of the station, and eventually for storing treated and wrapped waste to be transported out, etc. The structure will contain dismantled ready-to-assemble shelves to be assembled if needed. It is assumed that the container will be also used for storing packaging material (such as wooden profiles, cardboard, etc.) for eventual treatment as mixed waste for incineration. A wind-powered generator will be mounted on a corner of the structure.

    Built-up area    14.78 m^(2)
    Built-in volume  38.30 m^(3)

SO 07  Water intake and distribution

For common hygienic needs as well as for cooking, water from natural sources will be used. All other stations obtain water in the same manner. Bottled water, imported from the non-Antarctic area, will be used for drinking and supplementing the physiologically required daily amount of mineralized water. Water will be drained from a local natural freshwater stream - a glacial stream that runs down the glacier's forefront south-east of the station's location and
meanders to the sea so that it flows around the proposed construction site and flows into the sea 
on a SW beach, north of a nameless cliff. The main part of the structure will be an accumulation 
basin of approximately 3 m³. It will be obtained by deepening the streambed to approximately 80 
cm. In the deepest place, a zeolite filter will be installed in a perforated PE-vessel. When 
wintering the station, the pump will be dismounted, the basin emptied using sluice gates and the 
filter will be washed and stored.

Backwater surface       app. 3 m²
Distribution length    app. 50 m

SO 08 Waste water treatment

The structure serves for the basic treatment of sewage water from the operation structure. 
Since the waste water will have a character of biological sewage only, without chemical 
admixtures, its disposal is rather easy. Wastewater disposal will conform to the requirement of 
draining the sewage below sea level in order to provide an instant dilution and avoid impact on 
the station's freshwater systems. The proposed route of the wastewater pipeline uses gravity to 
drain the untreated materials. With respect to the need to minimize the solid particle content, the 
re-pumping and grinding of sewage will be carried out.

The total amount of domestic sewage will be 2.25 m³ per day.
The total length of the pipeline will be approximately 200 m.

SO 09 Watercraft storage

The structure serves to store watercraft, i.e. two inflatable boats of GRANT RAID MK III 
type. During storage, one of them will be hung under the container's ceiling, the other will be 
placed on an undercarriage on the floor. A wind-powered generator could be installed on this 
container.

Built-up area      14.8 m²
Built-in volume   38.30 m³

SO 10 Launching ramp

The construction of the ramp will allow for a sufficiently safe and controllable facility for 
floating watercraft as well as conditions for the unloading of supplies (foodstuffs, fuel, etc.) at 
the beginning of the working season and at the abandonment and preservation of the station. The 
structure's foundation is a leveled plain of the existing terrain that allows access to and from the 
coast; it could be leveled merely with local coarse gravel and aggregates to the flattest possible 
surface. With respect to the construction of the launching cart, it is not proposed to create a 
guide rail (unless inevitable) as the cart would move on the conditioned surface only. The exact 
position and dimensions of the ramp will be determined on site. The following data are 
preliminary.

Built-up area     - trimming of the ramp plain  150 m²
                  - plank platform              20 m²

SO 11 External cable distribution system

The system concerns the external cable connection among the individual structures. With 
respect to the character of the station's operation, which assumes only pedestrian traffic of 
people with knowledge of local conditions, the external cables will be laid in trenches as shallow 
as the terrain will allow. The cable routes are proposed along the walkways indicated by 
marking.
2. 5. Transport requirements and other infrastructures

The transport of personnel to and from the station will take place during personnel's arrival (November - December) and departure from the station (March - April). The transport will originate from the territories of Chile, Argentina or Peru. These countries supply their scientific and military stations and bases in the area. The limited transportation volume during the station's operation (app. 2 containers per year) will not represent a more significant increase in shipping in the area than a few more naval miles twice a year by icebreakers that have been already using current shipping lanes to supply the existing stations. Tourist agencies run services from Chile and Argentina approximately every two weeks, and, therefore, the transport of people can utilize the existing capacities without increasing the traffic volume in the area above the current state.

The station relies on ship transport. The use of continental vehicles or aircraft is not proposed and in connection with the station's construction, no facilities necessary for such transportation will be developed. If there were an emergency situation, injury or acute illness at the station, the persons could be evacuated either by a helicopter from the flat coast adjacent to the station without a need for landscaping, or by a special plane that can land on the snow-covered glacier approximately 10 km in the island's inland (again without a need for landscaping).

The supply by sea will require the construction of a slipway for the transport of material, mainly containers, from the coast to the storage using a slide and a winch. During a common operation, two containers per year will be transported, one of them 6 m long containing fuel, the other 3 m long containing foodstuffs and material for research activities. For the transport of containers from the coast to the storage, a launching ramp will be used, comprising a leveled terrain (aggregates, coarse gravel), complemented by a portable wooden bridge across the stream. This bridge will be stored during winter.

The transport of material at the station will utilize two-wheeled carts, a dolly and a universal winch-operated cart with  up to 1000 kg loading capacity. The cart will serve mainly for the transport of watercraft from the storage to the coast and back. Local transportation will be provided by two inflatable boats GRANT RAID MK III with 110 kg of weight and 1270 kg carrying capacity, with an outboard gasoline motor Johnson SJ65 RS.

                                                                                                                                                                  16
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

3. Description of the initial environmental reference state and 
prediction of the environment state in absence of the activity

The construction and operation of the station will directly concern the built-up area and part 
of the coast adjacent to James Ross Island. With respect to the extent of the construction and its 
use, only local environmental impacts might be assumed, and their intensity would differ 
according to the affected components described in detail further in the documentation.

Because except for the proposed station there is no other influence on the environment state 
of the site, we can expect that in absence of the assessed activity the environment state in future 
would response only to actual environmental conditions.

3. 1. Air

The air will be affected by emission from the above described sources (incinerator, diesel 
generator, portable gasoline generators, outboard motor). Characteristics of the atmosphere, climate 
and emission are presented in separate annexes. The characteristics of noise impact are the same at 
both Turret Point and James Ross 3.4. The immission study of Turret Point utilized terrain maps 
taken on site in 2001; at James Ross site 3.4., orthophotomaps based on aerial photographs by Dr. 
Strelin were used. In both dispersion and noise studies, the least favorable values were used, i.e. the 
most reflective terrain for noise, and the no-wind situation for maximum short-term immission. In 
both cases, negative impacts reach only tens of meters and do not affect any biological objects in 
the station's surroundings.

3. 2. Soil

There are no soils in the propre sense of the word at the area of the Antarctic Peninsula. The 
deglaciated surface is formed of material of various structure and texture with respect to its origin 
and development (glacial moraines, old beaches, erosion of bedrock of different origins on slopes of 
varying gradient and exposure, aquifers, etc.). Such substrate in so called vegetation oases supports 
the growth of sporadic clumps of Deschampsia anatarctica, growths of mosses, algae and lichens. 
Higher plants have not been found on James Ross Island at all, and lower plants appear sporadically. 
Larger vegetation oases, which are the basis of soil formation if such a process potentially happens 
due to the changing climate, can be identified in aerial photographs. Because the construction must 
take place on a coarse-grained gravel foundation without fine particles and little aquiferous 
permafrost (risk of solifluction and slope movements in summer), neither soil in the real sense of the 
word nor its initial stages will be occupied. Due to technical reasons, the construction will involve 
mainly coarse pebble and boulder debris of a morainic and/or fossil beach character.

The subsoil is permanently frozen (permafrost). In summer, the top layer thaws a few decimeters 
deep, therefore, the structures' foundations are not laid in the subsoil but placed on beam 
constructions (grillages).

The initial stages of pedogenesis will be monitored, especially with respect to their initiation stage 
and possible local influence, mainly due to the increased input of immissions from incineration 
(incineration unit, and power generators).

3. 3. Water
                                                                                                  17
In the given localities, water will be taken from the melting ice and snow in the amount of 2.25 
m^(3) per day. It will be quality drinking water, demineralized (precipitation water), without biological 
compounds. The discharged waste water of the same volume (2.25 m^(3) per day) will affect the 
littoral zone of the sea.

3. 4. Environmental geofactors

The South Shetlands comprise of 62 islands and 52 rock islets. This archipelago’s shelf reaches 
down to 500 m deep mainly along the northern coasts. On the southern side of King George Island, 
where other stations are situated, the coast line is highly articulated, creating many bays. The biggest 
is Admiralty Bay where permanent stations of Poland and Brazil and seasonal stations of Peru and 
the USA are situated.

King George Island, covering an area of 1310 km^(2), is a remnant of a volcanic mountain range 
of which more than 90 % is covered with ice. Only a small percent of exposed terrain, which 
deglaciates during Antarctic summer, is situated in foreshore areas forming coastal oases. These 
oases have a similar origin and character. They consist of partially emerging rock exposures 
disturbed by glacial activities. The space between the exposures has a character of either moraines 
merging with permafrost or debris filling of more or less weathered bedrock.

In general, the terrain at Turret Point can be described as a system of slightly sloping terraces of a 
former seafloor in coastal areas, which were secondarily uplifted to the present level either by 
volcanic activities or in combination with a glacier retreat and consequent uplift of its bedrock. The 
terraces slope gently towards SW; they are approximately 20-30 m wide occasionally with visible 
edges. Most likely, they are the result of seismic activities during the seafloor elevation as there is 
Penguin Island of a volcanic origin near Turret Point, only about 600 m away. Penguin Island still 
has two distinct volcanic craters, the major one rising to 160 m above the sea level.

The resulting surface consists mainly of massive marine sediments composed of crystalline 
bedrock fragments. The actual surface of the terrain is so stable that it has maintained the shape of 
breaker lines which delineate subhorizontal terraces consisting of coarse gravel (fraction 30-60 mm) 
complemented with boulders rounded from the upper side with dimensions up to 300 mm. The 
surface has a character of “stone pavement” with gaps of 10-50 mm or wider and up to 100 mm 
deep. Therefore, the terrain’s surface comprises heterogeneous material, usually originating from 
morainic structures that consist of bedrock fragments surrounded by soil. In places, there are scree 
slopes that developed by gradual weathering and erosion caused by the moving glacial cap. 
According to the composition and location, a highly variable level of permafrost depth can be 
assumed, as it depends on the composition of substrate, hydrological conditions and the depth of 
bedrock. According to the data compiled in previous research and obtained from H. Arctowski 
station, the permafrost layer ranges from 0.2 to 1.0 m below the surface.

James Ross Island is formed mainly by a sequence of Upper Jurassic to Lower Tertiary marine 
clastic sediments and tuffs. The JRI sedimentary basin developed as a back-arc basin in the period 
of the Pacific, Phoenix and Aluk plates’ subduction under the Antarctic Peninsula microcontinent. 
The sediments are roofed with volcanic formations dated from Miocene up to present. A 
morphologically prominent feature is the central Mt. Haddington (1620 m a.s.l.), a polygenetic 
shield volcano with lava flows up to 30 km long and up to 200 m thick. The volcanic sequences are 
dominated by basanites, tephrites, alkali basalts, and tholeiites. About 80 % of the island surface is 
covered with ice. Only a small percent of the exposed land, which deglaciates during the Antarctic 
summer, is situated in the northern part of the island. The localities of interest consist of rock
outcrops disturbed by glacial processes. The space between the exposures has a character of either 
moraines merging with permafrost or debris filling of more or less weathered bedrock.

3. 5. Fauna and flora

Flora

The higher flora is extremely poor in the Antarctic area; only two species of higher plants occur 
here, Deschampsia antarctica and Colobanthus quitensis. In the locality of the construction at 
Turret Point, only Deschampsia antarctica has been found, no higher plants have been found on 
James Ross Island.

Besides higher plants in Antarctica, there are about 100 moss species, 25 liverwort species, about 
300 or 400 lichen species, and about 20 species of macroscopic fungi. The Antarctic peninsula, and 
mainly its western part, abounds in plants because the conditions here are more favorable than 
anywhere else in Antarctica due to a humid and milder oceanic climate. In the construction's 
locality, the occurrence of lower plants has not been surveyed.

The station's construction and operation might locally disturb or kill the stands of these plants. 
Nevertheless, the impact is local, ranging within hundreds of square meters. At low temperatures 
and a short vegetation period, these changes have a reversible but rather long-term character.

Fauna

Antarctica and adjacent islands represent a unique biotop for so called homoiothermic animals 
(warm-blooded, with controlled body temperature). On the one hand, homoiothermy is the only 
adaptation for a year-round inhabitation of an area where the temperature ashore prevails above the 
freezing point. On the other hand, it is a very energy consuming adaptation. To keep the body 
temperature constant at the level of about 37 °C (i.e. about 35 °C in summer and in winter often 
over 80 °C of temperature gradient as against the surroundings), many complicated adaptations had 
to evolve. These include anatomical and morphological adaptations such as bodily structure, 
subcutaneous fatty tissue, and body coat; physiological adaptations such as hypothermia of the 
periphery, mainly limbs, in connection with the counterflow vascular heat-exchange systems, the 
ability to starve and utilize food, including the feeding of penguin young with so called "milk"; and 
ethological adaptations, which include mainly migration and an ability to withstand low 
temperatures thanks to gathering - forming of societies.

All adaptive mechanisms allow some homoiotherms in Antarctica not only to survive the short 
Antarctic summer but also to breed and even winter. However, these animals are very sensitive to 
the changes in their environment because they are highly specific organisms, and, therefore, highly 
susceptible to eventual changes in the environment.

With respect to the energy balance, the main general risks concerning homoiotherms are 
especially:

- changes in food supply

All Antarctic species of vertebrates are carnivores because in these conditions of short or even 
null vegetation period no bigger herbivores, mainly no terrestrial ones, can live. Therefore, without 
an exception, all Antarctic vertebrates are dependant on the marine ecosystem. Sea pollution 
leading to decreases in productivity or species diversity creates an immediate risk of extinction of 
such species.

19
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

- disturbance of migratory paths

Migration barriers include linear structures (disturbance corridors) on the coast, or any constructions 
in narrow places (canyons, passes, etc.). The disturbance of migratory paths can lead to starvation, 
increase in energetic costs of local populations, especially of penguins, and so to an increase in 
mortality, or decrease in fitness (total reproduction rate).

- disturbance at wintering or breeding grounds

Disturbance of bird nesting colonies or beaches and cliffs - assembly points of pinnipeds - by the 
station's operation is a real threat if the station is situated in such areas.

A typical group of birds in the Antarctic area are penguins. Even though the Antarctic area is not 
the only geographic area with the occurrence of penguins, all species have adapted the shape of 
their bodies (hydrodynamic body shape, legs at the end of body, wings adapted to swimming and not 
to flying, etc), and most species are well-adapted also to the extreme conditions of the cold 
Antarctic coast. Extreme adaptation to the environmental conditions can present high susceptibility 
to disturbances. Some influence caused by the presence of an Antarctic station, activities connected 
to its construction and inhabitation, can be considered as disturbing as well. For some species, a 
limiting factor is the access from the ocean to the seashore, as proved e.g. for Adelie Penguin 
(Pygoscelis adeliae). For such species, preventing their access from the sea to a rough shoreline 
can directly limit the populations' abundance. For the neighboring bird colonies, the absence of an 
airport or heliport is a positive fact because it has been proved (Hoyo et al., 1992) that noise and 
operation of aircraft and helicopters cause strong shock reactions among penguins. At the present 
day, penguins are not hunted anymore, but in the past they used to be hunted either commercially or 
to feed the crews of whaling ships. The hunting of penguins till the end of sixties also led to local 
decreases in population densities as low as to extinction levels. Nevertheless, water conservancy 
and further environmental data form a basis for the conservation of the penguins' environment. At 
present, the main threat to individual species populations is the disturbance of food resources in the 
marine environment, i.e. besides sea pollution and the disturbance of food chains, it is also the 
commercial fishing of krill, which is the main food source for most penguin species. The increasing 
number of research stations is being discussed. Negative influence has been observed only at large 
stations, especially with aircraft operation, on the biggest species - Emperor Penguin (Aptenodytes 
forsteri). A decrease in abundance of Adelie Penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) in connection with the 
activities of research stations has been observed also at Hallett Point where a colony of about eight 
to ten thousand nesting couples left a locality near newly constructed station.

Here follows a list of homoiothermic animal species that occur or can occur in the locality of the 
proposed construction of the Czech scientific station in Antarctica at Turret Point, King George 
Island, South Shetlands. A list of animal species occurring at Brandy Bay, James Ross Island, is not 
available; the occurrence of penguin colonies is known in the wider surroundings of the island and 
the occurrence of other bird species can be expected. Data on bird-nesting and the occurrence of 
pinnipeds will be supplied after terrain reconnaissance in February 2003. With respect to minimal 
impact on cetaceans, these are not listed.

20
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Birds and pinnipeds living on the Antarctic coast, the Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands and the coast of Weddel's Sea, species observed on James Ross Island (Lirio, Strelin in verb.)
and Turret Point (Prosek, Suchanek, 2002)

Aves                   Birds                  Turret Point    James Ross Island

Spheniscidae           Penguins                    
Aptenodytes forsteri   Emperor Penguin                           
Pygoscelis papua       Gentoo Penguin                    
                       (Papua Penguin)          *               *       
Pygoscelis adeliae     Adelie Penguin           *               *       
Pygoscelis antarctica  Chinstrap Penguin                           
Eudyptes chrysocome    Rockhopper Penguin                           
Eudyptes chrysolophus  Macaroni Penguin         *               *       

Diomedeidae            Albatrosses                           
Diomedea exulans       Wandering Albatross                           
Diomedea melanophris   Black-browed Albatross                           
Diomedea chrysostoma   Grey Headed Albatross                           
Phoebetria palpebrata  Light-mantled Albatross                           

Procellariidae         Petrels and Shearwaters              
Procellaria aequinoctialis  White-chinned Petrel         *               
Macronectes giganteus  Southern Giant Petrel        *               
Macronectes halli      Northern (Hall) Giant Petrel                           
Fulmarus glacialoides  Southern Fulmar                           
Thalassoica antarctica Antarctic petrel                           
Daption capense        Cape Petrel                           
Pagodroma nivea        Snow Petrel                          *       
Pachoptila desolata    Antarctic Prion                           
Pachoptila crassirostris                                          
Halobena caerulea                                       

Hydrobatidae           Storm-Petrels                           
Oceanites oceanicus    Willsons Petrel                      *       
Oceanites oceanicus    Wilson's Storm/petrel                           
Fregetta tropica       Black-bellied Storm-Petrel                           
Garrodia nereis        Gray-backed Storm-Petrel                          

Peleconoididae                                       
Peleconoides georgicus                                  
Peleconoides urinatrix                                  

Phalacrocoracidae      Cormorants                            
Phalacrocorax atriceps Blue-eyed Cormorant                 *       
Phalacr.. bransfieldensis  Antarctic shag                          

                                                                                
                                                                                  21
Chionidae                                  


Chionis alba                  Pale-faced Sheathbill                        

Chinois minor                                                                  

Stercorariidae                  Skuas                                    

Catharacta maccormicki        South Polar Skua                               *

Catharacta antarctica         Brown Skua                                    

Laridae                          Gulls                                     

Larus dominicanus             Kelp Gull                                    *

Sternidae                       Terns                                     

Sterna paradisea              Arctic Tern                                  

Sterna vittata                 Antartctic Tern                              *

Mammalia                       Mammals                  Turret Point    James Ross Island

Otariidae                       Fur seals                                  

Arctocephalus forsteri         Fur seal                                   

Arctocephalos tropicalis       Subantarctic Fur Seal                      

Phocidae                        Seals                                     

Hydrurga leptonyx              Leopard seal                                **                 

Leptonychotes weddellii        Weddell seal                                **        


Lobodon carcinophagus          Crabeater seal                              

Ommatophoca rossi              Ross seal                                   *       

Mirounga leonina               Elephant seal          *                  **       

* observed species on the site

** expected species, formerly observed close the site


3. 6. Ecological stability and the nature of the landscape

Territorial systems of ecological stability are not used in the Antarctic area and, therefore, the evaluation of the construction with respect to them is not relevant.

The nature of the Antarctic seashore landscape will be influenced locally in appearance during the station's existence. With respect to the fact that the station can be dismantled and also that the construction is not founded solidly in the bedrock, its influence is temporary.

Antarctic Peninsula and adjacent Antarctic islands (including the interest areas on King George Island and James Ross Island) have a distinct landscape formed by dominant glaciers with rocky cliffs and nunataks, glacier tongues, and stretches of coast not covered by ice with local geomorphological structures (islands, cliffs) of mainly volcanic origin (near the locality, there is e.g. a volcanic Penguin Island), or formed of older sedimentary rocks of mainly Cretaceous or Jurassic ages. The landscape is shaped by glacial activities. The landscape is bare except for two species of higher plants (only one species, Deschampsia antarctica, was observed in the locality Turret Point) and several tens of moss and lichen species.

22
3. 7. Protected areas and historical monuments

In the Antarctic area, there are several types of designated protected areas that correspond to the 
Czech ranking system of specially protected areas, or temporarily protected areas, areas of special 
scientific interest, and historically significant areas. They are the following types:

    Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)
    Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)
    Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs)
    CCAS Seal Reserves
    CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) sites
    Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)
    Other Protected Areas (SRAs and MPAs)

In the locality of James Ross Island, no protected area of the above listed types is established. 
Therefore, the assessed construction is not in disagreement with any special protection of the site.

The area of the proposed construction has not been consistently inhabited yet. Further, there has 
been no hunting base and, therefore, there are no archaeological findings or architectural 
monuments in the locality.

However, the whole Antarctic area is respected by international treaties as an exceptional area 
with a status comparable to that of national parks. Therefore, it is necessary to respect these special 
conditions and international conventions, particularly the Antarctic Treaty and its annexes and 
amendments, namely the Madrid Protocol.

3. 8. Areas of mineral resources

The Antarctic area is exceptional and highly susceptible. Therefore, extraction of raw materials is 
excluded. The construction and operation of the station does not potentially endanger raw material 
sources or any other natural riches except for living components. This question is discussed in 
chapters concerning ecosystems, flora, and fauna.

3. 9. Other characteristics of the environment

The main feature of the environment is the extremely unfavorable climatic conditions, 
characterized by particularly low temperatures and a short vegetation period. Therefore, even at low 
species diversity, any intervention to the environment has an extremely long-term character. All 
waste, construction debris and other traces of human activities can remain visible along the coast for 
tens or hundreds of years. Therefore, all activities in this area are subject to international treaties 
and international supervision by governmental and non-governmental organizations. The guidelines 
for the protection of the exceptional Antarctic environment are the subject of the Antarctic Treaty 
and the Madrid Protocol, whose selected parts are presented in the annexes of the Evaluation.

23
4. Direct impacts of the planned activity

4. 1. Air and climate

Neither climate, nor the microclimate, will be affected by the station's presence. The air will be locally affected by emission, particularly during the operation of the incineration unit (approximately 2 hours once in 7 or 10 days) and diesel generator, i.e. when wind generators will not function due to either still air (exceptionally) or adversely strong wind (good dispersion conditions) or due to their breakdown. Portable generators have a low output and represent insignificant emission sources. A detailed assessment of emission load is a subject in the annexes.

The air will be influenced by two static emission sources:

1. Waste incinerator, product of Norway by TEAMTEC, type GOLAR 120 Marine, with a weekly cycle.

2. Diesel-generator HONDA EXT 12 utilizing low-congealing oil.

Smaller volume of emission will be produced by mobile sources - gasoline-generators providing electricity locally in the terrain; the use of products by HONDA with an output of 6 kW and also a outboard gasoline motor Johnson SJ65 RS is proposed.

The total production of emissions and an emission study are part of the annex n 3 of CEE.

4. 2. Water

The construction and operation of the station will not affect the surface sources of freshwater (glacial stream), which will supply drinking and service water for the station's operation in the volume of 2.25 m3 per day. Eventual modification of the channel for water extraction will affect neither the overall discharge conditions, nor any organisms because there are not any in the stream.

As allowed by the Madrid Protocol, the station's wastewater (2.25 m3.d-1) of a sewage character will be ground in a chamber and discharged into the sea.

At the station, water will be used for:
-   drinking and hygienic needs (15 persons)
-   cooking (30 meals/day)
-   research needs (laboratories)
-   fire safety

Water for drinking and cooking will be quality potable water. Water for the laboratories will be processed according to the research requirements. For hygienic needs, bacterially uncontaminated service water will be used. The existing stream will be the source of water. It is water from melting glaciers that runs off by gravity to the sea.

Water will be transported to the station:

a) by gravity from a reservoir if the terrain's configuration allows (recommended elevation min. 15 m)

b) by pumping from the accumulation reservoir

24
In the accumulation structure, mechanical pre-treatment and sedimentation of possible suspended 
solid particles will occur. For the gravity-driven water supply pipeline, the necessary accumulation 
of water and its hygienic purity will be ensured. The accumulation reservoir will also serve for the 
external and internal fire safety of the station. The water supply pipeline will consist of PE pipes. A 
sludge removal device allowing a complete discharge of the pipeline will be installed at the lowest 
place.

If the station is permanently occupied by 15 people, water needs are estimated as follows:
Qd = 15.0 x 15 = 2 250 l.d-1, i.e. 2.25 m3 .d-1
qaver. = 0.03 l.s-1
qmax = 0.25 l.s-1

The above stated amount of water will by no means threaten the plentiful sources of melting ice 
and snow.

4. 3. Impacts on soil, land and bedrock

Under the given conditions, they will not be permanently affected. There are no soils, and 
geological subsoil will not be affected because the building will be constructed on wooden 
foundation grill laid on the terrain surface. Locally, the surface will be leveled for paths connecting 
the station's structures and for the launching ramp between the sea and storages. These 
modifications will affect small fractions of surface layers.

                                                                                              25
5. Waste

5. 1. Waste from the station's construction

During the construction of the station, two types of waste will occur:

a. Solid waste

The assumed amount of approximately 300 kg will have to be stored in plastic drums during both 
construction seasons and either taken away from the Antarctic Treaty area at the transport of the 
construction crew, or disposed of in one of the permanent stations.

b. Waste resulting from assembly and building activities

b.1. Construction waste

This waste consists of trimmings and pieces of wood that constitute the basic building material. 
During the production and pre-assembly operations prior to dispatch, this amount will be adjusted to 
allow maximum utilization. Usable cut timber can be utilized for the construction of waste bins or 
shelves in containers intended for operational use, etc. Appropriate construction elements will be 
also stored for possible repairs, etc.

b.2. Wrapping material

There will be basically two kinds – safely disposable wood and paper, and PET foil. Wooden 
containers (boxes, pieces of wood, etc.) will be stored for later use. Cardboard and PET foil will be 
sorted and later possibly used for additional creation of heat-insulation layers, e.g. for insulating the 
inner walls of containers.

Unused waste will be banded, stored in as little space as possible and prepared to be transported 
from the station's construction site. Maximum utilization of wrapping material on the spot is a 
presupposition for minimum export and the elimination of incineration during the preparatory phase 
of the station's occupation.

Detailed amounts of waste will be calculated in the next preparation phase as soon as the 
questions concerning the expedition have been clarified with manufacturers and suppliers of 
individual components, structures and elements of the station. In principle, all procedures will follow 
the corresponding provisions of the Attachment No. 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
(Madrid Protocol) to the Antarctic Treaty.

5. 2. Waste resulting from the station's operation

For the purpose of estimating the occurrence and disposal, waste resulting from the station's 
operation is categorized as follows:

a. Solid waste

- solid waste will be sorted as combustible and non-combustible at its formation and collection.

Mixed combustible waste, i.e. remains of office paper, wrapping paper, foil wrapping of 
foodstuffs and consumables, PET bottles, PET wraps, etc. will be separated and stored in 
designated boxes in the container.

In accordance with the requirements of the AT, non-combustible waste, e.g. batteries, glass, 
rubber, etc., will be deposited in designated boxes and prepared for transport from the area.
Ash resulting from the incineration also belongs to this category, and is therefore considered as waste to be transported from the AT area.

- solid waste resulting from the station's research activities, mainly from biological and physical-chemical laboratories, can be defined as harmless, for example biomass that will be incinerated.

The disposal of solid waste in the station will be carried out by an incineration process in a special facility placed in structure 002 Incineration unit, which is connected directly to the main building of the station. The incineration cycle will be based on experience from the specific operation. According to the information obtained from other stations, a two-week cycle of incineration of approximately 200 kg of waste is expected. Waste will be collected and sorted into designated bins in the cargo container. Combustible waste will be incinerated as municipal-type mixed waste.

A specialized manufacturer of incinerators TEAMTEC Norway recommended the GOLAR 120 Marine type incinerator. The incinerator plant consists of the following four main parts: an incineration chamber, electric control panel, exhaust fan for combustion gases and regulator (damper) of waste gas exhausts.

This incinerator can combust all types of solid waste based on their heating value:

Classified material          17,270 kJ.kg-1 (dry paper)
Waste of type II             9,901 kJ.kg-1

Type II waste, which can be processed by this incineration equipment in 200 liter batches at a frequency of 3-5 hours, is defined as follows:

This type of waste consists of a roughly uniform mixture with a maximum moisture content up to 50% by weight and a maximum non-combustible residue up to 7%. The high temperature in the combustion chamber (in some areas app. 1400°C) provides a smokeless and complete combustion. The solid waste in the gas exhaust is neutralized (disposed) by the burner, and, therefore, the process is ecologically safe. As soon as the waste gases pass the burner zone, they are mixed with the cooling air before entering the spent gases exhaust and emitted through a chimney. The incinerator plant consists of the following four main parts: an incineration chamber, electric control panel, exhaust fan for combustion gases and regulator (damper) of waste gas exhausts. The atomizing pressure burner Fremo HF-210-R for vacuum incineration, modified for the purposes of the station, has a capacity of 5.7 kg.h-1. For special purposes and conditions, nozzles with other capacities are available. The waste should be prepared to a heating value of app. 10,000 kJ.kg-1. For the mixing process, an instruction manual will be prepared for the operators so that the combustion process proceeds smoothly with as low consumption of support fuel (diesel oil) as possible.

The incinerator is supplemented with boxes for sorting of waste into the following groups: combustibles, glass, plastics, metal, rubber, AKU batteries. Non-combustible waste will be safely prepared for the transport away from the Antarctic area. For transport, the sorting of wastes according to SCAR is crucial. It is assumed that waste requiring such a disposal by the waste management plan will be concentrated in PE transport drums with lids. After being filled up to manipulation weight, the drums will be transported during supply cycles on a ship and shipped to a country where the waste will be disposed of. With respect to the distance to Europe, a treatment with a South American port can be expected.

27
b. Liquid waste

- liquid waste of a domestic sewage character that will be drained directly to the sea in the amount of app. 2.5 m^(3)

- liquid waste of physical-chemical solutions from laboratory research

The character of these substances will be specific according to the types of laboratory research activities. It is assumed that for certain laboratory activities, which are proposed and will result in this sort of waste, its expected amount, the manner of primary neutralization (if needed), wrapping, adjustment and placing in a cargo container will be specified.

- liquid waste of oil products such as used oil from engines or spillage from fuelling

After sorting, this waste will be collected in separated canisters and during supply operations returned to the service ship either for incineration outside the Antarctic Treaty area or for the application as a fuel for the ship's engine.

c. Gaseous waste

- exhaust gases of diesel-electric generators or small gasoline-powered generators; in the given case, their amount should be reduced by the utilization of renewable sources of energy

- combustion gases resulting from the disposal of solid combustible waste from the station's operation

5. 3. Waste water

The waste water is only sewage water from the hygienic facilities and from food preparation. Therefore, it is common municipal waste water. The amount of waste water is the result of water consumption. The balance of the production of pollution is calculated per one equivalent inhabitant (EI). The calculation takes in account 15 EI at the station. Besides standard parameters (Q_(annual), Q_(daily), q_(average), q_(max)) for the calculation of the pollution production, an additional parameter (Q_(season)) was used to calculate the volume of pollution with respect to the assumed extent of maximum 5-month-occupation of the station by personnel.

Balance sheet

Q_(       )annual          Q_(seasonal)           Q_(daily)              q_(average)              q_(max)    
m^(3) per year         m^(3) per 150 days     m^(3).d^(-1)           l.s^(-1)                 l.s^(-1)

821.25                    337.75                    2.25                      0.03                      0.25

Given a daily water consumption of 2.25 m^(3).d^(-1), the production of pollution is:

|                  | kg.d^(-1) | kg per year | kg per season | mg.l^(-1) |
|------------------|-----------|-------------|---------------|-----------|
| BOD5             | 0.90      | 328.5       | 135           | 400       |
| DS               | 0.83      | 302.95      | 124.5         | 367       |
| COD              | 0.67      | 264.65      | 100.5         | 300       |
| pH               |           | 6.0 - 8.0    |               |           |
| dissolved matter | 1.88      | 686.2       | 282           | 834       |

28
N total | 0.18 | 65.7 | 27 | 80
P total | 0.02 | 7.3  | 3  | 10

With respect to EI and the Madrid Protocol of the Antarctic Treaty, the wastewater can be drained straight into the sea. After the completion of the next project stage, the actual project may be adapted especially where the sewage system of the construction is concerned. A separation of used toilet paper into special containers (bags) and their incineration with solid waste will be considered. This would decrease the total input of organic matter into the marine environment, and, furthermore, it would eliminate the unappealing presence of slowly decaying paper by the coast.

5. 4. Waste management plan

Following the regulations that are being prepared on the initiative of SCAR, the procedure of waste management will be further elaborated based on the analysis of the monitoring carried out in 1996 and published by SCAR and COMNAP. In accordance with Article 8, Attachment No. 3 of the Madrid Protocol, the waste management plan will be compiled at the next project stage and will respect the following structure and categorization of waste:

Group 1. Sewage and domestic liquid waste

Group 2. Other liquid waste and chemicals, fuels and lubricants inclusive

Group 3. Solid substances intended for incineration

Group 4. Other solid waste

Based on this structure, a realistic estimation of waste production will be gradually quantified at the next stages of the project's preparation. The waste production should be monitored during the first operation season and evaluated according to the conditions set in Attachment No. 3 of the Protocol and the expected requirements.

                                                                                                                         29
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

6. Noise, vibrations

The following sources of vibrations and noise will be located within the station:
- wind-powered generators
- diesel-powered generator
- portable gasoline-powered generator
- outboard gasoline motor for a boat

No other sources of noise and vibrations or motor vehicles are anticipated at the station. The station will not be supplied by plane and no landing ground is planned. Therefore, there will not be any noise from landing aircraft.

A detailed noise study is presented in Annex n. 4 of CEE.

7. Radioactive and electromagnetic radiation

Neither the construction not the operation of the station will create radioactive radiation, and no radioactive emitters will be released into the environment.

Presumably, the station will communicate with the world via radiostation with an output of app. 100 W working in SW frequency band. This will be the greatest source of electromagnetic radiation in the locality. Besides, the station will utilize a radiostation for local communication in SW and VHF bands, and approximately 5 to 7 portable ministations.

                                                                                                                         30
8. Impacts on flora and fauna

The construction site at Site No. 4 on James Ross Island is not covered with vegetation, and, 
therefore, neither local covering of vegetation with the construction nor trampling will occur. 
Deschampsia antarctica does not occur on James Ross Island, unlike the originally considered King 
George Island. In the construction's wider environs, the occurrence of an unidentified range of 
species of lower plants (mosses, liverworts, lichens) can be expected. The construction and 
operation of the station will not affect wider environs in terms of trampling or vegetation damage.

In wider environs, there occur several species of birds (Skuas, Antarctic Tern) and mammals 
(Elephant Seal). However, according to the site observation (Stre?in in verb.), there are no 
breeding grounds of mammals or nesting colonies of birds. In both cases, it is only a dispersed 
occurrence of individuals and, therefore, the location of the station will not have a significant 
impact on these animals.

In the particular area of Site No. 4 on James Ross Island, the Czech Antarctic station is situated 
appropriately because

-   it disturbs neither nesting colonies of birds nor large breeding or resting colonies of pinnipeds
-   it does not produce great amounts of waste which would enrich the local ecosystem (15 EI of 
    discharged waste water during app. 150 days per year is negligible
-   it does not significantly affect primary producers because there occur none in the locality

9. Impacts on ecosystems

Coastal ecosystems of the Antarctic peninsula and adjacent islands are quite simple, but still they 
have very susceptible energy and material flows. As the communities of primary producers are 
extremely pure here and their production is insignificant, the communities of all mammals and birds 
are dependant on the marine ecosystem. Therefore, the terrestrial and marine ecosystems are 
directly linked by food chains. The link is closed by a decomposition chain where both excrement 
and carrion of birds and mammals are washed off the coast by rain or thawing snow back to the sea 
and enrich the littoral and shelf zones with nutrients. At large nesting colonies of sea birds, these 
runoffs represent a highly significant eutrophication of the littoral and shelf zones by nutrients, 
particularly phosphorus and nitrogen, and a significant contribution to the nutrient cycle and 
production of coastal waters. That is why these waters can represent a sufficient trophic base even 
for large colonies of birds and pinnipeds breeding on the coast.

In this sense, the Czech scientific station does not represent a significant and especially vast 
influence on the ecosystem.

10. Impacts on the anthropogenic systems, their components and 
functions

There are no anthropogenic systems in the locality. The surrounding stations cannot be considered 
as systems (at present there are 9 temporary or permanent stations on King George Island; on James 
Ross Island there is none). The nearest station is situated more than 50 km in a linear distance 
(about 75 km by sea), and there is minimum or no mutual interaction of their functions (in relation 
to personnel). Since the Czech Antarctic station would be already the tenth on
King George Island, a significant influence of a relatively great number of stations could manifest itself, for example, in an increased transport load on the sea around the island. No such risk is known on James Ross Island and the documentation will be based on data obtained straight from the terrain.

11. Description of the operational safety risks

Even though the used materials usually have a fire-resistant finish, the fire within the structures is considered as the greatest risk. Because the personnel's shelter is a life necessity, the individual structures are situated at such distances as to prevent possible fire from spreading. Specific fire prevention measures are proposed for fuel storage (at the beginning of the season it would presumably store 6,000 l of oil and 500 l of gasoline).

During a fire, a larger amount of gaseous toxic emission would be released at once, originating especially from the insulation materials (polystyrene) and fillers of chipboard parts. Due to the fact that the character of such emission depends on temperature, it cannot be definitely pre-established what products, especially the volume of toxic substances, a fire would create.

Another possible risk is the leak of oil products, mainly oil, gasoline, lubricating oils and used oil fills for the generators and the outboard motor. Such leaks can occur
-   in the fuel storage if the stored products are poorly secured or ill-manipulated
-   during the manipulation of the diesel-generator and gasoline generators
    during the transport of fuel to the structure containing the diesel-generator.

Another risk is the leak of chemical waste from the laboratory. Although the amount and toxicity of the substances commonly used in the laboratory will be low (mainly basic fixation of samples is considered), there will be prepared regulations for the treatment of these substances, their storage, including the storage of used substances.

12. Minimization of the environmental impacts

12. 1. Description of proposed alternative solutions

Originally, the only alternative for the station's location was the locality Turret Point on King George Island, South Shetlands Archipelago, with one kind of technology for the station's construction and operation. Besides, there are several potentially suitable localities within the South Shetlands that were surveyed in January and February 2002. As none of these localities fulfilled the requirements for the construction of the Czech Antarctic station, alternative solutions were proposed during the year 2002, based mainly on the reconstruction of a formerly used station. The analysis showed that none of such stations would support the proposed scientific research in full extent. Besides the formerly used localities, another alternative is the construction of the station in Brandy Bay on James Ross Island. So far, no scientific station has been constructed here and this area is relatively less explored. This fact offers the chance of a research in a relatively untouched area with a higher probability of finding new information about the region.

During the expedition to the area in March 2003, described briefly in the introductory chapter on the project's history, 7 additional localities in the north of James Ross Island, besides the proposed
32
Brandy Bay location, were proposed and mutually assessed with the kind help of Instituto Antarctico Argentino experts (see chapter "History of the project" at the beginning of the Documentation).

A table included in Annex No. 6 contains a brief mutual assessment of the alternatives of suitable solutions. The following part presents verbal comment to individual alternatives.

0. Alternative "0"

The alternative without a station's construction will neither support the full extent of activities of Czech scientists nor utilize the experience of Czech science because of the relatively high costs of possible renting a capacity at other countries' stations. The scientific programme proposed for the first Czech research station is strictly oriented at obtaining data on the changes in the sensitive Antarctic environment caused by current alterations of the Earth's climate that may be caused by or in connection with human activities. The assumed "benefits", i.e. knowledge of processes caused by such changes in the Antarctic environment, can contribute to efficient protection of this continent and the surrounding islands in the future.

Zero alternative will not supply to the environment any benefits or improvements in the current state. It will prevent long-term changes in terrain and inanimate parts of nature on a local scale (hundreds of square meters of land). Because all non-zero alternatives locate the station outside vegetation oases or breeding grounds of birds and mammals, there will be no significant difference between the influence of any non-zero alternative compared to zero alternative.

1. Turret Point, King George Island, South Shetlands Archipelago

The first proposed alternative fulfilled all requirements with respect to scientific goals at the locality, construction, and logistic needs. From this point of view, it is a locality with high scientific potential, good accessibility from the sea, suitable subsoil and water sources. At the construction's location, there are no significant vegetation oases or breeding grounds of vertebrates. The disadvantage of this locality is a possible development of cumulative effect of the station's influence on King George Island because another eight stations have been located there at present. Turret Point site played an important role during the project's preparation because it served as a model situation for the spatial distribution of structures, their interconnection, safety and technical solution. Based on the knowledge of this locality, first models of some negative influences (noise, emissions and immissions) were prepared and later applied on further assessed localities on James Ross Island.

2. Danco Island

The basic, but finally the only, advantage of this locality is the existence of an old, currently not-operating British station. The operation of the Czech station would only mean an extension of the former load (mainly the influence on landscape character). The limited non-glaciated area and size of the area have almost no importance for the assumed scientific activities. Therefore, the assessment of the station's construction at this location was abandoned after a brief analysis.

3. James Ross Island

The scientific importance of this locality is in its novelty because of the non-existence of a permanent station on James Ross Island. So far, all research oriented toward geology, geomorphology and paleontology has been carried out during shot-term expeditions equipped with tents or utilizing the currently not-operating refuge at site San Carlos Point.

However, it is a highly precious area both from the point of view of climatological, geological and geographical sciences, and biological sciences. The relatively large deglaciated area in the northern
part of the island is quite young and de-glaciating continues here. Therefore, we can study the 
processes following de-glaciating and subsequent (mainly peri-glacial) phenomena, which are 
connected with pedogenesis and later colonization by living organisms.

So far, there is no station on the island and, therefore, no risk of cumulative effects. Due to a 
present scarce biological colonization, there is little risk of substantial interventions to biological 
systems. The mutually compared localities differ mainly in their construction and transportation 
opportunities; some were not recommended for their extreme microclimatic conditions (wind 
exposure), or other later described negative phenomena.

Because the area has not been utilized yet, we were able to analyze tens of kilometers of ragged 
coast and consider the advantages and disadvantages of the station’s locations. Altogether eight 
localities were assessed this way (most have not had geographical names and were, therefore, 
marked as sites 1 − 8, here in the Documentation as 3.1-3.8).

3.1. The estuary of a nameless stream on the north-west coast below Lewis Hill. It is a locality 
without significant adverse phenomena for the construction and without significant adverse 
effects upon the environment. Its drawback is difficult accessibility (steep terrain and long 
distance) of deglaciated parts of the island which are essential for the research activities. The 
location’s orientation prevents the suggested distribution of structures in the east-west axis 
and, therefore, full utilization of solar energy collectors. The consumption of oil to run diesel-
powered generators would probably increase.

3.2. South-west coast of Brandy Bay – estuary of a stream from a freshwater lake. This site was 
long considered the most suitable for the station’s location. Thanks to the knowledge of the 
site by Argentinean geologists, it was refused in the end, because most of Brandy Bay’s coast 
is covered all year round with high snowdrifts. The area above the only free access to the 
coast (stream’s estuary) is not quite solid and threatens slope movements of sediments. 
Furthermore, the local climatic conditions are often very poor, and they would limit the 
construction and future operation. Brandy Bay itself is a relatively calm place used by 
research vessels as an emergency shelter against strong pounding of waves and floating ice in 
Prince Gustav’s Strait during storms. On the contrary, little water motion in the bay could 
cause trouble with the dispersion of wastewater in the shallow littoral zone.

3.3. Inner Brandy Bay near Aberneth Flats. Almost all the coast is filled with small-grain fluvial 
sediments; it is unstable and flat, very low and often flooded from the land during rapid 
thawing. In the aerial photographs, it is evident that the flat coast is to a large extent flooded 
at high tide. Such a character of the beach eliminates disembarkation from the sea.

3.4. The estuary of a nameless stream on the north coast below spot height “64”. This site is well 
accessible from the sea with an opportunity for a ship’s retreat from storms to nearby Brandy 
Bay. The sea does not freeze over here even in austral winter which allows early spring 
provision of the station. On site, there is a vast and geologically stable area for the station’s 
foundation, with a source of water and the opportunity to orient the structures in east-west 
axis for the utilization of solar energy and also in the west-wind direction for wind 
generators’ operation. Slowly upward-sloping terrain allows, across the saddle Crame Col 
(200 m a.s.l.), an easy access to the whole north promontory of James Ross Island. At this 
site, no environmental phenomena that would prevent the construction were detected. 
Because of its overall suitability, another dispersion study was carried out for this site, using 
the same emission features of the structures as in the case of Turret Point. A noise study was 
not compiled because the area’s extent in relation to the noise-affected part is not 
significantly different from Turret Point site and the results can be duplicated.

34
3.5. The east coast below Bengtson Cliffs. It is a site with a small area for the location of 
structures and with an unsuitable orientation towards east (solar collectors). The location 
below cliffs would limit the prevailing west winds and reduce the effectiveness of wind 
generators.

3.6. A more south-ward located site, similarly to 3.5. on the east coast below Bengtson Cliffs. Its 
characteristics are similar to the above mentioned; the main adverse phenomenon is, 
however, the unstable material for the structure's foundation.

3.7.

and

3.8. Two sites on the east coast, relatively deep in Croft Bay. Both alternatives were refused for 
the sea's freezing over which lasts until late spring (November to December) and is the key 
limiting factor for the station's construction and provision.

Based on the analysis of all localities with respect to the above mentioned implications, location 3.4. 
(or Site No. 4) on the north coast of James Ross Island was selected as a priority site for the 
assessment and construction of the station.

13. Description of the proposed measures to prevent, eliminate, 
minimize or compensate environmental impacts

The construction's location, concept and technology, maximum utilization of renewable energy 
sources (solar collectors, wind), waste disposal, etc., are proposed already in the project so as to 
minimize the environmental impacts. The key measures proposed in the project can be summarized 
as follows:
-   the construction is situated on the terrain surface, without deep foundation
-   the construction can be dismantled and completely transported away after its lifetime expires
-   the construction is situated on the part of the coast not used by animals
-   the construction maximizes the effort to utilize available renewable sources of energy
-   in the locality, there will be deposited no waste which cannot disperse or degrade
    each new-coming group would be instructed at the beginning of the season by the head of the 
expedition as to the location of vegetation oases and the occurrence of animals so that such 
localities would be disturbed as little as possible
                                                                                                                         35
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

14. Description of methods and data used to the forecast impact

Technical parameters of the materials and equipment proposed for the station were used as 
the input data for the environmental impact evaluation as well as field data acquired during the 
terrain reconnaissance by the representatives of the investor and project designer. Additional data 
included the published results of the research carried out in the South Shetlands Archipelago area 
and James Ross Island area. Besides, the evaluation utilizes experience from the operation of other 
research stations in the area, including the final Greenpeace report (Anonymous 1994). Their base 
and the research conducted there was directed to acquiring experience with environmental impact 
minimization. Data collecting in field in January - February 2003 will help complete description of 
the details where the station will be situated. There will be learned vegetation cover in the building 
area, bird nesting places and mammal refuges which would be impacted.

All these data are used also by the planners during project development and are taken into 
account in the project. All the date collected before realization should be used for final CEE.

15. Outline of monitoring programme

Monitoring of the impacts of activities in the Antarctic area is compulsory; it has a given 
methodology and purpose derived from the Antarctic Treaty and Madrid Protocol. A specific 
monitoring programme is part of the construction plan (Anonymous 2000) and assumes the 
following observations and measurements:

- At the beginning of the construction, soil samples will be taken at the construction site and its 
environs in a grid of 100 x 100 m at a total area corresponding to the maximum short-term 
immission concentration 50 μg.m-3 according to the dispersion study, i.e. the grid will cover an 
area of up to 500 x 500 m (total of 25 samples). In this grid, samples will be taken annually at 
the end of the research season, analyzed, and compared to the referential samples from the first 
year. The analyses will be directed at the contents of nitrogenous compounds in soils.

- At the beginning of the construction, a quantitative survey of bird nesting populations and a 
count of pinnipeds on the coast will take place within 1 km around the station. The counts will 
be taken every season during the station's operation and the results will be analyzed with 
respect to the station's operation possible impact on these populations.

- In the station's environs where its personnel can visit more frequently, i.e. at a radius within 2 
km from the station, a detailed monitoring of vegetation oases and further occurrence of 
vegetation (algae, lichens, mosses) will be carried out at the beginning of the construction and a 
detailed map of such areas will be drawn. At the beginning of each season, the head of the 
expedition will introduce the personnel to these oases and the rudiments of their conservation. 
These areas will be checked every season to assure that there occur no mechanical or other 
sorts of damage.

36
16. Gaps and uncertainties affecting the EIA

The initial environmental evaluation utilizes all available sources for the construction's alternative locations suggested during terrain reconnaissance of King George Island in January 2002, and results both published and unpublished from the Antarctic Peninsula area, the South Shetlands, and James Ross Island. The knowledge of Argentinean geologists and geomorphologists, namely Drs. R. J. Strelin, D. C. Toriclli and J. M. Lirio, and employees or collaborators of IAA, was utilized for the assessment of localities on James Ross Island.

In the localities, for example, no measuring of noise load background was carried out, thus the noise load (especially from wind-generators, and at strong wind from diesel-generators) cannot be compared in relation to this background. The samples of soil for the detection of nitrogenous compounds have not been taken yet. The extent of eutrophication caused by washing-off of the excrements from bird nesting grounds to the sea is not known and cannot be compared to the loading caused by wastewater discharged from the station.

No accurate data on the occurrence and location of bird nesting grounds and pinniped assembly points in the wider surroundings of the station were available during the elaboration of the Documentation, except for the locality itself where nesting was not proved. However, all knowledge of localities (all alternatives) proves that no bird nesting colonies or large gathering grounds of pinnipeds occur in the here.

                                                                                                                                             37
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

17. Conclusions

Impact                                                    Point evaluation
on inhabitants                                               0
on ecosystems, their components and                          1
functions                                                    
on air and climate                                           2
                                                         emission    2
                                                         noise and vibration    2
on water                                                     1
                                                         freshwater    0
                                                         sea           1
on soil and geological conditions                            1-2
on flora and fauna                                           0-1
                                                         flora         0-1
                                                         fauna         0-1
on ecosystems                                                1
                                                         terrestrial   1
                                                         marine        2
on anthropogenic systems                                     0
other impacts                                                0
large-area impacts in the landscape                          2

Legend:
0 - without verifiable impact
1 - unverifiable, but probable local reversible impact
2 - verifiable reversible impact of local reach
3 - assumed irreversible impact of local reach
4 - assumed regional and supraregional irreversible impact
5 - certain regional and supraregional irreversible impact
38
18. Non-technical summary

The objective of the Czech Republic to build a small, seasonal, research station in the 
Antarctic stems from experience gathered through activities of Czech scientists in the area of the 
Antarctic Peninsula and South Shetlands, and from the need to establish a logistic background for 
development of complex and long-term research.

After comments on the first proposal of the station site presented at XXIV ATCM in St. 
Petersburg, 2001, and based on two reconnaissance trips to the Antarctic Peninsula, South 
Shetlands, and South Orkneys, a new location was proposed at the northern coast of James Ross 
Island. This area was the destination of another reconnaissance journey in March 2003. The aims 
were as follows:

1. Selection of a suitable building site,

2. Evaluation of its suitability from the point of view of landing and disembarkation, 
construction of buildings with application of the design and technological solutions proposed 
for the former location (Turret Point),

3. Evaluation of the site from the point of view of possible disturbing the existing ecosystems 
with regard to minimization of this impact,

4. Identification of a suitable fresh water source,

5. Assessment of the site and the environs from the point of view of research potential 
corresponding to the existing scientific programme.

Thanks to IAA colleagues and their close cooperation with the Czech party, 8 locations at the 
northern coast of JRI in the section from the Lewis Hill to St. Martha Cove were evaluated and as 
generally most suitable the site NW of Brandy Bay, under spot 64 m, was selected.

The environmental impact assessment of station technical project, construction and operation 
resulted at this stage in the following conclusions:

1. The station construction and its foundation would not disturb significantly either the surface 
or subsoil or vegetation at the selected site.

2. Proposed energy generation and effort to use maximum of renewable energy resources 
(wind, solar energy, thermal pumps) would minimize fuel combustion emissions to a level 
which should not significantly influence the station's environs.

3. Discharge of non-toxic liquid waste to the sea would be directed to an area with sufficient 
flow, thus it is not supposed to increase singnificantly concentration of pollution along the 
coast.

4. Toxic and incombustible waste would be transported out the Antarctic area pursuant to 
Madrid Protocol.

5. Sources of acoustic emissions (diesel generators, waste incinerator, wind generators) would 
not be as considerable as to disturb significantly birds and mammals in the surroundings.

6. Continuous vegetation does not occur in the proximate surroundings of the selected site and 
thus it could not be affected by the station construction and operation.

7. In the vicinity o f the selected site no bird-nesting areas or areas of large concentrations of 
pinnipeds exist, thus they could no be affected by the station construction and operation.

8. Occurrence of flora and fauna in the station environs would regularly monitored pursuant to 
Madrid Protocol requirements. Results of the monitoring would be processed, interpreted 
and if necessary, measures for the station operation would be adopted.

39
19. References/Sources

Anonymous, 1994: Trading Lightly: A Minimal Impact Antarctic Station. Greenpeace World Park
    Base Antarctica 1987-1992. Greenpeace International Amsterdam, 41 pp.
Anonymous, 2000: Česká vědecká stanice v Antarktidě. Projekt stavby pro stavební povolení. E - 
    Dokumentace stavebních a inženýrských objektů a provozních souborů. A) Průvodní zpráva. 
    Investprojekt Zlín 12 pp. B) Souhrnná technická zpráva. Investprojekt Zlín 93 pp.
Anonymous, 2000: Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica. COMNAP, 
    Hobart, 21pp.
Croxall JP, Steele WK, McInnes SJ & Prince PA (1995) Breeding distribution of the snow petrel 
    Pagodroma nivea. Marine Ornithology 23, 69-99.
Heap, 1994: Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System
Hoyo, J., Elliot, A., Sargatal. J., (eds.) 1992: Handbook of the Birds of the World, Volume I, Ostrich 
    to Ducks. Lynx Edicions Barcelona. 696 pp.
Hoyo, J., Elliot, A., Sargatal. J., (eds.) 1992: Handbook of the Birds of the World, Volume II, 
    Hoatzin to Auks. Lynx Edicions Barcelona. 821 pp.
Perrins, C., M., Lebreton, J-D., Hirons, (eds.)1991: Bird population studies. Relevance to 
    Conservation and management. Oxford, 683 pp.
Poncet S et al (ms) The distribution and abundance of blue-eyed cormorants. Draft ms for Scientific 
    Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Bird Biology Subcommittee (70pp). To be 
    submitted to Marine Ornithology.
Woehler EJ (ms). The distribution and abundance of Southern Ocean larids. Draft ms for Scientific 
    Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Bird Biology Subcommittee (80pp). To be 
    submitted to Marine Ornithology.
Woehler, E.J. & Croxall, J.P. 1997. The status and trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic seabirds. 
    Marine Ornithology 25, 43-66. [Originally tabled as SC-CAMLR-XV/BG/29]
Woehler, E.J. 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic penguins. 
    Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Bird Biology Subcommittee, iv+76pp
Woehler, E.J. & Croxall, J.P. 1997. The status and trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic seabirds. 
    Marine Ornithology 25, 43-66. [Originally tabled as SC-CAMLR-XV/BG/29]
Woehler EJ (ms). The distribution and abundance of Southern Ocean larids. Draft ms for Scientific 
    Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Bird Biology Subcommittee (80pp). To be 
    submitted to Marine Ornithology.

Selected websites used as a source of other informations

http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/
http://www.anta.canterbury.ac.nz/
http://www.nerc-bas.ac.uk/public/magic/protected-area/
http://www.cold.loc.gov
http://www.aadc.aad.gov.au
http://www.npolar.no/cep/Content/cep_archive/CEP_V_Documents.htm
                                                                                    40
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annexes of CEE

Annex No. 1    Area of Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula with locations of sites assessed in 
               connection with the intention of the station's construction

Annex No. 2    Satellite photograph of James Ross Island with the research interest area marked

Annex No. 3    Northern part of James Ross Island - 8 assessed alternatives, arrow pointed at the 
               final location

Annex No. 4    Aerial photograph of Site No. 4, construction site marked (photo by J. Strelin)

Annex No. 5    Temperatures, wind direction and intensity on James Ross Island (J. Strelin)

Annex No. 6    Table of the analysis of compared alternatives of the project

Annex No. 7    Emission and dispersion study

Annex No. 8    Noise study

41
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 1
Area of Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula with location of sites assessed in connection 
with the intention of the station's construction

King George Island (left) and  James Ross Island (right)
                                                                                                          42
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No.2
Satellite photograph of James Ross Island with research interest area marked

10 km

43
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No 3
North part of James Ross Island - 8 assessed alternatives, arrow pointed at the final location

          10 km        
44
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No 4
Aerial photohraph of Site No. 4, construction site marked (photo by J. Strelin)

1 000 m
                                                                                             45
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 5
Temperatures, wind direction and intensity on James Ross Island

Wind speed vs direction - Jan 1997 to Mar 1999




                                                                 46
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 6
Table of the analysis of compared alternatives of the project

                                                                 Σ                ΣΣ       
|                | negative factors (subtracted from the total)     |   | positive factors                                  |   |     |
|                | risk of snow-drift | soilflow | loading capacity *1 | bank *2 | influence on vegetation | influence on fauna | cumulation of stations |   | scientific interest | seasonal accessibility from sea | site for constructi on | exposure (wind, collectors) | water source |   |     |
| 1.Turr.Point   | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 1                      | -1 | 1                   | 1                               | 1                      | 1                           | 1            | 5 | 4   |
| 2.Danco        | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0 | 0                   | 1                               | 0                      | 1                           | 0            | 2 | 2   |
| 3.James Ross   |                    |          |                     |         |                         |                    |                        |    |                     |                                 |                        |                             |              |     |     |
| 3.1.           | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0 | 0                   | 1                               | 1                      | 0                           | 1            | 3 | 3   |
| 3.2.           | 0                  | 1        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -1 | 1                   | 1                               | 0                      | 1                           | 1            | 4 | 3   |
| 3.3.           | 0                  | 1        | 1                   | 1       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -3 | 0                   | 0                               | 0                      | 1                           | 0            | 1 | -2  |
| 3.4.           | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0 | 1                   | 1                               | 1                      | 1                           | 1            | 5 | 5   |
| 3.5.           | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0 | 0                   | 1                               | 0                      | 1                           | 1            | 3 | 3   |
| 3.6.           | 0                  | 1        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -1 | 0                   | 1                               | 1                      | 1                           | 0            | 3 | 2   |
| 3.7.           | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0 | 1                   | 0                               | 1                      | 1                           | 1            | 4 | 4   |
| 3.8.           | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0 | 1                   | 0                               | 1                      | 1                           | 1            | 6 | 4   |

*1  of the assumed footing bottom
*2  bank character with respect to disembarkation needs
                                                                                                                         47
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex n. 7

The influence of station's operation on air quality -
dispersion study

Introduction

The operation of a proposed scientific station in Antarctica will also include production of 
supplementary electricity by a diesel-generator and treatment of solid municipal waste in a small 
incinerator of GOLAR 120 Marine type.

For proposed station were assessed two alternative sites, the first one located on the south coast of 
King George Island in the South Shetlands, the second on the north coast of James Ross Island.

Therefore, the station's operation will emit pollutants to the air. The dispersion study models and 
evaluates the possible influence of such emissions on the quality of air in the station's surroundings.

Emissions
Waste incinerator GOLAR 120 Marine

For the quantification of emissions, available technical specifications present the amount of CO 
131 mg/MJ produced during the incineration of solid waste. Based on the published heat output 175 
kW (=0.175 MJ.s
-1
), emission flow of CO can be expected at 23 mg.s
-1
.

Available data do not permit direct calculation of emission flow of other basic pollutants (group 0 
according to the Ministry of the Environment Regulation n. 117/1997 Coll., i.e. NO
x
, HC, etc.), or 
other eventual harmful substances (group 1 - 4).

For the incineration unit, a rough estimate of nitrogen oxides mass flow is deduced from the data 
on CO when considering the assumed ratio of CO and NO
x
 emission at incinerators of the given 
type, utilizing high temperature incineration. This is done since NO
x
 cannot be omitted at emission 
and immission evaluation (due to the ratio of emission relative amount and immission limit). In 
48
emission limits, this ratio is stated within the value of 1:4 (see the above mentioned regulation,
"Special Emission Standards for Waste Incinerators", etc.). Under these circumstances, the emission 
flow of NO     x    is assessed at about 100 mg.s    -1    for the incineration of solid municipal waste in the 
GOLAR 120 Marine incinerator.

Combustible waste is expected to be disposed of in single portions of about 200 l approximately 
twice a month.

One summer season will, therefore, have about 9 incineration cycles. One 200 l portion of solid 
waste is incinerated in about 4 hours.

Based on the previous facts, the following values of CO and NO     x    emissions can be assessed for the 
expected incineration of solid municipal waste in the incinerator GOLAR 120 Marine during 
seasonal operation of the Czech scientific station in Antarctica.

|          | CO     | NO     x    |
| Total emission per season 
kg/120 days | 2.981  | 12.960  |
| Emission mass flow 
g/hour | 83     | 360     |

At the stated capacity of the output fan at 3000 m    3    .h    -1    , the emission concentrations of NO     x    and CO 
in combustion products (corresponding to the mentioned mass flows) reach the level of 120 mg.m    -3    , 
and 28 mg.m    -3    . These levels are well below limits (see the above mentioned regulation).

Emission of other pollutants that may be produced by the given facility can also be considered at 
low below-limit levels due to the high-temperature incineration (up to 1400 °C). Considering the 
substances in group 1, especially the frequently discussed polychlorinated dibenzodioxins and 
dibenzofurans, one can say that under the given incineration conditions, and given the amount and 
character of combusted waste, the emission of these substances exceeding the limits is highly 
improbable. Facilities, such as GOLAR, have long been verified for the disposal of waste under the 
given conditions and there is no reason to disregard their emission standards.

Diesel-electric generator

So far, diesel generator HONDA EXT 12 with an output of 10 kW     el     , has been chosen as a 
supplementary source of electricity for the scientific station. Based on the available data, i.e. 
efficiency 0.8, consumption max. 271 g of oil per kWh, the hourly consumption of fuel can be 
deduced at 3.375 kg.h    -1    . The generator is supposed to cover about 45 % of the seasonal need for 
electricity (about 55 % will be supplied by the main source - wind generators). Therefore, the total 
operation time of the generator at the presumed input of 9 kW would be 1166 hours (if the season 
lasts 120 days).

The following emission data can be deduced when we use emission factors published by the 
Institute for the research of motor vehicles "Specific emission for the basic categories of cars and 
selected regimes, Prague 1995" (emission factors adjusted for the technical level of motors after 
year 2000):
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica


|                  | CO  | NO    | O     | solid  |
|                  |     | x     | x     |pollutants|
|------------------|-----|-------|-------|----------|
|Total emission    | 128 | 90    | 38    | 28       |
|kg/120 days       |     |       |       |          |
|Emission mass flow| 110 | 77    | 35    | 22       |
|g/hour            |     |       |       |          |

Portable gasoline generators

Based on the available data, the following emission flow values can be deduced for one operating generator:

|                  | CO   | NO    | O     | solid  |
|                  |      | x     | x     |pollutants|
|------------------|------|-------|-------|----------|
|Emission mass flow| 1570 | 37    | 23    | -        |
|g/hour            |      |       |       |          |

Certainly, total emission per season cannot be presented.

In order to provide the full picture, it should be mentioned that there will be emissions in connection with the presumed operation of motor boats.

Immission

Potential immission of nitrogen oxides is calculated as a part of the evaluation of the scientific station's possible influence on air quality in its surroundings. Model calculation is conducted according to the valid methodology SYMOS' 97 ("Methodical directions of the department of air protection of the Ministry of the Environment for the calculation of air pollution from point and mobile sources", Prague 1998).

We assess three situations - operation of a diesel-electric generator, operation of an incinerator, and simultaneous operation of both facilities.

For the given locality, complete meteorological data (i.e. detailed wind rose at atmosphere's stability classes) that are necessary for the calculation of statistically bound immission parameters, such as average annual concentration IH r , or total duration of limit exceeding, are not available. Therefore, only a model calculation of maximum short term immission concentrations of NO x was carried out. The reduction of the outcomes of the dispersion study in this case does not lead to an abatement of the quality of presented assessment. Emission flows of both assessed sources almost insignificant from the point of view of possible values of average annual concentrations that were calculated from emission data. We can say that the IH r values of NO x would be at the level of 10-15 μg.m -3  at maximum, which is well below immission limit (80 μg.m -3 ). Similarly, the total number of hours exceeding the limit for average 30-minute concentrations of NO x would by no means exceed the permissible 5% annually anywhere around the station.

A model assessment is carried out for nitrogen oxides. This pollutant definitely reaches the most unfavorable ratio between relative emission amount and immission limit.

50
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Calculation method according to the methodology SYMOS’ 97.

SYMOS’ 97 methodology is based on a static gauss model of exhaust plume dispersion at stability classification of atmosphere according to Bubník and Koldovský. Side dispersion of polluting admixture in the axis of exhaust plume (depending on side deviations) is determined by gauss division in analytically formulated computational regulation (Sutton's formula).

According to the available data, the model covers the assessed line sources as follows (see the above chapter "Emission"):
- Incinerator GOLAR 120 Marine – construction height 2.5 m, heat yield 0.1 MW, emission mass flow of NO_(x) 100 mg.s^(-1).
- Diesel-generator – construction height 2 m, heat yield 0.001 MW (low value takes into account horizontal layout of the exhaust), emission mass flow of NO_(x) 21 mg.s^(-1).

A model immission calculation is carried out in a detailed square grid of referential points with 20 m pitch. The calculation comprises specific orography of the given locality at standard detail corresponding to the grid of referential points.

Calculated values are interpolated and further processed (utilizing GIS) to the final graphic outcomes - maps of the interest area covered by color restricted areas of the occurrence of individual value ranges of modeled immission parameters.

51
Valid immission limits:
	Nitrogen and carbon oxides (for comparison) have the following immission limits set by the provision of FVŽP, October 1, 1991, following the Act No 309/1991 Coll.

                                                                            
                                 | Immission limits (μg.m<sup>-3</sup>)       | Permissible number of hours 
                                 | Average annual  | Average 30-minute  | per year when exceeding IH<sub>k</sub>
                                 | concentration IH<sub>i</sub> | concentration IH<sub>k</sub>   |                                
______________________________________________________________________________
NO<sub>x</sub>                    |        80       |        200         |         438         
CO                       |                 |       10 000       |         438         

Commentary to the results

As already stated above, the possible influence of the proposed scientific station's operation is assessed via a model calculation of maximum short-term immission concentrations of nitrogen oxides in the surface layer of atmosphere.

Maximum short-term immission concentrations are not statistically defined parameters, i.e. they are not averages as are other immission attributes but maximum theoretically possible values that can be reached by immission concentration at a certain point.

In this case, therefore, we model the situation of persistence of the most adverse dispersion conditions when the flow direction causes maximum transport of pollutants from the dominant source to individual referential points. The value of maximum short-term immission concentration at each point in the interest area in fact represents different directions of flow - different meteorological situations. Final distribution of maximum short-term concentration values in the presented area is, therefore, an integration of all the most adverse meteorological situations (from the point of view of every single referential point). In this context, maximum short-term concentrations are always referred to in plural in contrast to statistically bound average annual concentration.

We can add that the comparison of maximum theoretically possible immission concentration with the IH<sub>k</sub> limit (average 30-minute concentration) automatically presupposes a stable half-an-hour duration of the above described dispersion conditions and flow direction without direction or speed fluctuations in order to reach the predicted immission maxima. In reality, such situation never exists. It means that the calculated immission maximum can be in reality reached only as an immediate value. The average 30-minute sequence of concentrations is almost always lower.

Assessment and conclusions

Situation - operation of diesel-generator:

The eventual occurrence of slightly limit-exceeding values of NO<sub>x</sub> immission concentrations in the surface layer of atmosphere, i.e. 200 - 250 μg.m<sup>-3</sup> (red color), can be encountered in the immediate surroundings of the station within app. 50 m. This concentration results from a presumed lower plume rise from the horizontal exhaust (at lower value of NO<sub>x</sub> mass flow used).

Nevertheless, it should be noted that the situation (or collection of situations for different flow directions - see commentary to the results) corresponds to very adverse dispersion conditions with a 
                                                                                                                                                                                              52
noticeable thermal inversion at very slight to no flow intensity. Under normal dispersion conditions, 
the calculated NO
x
 immission concentrations at a given situation are significantly below limit.

Further, it is possible to presume that the actual NO
x
 mass flow produced by the assessed modern 
facility will be slightly lower than the one used for the calculations. With respect to the information 
source, another was not available, the NO
x
 mass flow value used for the calculation can be 
considered to totally overestimate any actual occurrence.

The result we obtained does not show any possibility of significant exceeding the IH
k 
NO
x 
immission limit. In connection with the above stated facts (see commentary to the results), the 
operation of the diesel-generator in the given locality can be considered permissible with respect to 
the presumed influence on air quality (even though the generator might be put into operation at 
lower flow intensities).

Situation - operation of incineration unit:

A favorable result, even if a significantly higher value of NO
x 
mass flow is used in comparison to 
the proceeding situation, can be expected due to the higher thermal rise of hot emissions. It is 
possible that slightly above-limit values of immission concentrations will be encountered within 30 
m around the structure containing the incinerator.

Except for the overestimation of the used mass flow, the facts stated at the assessment of the 
proceeding situation can be repeated. Furthermore, the incinerator's operation is not limited by the 
occurrence of lower flow intensity.

Situation - simultaneous operation of incinerator and diesel-generator:

The results basically correspond to the unification of both above assessed situations.

In general, we can say that except under extremely adverse dispersion conditions the incinerator 
can be operated simultaneously with the diesel generator, if necessary.

Conclusion

Model assessment of the eventual impact of the future operation of the Czech scientific station in 
Antarctica on air quality shows that the implementation of this project will not bring an 
unacceptable immission load in the given locality.

References:
SYMOS 97, Metodický pokyn odboru ochrany ovzduší MŽP výpočtu znečištění ovzduší z 
bodových a mobilních zdrojů, Praha 1998.
Kröbl, L.: Měrné emise pro základní kategorie automobilů a vybrané druhy provozních 
režimů,ÚVMV/TÜV Bayern, s.r.o., Praha 1995.
Dvořák, M.: Hodnocení životních období jako důsledek cirkulačních faktorů ve střední části 
Jižních Shetland, diplomová práce, MU v Brně, Brno 2000.

Other information and map sources supplied by the applicant:
Teamtec - GOLAR Incinerators, Technical Specification, Type OG 120 C
Technical data   - diesel-generator HONDA EXIT 12
                - portable gasoline generator

Description of the proposed scientific station
Map of the area of interest
                                                                                                          53
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Appendix 1 to Annex 7: Graphical presentation of the results

King George Island -Turret Point


Czech scienentific station 
in Antarctica

Model assessment of impact 
Operation of diesel-generator

Maximum short-therm 
immission concentration 
of Nitrogen oxides (μg.m ^{-3} )

King George Island -Turret Point


Czech scienentific station 
in Antarctica

Model assessment of impact 
Operation of incineration unit

Maximum short-therm 
immission concentration 
of Nitrogen oxides (μg.m ^{-3} )
54
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

King George Island -Turret Point

< 20
20 - 40
40 - 60
60 - 80
80 - 100
100 - 130
130 - 160
160 - 200
200 - 250

Czech scienentific station 
in Antarctica

Model assessment of impact 
Simultaneous operation 
of incineration unit and 
diesel-generator

Maximum short-therm 
immission concentration 
of Nitrogen oxides (μg.m-3)

James Ross Island – “Site No.- 4”

< 20
20 - 40
40 - 60
60 - 80
80 - 100
100 - 130
130 - 160
160 - 200
200 - 250

Czech scientific station 
in Antarctica 
James Ross Island 
"site No. 4"

Model assessement of impact 
Operation of diesel-generator

Maximum short-therm 
immission concentration 
of Nitrogen oxides (μg/m3)

55
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

James Ross Island - "Site No.- 4"




                                          <= 20 
                                          20 - 40 
                                          40 - 60 
                                          60 - 80 
                                          80 - 100 
                                          100 - 130 
                                          130 - 160 
                                          160 - 200 
                                          200 - 250
                                          
Czech scientific station
in Antarctica
James Ross Island
"site No. 4"

Model assessement of impact
Operation of incineration unit

Maximum short-therm
immission concentration
of Nitrogen oxides (μ g/m3)

James Ross Island - "Site No.- 4"




                                          <= 20 
                                          20 - 40 
                                          40 - 60 
                                          60 - 80 
                                          80 - 100 
                                          100 - 130 
                                          130 - 160 
                                          160 - 200 
                                          200 - 250

Czech scientific station
in Antarctica
James Ross Island
"site No.4"

Model assessement of impact
Simultaneous operation
of incineration unit and
diesel-generator

Maximum short-therm
immission concentration
of Nitrogen oxides (μ g/m3)

56
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex n. 8

Acoustic study

CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION...........................................................................................................................................58
2. SOURCE MATERIALS...............................................................................................................................58
2.1. Source materials delivered by the customer.......................................................................................58
3. PREREQUISITES FOR THE REALIZATION..............................................................................................58
3.1. Area of interest........................................................................................................................................58
3.2. Conditions for the study’s realization....................................................................................................58
3.2.1. General characteristics....................................................................................................................58
3.2.2. Point sources....................................................................................................................................59
3.2.3. Description of calculation points....................................................................................................66
4. ACOUSTIC SITUATION..............................................................................................................................68
4.1. Noise propagation from point sources to the outer surroundings....................................................68
4.2. Noise propagation from a portable gasoline generator to the outer surroundings.......................69
5. CONCLUSION.............................................................................................................................................70
6. REFFERENCES............................................................................................................................................71
7. ATTACHMENTS..........................................................................................................................................71
                                                                                                      57
1. INTRODUCTION

This study aims to determine the area impacted by the noise produced by point sources 
located on the structures within the Czech scientific station in Antarctica to the surroundings.

This study deals with two acoustic situations :

1.Situation during the operation of the scientific station. The assessment was calculated on the 
basis of acoustic features of point sources located on the structures within the area of the scientific 
station.

2.Situation during the use of portable diesel-generator. The assessment was calculated on the basis 
of acoustic features of the portable gasoline-powered generator.

2. SOURCE MATERIALS

2.1. Source materials delivered by the customer

The customer delivered to the compiler the following source materials :

1.Built-up plan of the Czech scientific station in Antarctica, 1:1000
2.Cross-section of the accommodation structure SO 01, 1:125
3.Longitudinal section of the accommodation structure SO 01, 1:125
4.Cross-sections of the operational containers SO 02 - 06, 1:100
5.Excerpts from the technical report and project
6.Photographs with a transparency representing the nesting and migration of fauna.

Other sources used for the study's preparation are listed in Chapter References.

3. PREREQUISITES FOR THE REALIZATION

3.1. Area of interest

The area of interest is situated on a rocky sea coast; the Czech scientific station is in its center. 
The area of interest is formed by a circle with a radius of 200 m. There is a cargo container SO 05 - 
Diesel generator in its center. The generator is the most significant source of noise.

The area of the scientific station comprises two basic types of structures. The first type is the 
main accommodation structure with dimensions of 26.53 x 10.53 x 3.15 m. The other type 
comprises eight cargo containers with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m. The list of individual 
structures that constitute the scientific station and their acoustic features are presented inpter 3.2.2.

3.2. Conditions for the study's realization

3.2.1. General characteristics

Acoustic situations were assessed by calculation. Software HLUK+, version 5.02, was used 
for the calculation. The program facilitates the calculation of the levels of acoustic pressure A 
generated by industrial sources of noise in the outer environment. The program contains a procedure 
published in "Source materials for proposing and assessing of industrial constructions, part 3 - 
construction acoustics" (M. Meller, J. Stěnička, VÚPS Praha, 1985 in Czech).
Program HLUK+ requires entering the type of terrain when creating a calculation environment. A global choice of "reflective terrain" or "absorptive terrain" is used, or an attribute of "immersed terrain" can be used. "Reflective terrain" causes minimum attenuation of sound waves. It is represented by concrete or asphalt areas and water surface. On the contrary, during the propagation of a sound wave above an "absorptive terrain", the attenuation of sound waves is greater. Such a terrain comprises, for example, grass areas, fields of grain, and other agricultural crops. In our case, the area of interest for noise propagation can be with characterized as a reflective terrain with a minimum percentage of acoustically absorptive areas.

3.2.2. Point sources

Because no specific acoustic parameters of the individual sources of noise were available, the calculation utilizes values set according to a common knowledge of acoustic features of similar facilities. Table 1 of this chapter presents the assumed acoustic features of the individual sources of noise. The following outline presents only the basic characteristics of individual structures and their parameters at the calculation program HLUK+.

Survey of the scientific station's structures:

> Structure SO 01 - Operation and accommodation building

This is the main building of the station with dimensions of 26.53 x 10.53 m. It is covered with a pent roof with an approximate 5% slope (height 3.15 - 2.6 m). The building is designed as a one-story structure erected from the K-Kontrol construction system. The system comprises sandwich panels consisting of two OSB chipboards with an inner insulation layer of self-extinguishing polystyrene. Floor and roof panels are 320 mm, external walls 265 mm thick. The panel will be 170 mm thick where a solar collector wall will be installed.

The alternative of the surface finish of the outer walls with a coating of waterproof plywood 6 mm thick on lath grill is preferred.

Sources of noise:
- According to the project developer, the ventilation engine room contains app. 6 pieces of small equipment with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= 40 dB within 1 m from the source and 2 pieces of exhaust and suction fans with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= 50 dB within 1 m from the source. On the suction and exhaust lattices from the eastern side of the structure SO 01 towards the incinerator (SO 02), the level of acoustic pressure A is L_(pA )= 40 dB in 1 m from the source.

Based on the computations according to the equations (1) - (3) of this chapter, the level of acoustic pressure A inside the engine room was determined as L_(pA )= 58.4 dB. With respect to the fact that the soundproofness of the outer coat of the structure SO 01 is R_(W )= 45 dB, the value of acoustic pressure A in the outer surroundings according to the equation (4) of this chapter is L_(2 )= 7.4 dB, which is an absolutely negligible value. Therefore, the model computation takes into account only the suction and exhaust port from the eastern side of the structure SO 01 with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= 40 dB in 1 m from the source.

> Structure SO 02 - Waste treatment

The structure is located with a direct relationship to the main building of the station. It is accessible through a technical entrance from the eastern front, directly from an entrance ramp. The structure comprises a modified cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.

Sources of noise:
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

-   Incinerator OG 120 SW, produced by TEAMTEC Norway, with two sources of noise 
- a pump of the heating oil with a burner and an exhaust fan for combustion gases with 
a value of acoustic output of the source app. L_(WA )= 40 – 50 dB, which will operate once 
every 10 days with approximately a 4-hour combustion cycle.
-   Wind -powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= 38 dB in 1 m 
from the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 03 - Generators storage 
This is a modified cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m. 
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= 38 dB in 1 m from 
the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 04 - Engine room of power supply equipment 
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m. 
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= 38 dB in 1 m from 
the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 05 - Diesel generator 
Structure SO 05 is the most significant source of noise within the station's area. It is a cargo 
container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m, without windows, with two permanently 
mounted diesel generators for the production of electricity and two mobile diesel generators. 
The outer coat of the container comprises a trapeze sheet 2 mm thick followed by a mineral 
matting 50 mm thick with a perforated aluminum sheet.

Sources of noise:
-   Two permanently mounted diesel generators of Spanish origin with the electricity 
output of 12.6 kW. Only one generator at a time will be in operation for 24 hours. The 
other diesel generator will serve as an electricity backup. As the project developer states, no 
authentic noise parameters were available, therefore, a comparable value of acoustic 
pressure A L_(PA )= 90 dB in 1m, stated by the producer Catterpilar for 12.6 kW, was used for 
this source of noise. The exhaust of the diesel generator protrudes horizontally from the wall 
2.5 m above the ground. Air suction is located on a suction grating with dimensions of 
150 x 210 mm, which is situated in the upper part of the front against the entrance door. 
Below this suction grating, i.e. in the lower part of the front, and above the entrance door, 
there are air grates. These are 50 x 150 mm big and have holes 10 mm in diameter. These 
holes represent 50 % of the area. The air grate is further covered with blinds from the 
outside.
-   Two portable gasoline-powered generators with a total operation time app. 10 
hours a week outside the scientific station's area. Only one generator at a time will be in 
operation. The project developer states the value of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= 90 dB 
in 1m.

Using the above mentioned data, the following values of acoustic parameters 
were calculated as valid for the structure SO 05. Based on these computations, 
the calculation program HLUK+ utilized input values of acoustic parameters, 
which are summarized in Table 1.
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

According to the equation (1), the level of acoustic output was calculated as LWA = 98 dB

        LpA = LWA + 10log(Q/4πr2)      [dB]         (1)

where:
LpA ..... level of acoustic pressure A in dB (LpA = 90 dB),
LWA .... acoustic output of a sound source in dB,
Q....... factor of directionality of a sound source in a given environment and direction (Q = 
2),
4πr2 .... wave front of a spherical sound wave in m2,
r ....... distance between the immission point and the center of the source of sound (r = 
1m).

According to the equation (2), the level of acoustic pressure A inside the container was calculated as LpA = 93 dB

          LpA = LWA + 10log(Q/4πr2 + 4(1-α)/A)     [dB]      (2)

where:
LpA .... level of acoustic pressure inside the container,
LWA ... level of acoustic output of the diesel generator (LWA = 98 dB),
Q ...... factor of directionality of a sound source in a given environment and direction (Q = 
2),
α ...... factor of absorptivity (α = 0.25),
A ...... absorptivity of area (A = 18.6 m2).

According to the equation (3), the absorptivity of the area was calculated as A = 18.6 m2

          A = ∑Sα     [m2]         (3)

where:
A .... absorptivity of area in m2,
S ..... inner surfaces of the container in m2,
α ..... factor of absorptivity (α = 0.25).

With respect to the construction of the container and the value of the level of acoustic pressure inside the container, not only the individual openings in the container walls but also the walls themselves are considered as sources of noise. According to the equation (4), the levels of acoustic pressure on the container walls are calculated as L2 = 57 dB

          L2 = LpA - RW' - 6      [dB]      (4)

where:
L2 ..... level of acoustic pressure on the container wall in dB,
LpA .... level of acoustic pressure inside the container (LpA = 93 dB),
RW .... soundproofness of the outer coat (RW = 30 dB).

The soundproofness of the outer coat was assessed as follows:

By calculating the air soundproofness with a technical method according to Watterson [1], a minimum construction value of the soundproofness of a trapeze aluminum sheet 2 mm thick was set as RW' = 22 dB. This value was then increased by a professional estimate to RW = 30 dB, because
                                                                                                                         61
of the influence of the filling from the mineral matting 50 mm thick and the perforated aluminum 
sheet, which is used on the inner walls of the container.

> Structure SO 06/1 - Intermediate storage
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA) = **38 dB** in **1 m** from 
the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 06/2 - Fuel storage
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= **38 dB** in **1 m** from 
the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 06/3 - Spare parts storage
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= **38 dB** in **1 m** from 
the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 07 - Water intake and distribution
This is an accumulation basin of approximately 3 m^(3), which will be obtained by deepening 
the streambed to approximately 80 cm.
Sources of noise:
- Cold service water pump with a reservoir (DARLING), the project developer states the 
value of acoustic pressure below L_(pA )= **45 dB** in **1 m** from the source.

> Structure SO 08 - Waste water treatment
There is a wastewater pipeline draining sewage water from the operation building 
and a grinding pump in combination with a slush pump pumping the sewage from an 
underground reservoir, which is located beside accommodation structure SO 01, and has 
a lid.

Sources of noise:
- Slush and grinding pump AS PUMP 800/1500; the project developer states the value of 
acoustic output L_(wA) up to **60 dB**. The pumps will run in minute cycles 5 x 2 minutes per 
hour.

> Structure SO 09 - Watercraft storage
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= **38 dB** in **1 m** from 
the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 10 - Launching ramp
The structure's foundation is a leveled plain of the existing terrain that allows access to and 
from the coast; the terrain will be leveled merely with local coarse gravel and aggregates to 
the flattest possible surface.
There are no sources of noise.
                                                                                                          62
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

The following Table 1 contains assumed point sources of noise that are located on the scientific station's structures. Acoustic parameters are presented in the same form in which they were used in the calculation program HLUK+. Figure 1 represents the location of individual point sources on the structures of the scientific station. Figure 2 shows a detailed location of point sources on the noisiest structure, SO 05 - Diesel generator.

Acoustic parameters of point sources can be put in the program HLUK+ as follows:
·  L_(r ).....level of acoustic pressure [dB] in distance r [m]
·  L_(2 ).... level of acoustic pressure [dB] with source area S [m^(2)]
·  L_(W )... level of acoustic output [dB]

Table 1: Assumed sources of noise located on the structures of the scientific station

 Source number  | Description of the source of noise              | Acoustic parameters       
---------------|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------
P1 - P8        | Wind generators on structures SO 02- 6/1, 06/2, 06/3, 09. | L_(r )= 38 dB in 1 m     
P9             | Diesel generator exhaust on the wall of structure SO 05  | L_(W )= 98 dB            
                                                  | S = 0.02 m^(2)           
P10            | Suction grating of the diesel generator on the wall of structure SO 05 | L_(2 )= 84 dB            
                                                  | S = 0.05 m^(2)           
P11, P12       | Ventilation openings on the walls of structure SO 05 (diesel generator) | L_(2 )= 84 dB            
                                                  | S = 0.005 m^(2)          
P13 - 17       | Peripheral walls and ceiling of structure SO 05 (diesel generator) | L_(2 )= 57 dB            
P18, P19       | Suction and exhaust from the ventilation engine room on the wall of structure SO 01 | L_(r )= 40 dB in 1 m     
P20            | Slush and grinding pump structure SO 08       | L_(W )= 60 dB            
P21            | Outlet of the combustion gases suction fan on the wall of structure SO 02 | L_(W )= 50 dB            
P22            | Water pump structure SO 07                    | L_(r )= 45 dB in 1 m     
                                                                                           63
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Figure 1: Location of point sources on the structures of the scientific station

"Ceska vedecka stanice v Antarktid?e", Ter?n=odrazuj, Rok=2002.

 
                                                                                                 SO 07
80 
                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                 

                                                                
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Figure 2: Location of point sources on the structure SO 05 - Diesel generator

"Ceska vedecka stanice v Antarktid[e]", Teren=odraziuj, Rok=2002.

                                                                 80                  
              -------------------------------------------------------------
              |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |                      |                     
50            |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |             P22      |                     
              |                            |                      |SO 03              
              |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |                      |                     
              |                            |                      |                     
              -------------------------------------------------------------
              60                            70                      80                  
                                                             M=1:250              
ANT.ZAD                                                                             
                                                                                  
Legend:

Calculation point
Built-up area
Source of noise

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
65
3.2.3. Description of calculation points

The following Table 2 contains the description of points used for the calculation of noise from point sources located on the structures of the scientific station, and Figure 3 represents their location. The points are divided according to cardinal points. The starting point for locating calculation points is the noisiest place within the station, i.e. structure SO 05 - Diesel generator. Points 1, 11, 18 and 26 are located 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 and point 14 is 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 01. The following points are located every 10 m in an area where greater noise can be expected, i.e. in the area app. 50 m within the source, and every 50 m in the remaining area so that the area of interest is covered with calculation points within app. 200 m from the source. All points are located 1, 2 and 3 m high above the ground.

Table 2: Location of calculation points

| Number | Description of the point |
| --- | --- |
| 1 | Northward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 |
| 2 - 7 | Northward, located every 10 m from point 1 |
| 8 - 10 | Northward, located every 50 m from point 7 |
| 11 | Eastward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 |
| 12, 13 | Eastward, located every 10 m from point 11 |
| 14 | Eastward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 01 |
| 15 - 17 | Eastward, located every 50 m from point 14 |
| 18 | Southward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 |
| 19 - 21 | Southward, located every 10 m from point 18 |
| 22 - 25 | Southward, located every 50 m from point 21 |
| 26 | Westward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 |
| 27 - 30 | Westward, located every 10 m from point 26 |
| 31 - 33 | Westward, located every 50 m from point 30 |

66
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Figure 3: Location of calculation points within the area of the scientific station and its surroundings

"Ceska vedecka stanice v Antarktidé", Terén=odrazi?vy?, Rok=2002.


                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                
4. ACOUSTIC SITUATION

4.1. Noise propagation from point sources to the outer surroundings

Based on the above presented input acoustic parameters, a quasi-three-dimensional model of 
noise propagation from point sources, located on the structures of Czech scientific station in 
Antarctica, to the outer surroundings was created using the calculation program HLUK+.

Table 3 presents the final values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A in the calculation 
points.

Table 3: Final values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A in the calculation points generated by 
point sources at the scientific station


                                                                 North                                   East                                      South                                    West           
 Number  Height   L       Number   Height   L       Number   Height   L       Number   Height   L      
         t [m]    Aeq                                 t [m]    Aeq                                 t [m]    Aeq                                 t [m]    Aeq     
         [dB]                                    [dB]                                    [dB]                                    [dB]     
1        1       63.2    11       1       53.4    18       1       55.2    26       1       56.6    
         2       64.0             2       54.9             2       55.7             2       57.8    
         3       64.0             3       55.6             3       56.0             3       57.9    
2        1       51.7    12       1       43.8    19       1       43.6    27       1       44.7    
         2       51.8             2       44.2             2       43.8             2       45.0    
         3       51.8             3       44.7             3       44.6             3       45.5    
3        1       47.0    13       1       43.8    20       1       39.1    28       1       40.9    
         2       47.0             2       43.9             2       39.2             2       41.2    
         3       47.1             3       40.9             3       39.9             3       40.8    
4        1       44.2    14       1       24.9    21       1       36.2    29       1       38.3    
         2       44.1             2       28.6             2       36.3             2       38.4    
         3       44.2             3       32.1             3       36.9             3       38.6    
5        1       42.0    15       1       27.0             1       27.4    30       1       36.0    
         2       42.0             2       27.0    22       2       27.4             2       36.1    
         3       42.1             3       27.0             3       28.1             3       36.2    
6        1       40.3             1       23.7             1       24.5    31       1       29.6    
         2       40.3    16       2       23.7    23       2       24.5             2       29.7    
         3       40.3             3       23.7             3       25.1             3       29.8    
7        1       38.8             1       21.3             1       21.8    32       1       25.9    
         2       38.8    17       2       21.3    24       2       21.8             2       26.0    
         3       38.9             3       21.4             3       22.4             3       26.0    
8        1       33.7                                 1       19.9    33       1       23.3    
         2       33.7                                 2       19.9             2       23.
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Evaluation:

The most significant source of noise within the area of the scientific station is structure SO
05 - Diesel generator. The highest values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A will be in
northwards from structure SO 05, where app. 40 dB will be reached at a distance of 50 m from this
source.

At 200 m from the structure SO 05 in all cardinal points, the values of acoustic pressure A
will oscillate between app. 28 dB and 20 dB.

The calculation was carried out for low acoustic background as the acoustic background is
not known. Due to the fact that the area of the scientific station will be located on the sea coast
where other factors with possibly high noise, such as wind and surf, may apply, the noise from the
point sources located on the scientific station's structures can be camouflaged.

4.2.     Noise propagation from a portable gasoline generator to the outer
surroundings

It is impossible to create a quasi-three-dimensional model of noise propagation which would
characterize purely specific situations because the portable gasoline generator will be used in
different places, i.e. in different terrain. Therefore, for this source of noise, a plain model was
created that would show the probable manner of noise propagation from the portable gasoline
generator to the surroundings. Based on the previous characterization of the area of interest,
reflective terrain was chosen for the calculation.

Table 4 presents final values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A in calculation points
around the portable gasoline generator. Calculation points are located as follows: points 1 - 5 are
situated every 10 m from the source, points 6 - 8 every 50 m starting from point 5 so that an area
within 200 m from the source of noise is covered.

69
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Evaluation:
When a portable gasoline generator with the value of acoustic pressure A LpA =90 dB in 1m is used, the value of equivalent level of acoustic pressure A will be 47 dB at a distance of 200 m from the source. Since the exact location where the portable gasoline generator would be used is not known, and it might disturb local fauna, covering and noise insulating are recommended.

Table 4: Final values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A in calculation points around the portable gasoline generator.

| Number | Distance from source [m] | Height [m] | LAeq [dB] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 10 | 1 | 72.9 |
|  |  | 2 | 72.8 |
|  |  | 3 | 72.6 |
| 2 | 20 | 1 | 66.9 |
|  |  | 2 | 66.9 |
|  |  | 3 | 66.8 |
| 3 | 30 | 1 | 63.4 |
|  |  | 2 | 63.4 |
|  |  | 3 | 63.4 |
| 4 | 40 | 1 | 60.9 |
|  |  | 2 | 60.9 |
|  |  | 3 | 60.9 |
| 5 | 50 | 1 | 59.0 |
|  |  | 2 | 59.0 |
|  |  | 3 | 59.0 |
| 6 | 100 | 1 | 53.0 |
|  |  | 2 | 53.0 |
|  |  | 3 | 53.0 |
| 7 | 150 | 1 | 49.5 |
|  |  | 2 | 49.5 |
|  |  | 3 | 49.5 |
| 8 | 200 | 1 | 47.0 |
|  |  | 2 | 47.0 |
|  |  | 3 | 47.0 |

5. CONCLUSION

Based on the results and analyses in this study, the conclusion is:

The overall impact of the scientific station's operation on its surroundings is acoustically insignificant. The most significant source of noise within the whole area of the scientific station is structure SO 05 - Diesel generator, due to which the values of acoustic pressure A within the station's area will range from 64 dB to 40 dB. At a distance of 200 m from the structure SO 05, the values of acoustic pressure A will range only from app. 28 to 20 dB. As the scientific station would be located on the sea coast, the noise from point sources situated on the structures within the scientific station may get camouflaged by acoustic background, i.e. by wind and surf.

When a portable gasoline generator with the value of acoustic pressure A LpA = 90 dB in 1m is used, the value of equivalent level of acoustic pressure A will be 47 dB at a distance of 200 m 
70
from the source. If the portable gasoline generator was used close to local fauna, it might disturb it, 
therefore, covering and noise insulating of the generator or using a less noisy source are 
recommended.

This study is only primary material. It is necessary to specify the acoustic calculations after 
the final location of the station and actual technologies are known.

Note: The conditions of the station's exact location are not known. Therefore, neither the 
acoustic features of the terrain, i.e. its absorptivity, are known. This feature will change throughout 
the year with the changes in weather conditions (bare terrain, snow, hard snow, etc.). For safety 
reasons, reflective terrain was used at the calculation.

6. REFFERENCES

[1] Čechura J., Stavební fyzika 10, ČVÚT, Praha 1997
[2] Meller, M., Stěnička, J, Podklady pro navrhování a posuzování průmyslových staveb, 3.díl - 
stavební akustika, VÚPS Praha, 1985
[3] Liberko, M., Polášek, J., HLUK+ verze 5.02, pásma, ENVICONSULT, JpSoft, 2000
[4] Vaverka, J., Kozel, V., Ládyš, L., Liberko, M., Chybík, P., Stavební fyzika I, VUT Brno, 1998

7. ATTACHMENTS

Attachment 1: Zones of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A from point sources located on the 
scientific station's structures
Attachment 2: Zones of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A from portable gasoline generator

Legend to the attachment:




      Calculation point




      Built-up area




      Source of 
noise
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica


                                                                                           <40 dB
                                                                                       40 -50 dB
                                                                                       50-60 dB
                                                                                       60 -70 dB
                                                                                           >70 dB
ANT7.ZAD                            0                   40                  80                  120       M=1:1414

Attachment 1: Zones of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A from point sources located on the scientific station's structures
                                                                                                                   72
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica


                                                     
                                                     200 
                                                    
                                                     100 
                                                    
                                                      0  
                                                    
                                                    -100 
                                                    
                                                    -200 
                                   -200         -100          0           100         200  
                                                                                                 
                                                                 M=1:4000
                                   n-MALYDI.ZAD
Attachment.2: Zones of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A from portable gasoline generator
                                                                                                 73
