º

Opening address by the Head of the Italian Delegation, Ambassador Luchino Cortese


Mr Chairman,
on behalf of my Government I wish to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this XXVI Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. I wish also to express our gratitude to the Government of Spain for the kind hospitality in this wonderful city of Madrid, that has already hosted in 1991 the Meeting for the final preparation and signature of the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection.
Italy is fully aware of the importance of the protection of the Antarctic environment and is ready to take every step in order to preserve it for the future generations.
The Environmental Protocol has been implemented more and more broadly and carefully by Consultative Parties. This obviously implies an enhanced level of co-operation and co-ordination among the Parties.
A better co-operation among Parties makes even more needed the creation of a Permanent Secretariat. To this end , in the first days of  April of 2003 a Second Informal Meeting on the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat was held in Buenos Aires. 
The conclusions of that Meeting will hopefully bring the establishment of the Secretariat very close. Besides, a strong co-operation between the Secretariat and the CEP should ensure a much improved effectiveness of the entire system of the Antarctic Treaty.
In March 2003 the XVIII Italian campaign in Antarctica was concluded with remarkable results. In particular the EPICA Project has to be pointed out as one of the most important achievements. The Project is going on at the “Dome C” site on the Antarctic Plateau, with a mixed crew, among others, of Italian, French, American, Swiss, British, and other European teams of scientists and technicians. The maximum depth reached by the deep boring in ice was 3200 meters,  corresponding to an age of the ice core between 900.000 and 1.000.000 years.
On the same “Dome C” site the Concordia Station is being built in the frame of the French and the Italian Antarctica National Programs. The Station will be operational in less then two years and will be open to researchers of all Countries. This project as well as EPICA are the two most important initiatives presently implemented by Italy; but there are several other interesting although smaller projects that are being effectively carried out.
Italy is also implementing now important logistic activity in the Ross Sea Region, mainly in co-operation with New Zealand and the USA. Such co-operation is aimed not only at transportation and supply but also deals with weather forecasting and contingency planning in the region.
Mr Chairman,
Italy has been active in Antarctica as a Consultative Party for about 18 years. We remain fully committed to the principles and the targets of the Antarctic Treaty.
We are confident that this ATCM under your leadership will mark an important step forward in the life of the Antarctic Treaty System.
Thank you
