

CEP Information Paper
Agenda Item: CEP 4g
Submitted by the United Kingdom

Antarctic Protected Areas System:
Information Archive for Antarctic Protected Areas:  

Background
At CEP V, the United Kingdom presented  Working Paper (XXV ATCM / WP-022) describing the development of an Antarctic Protected Areas Information Archive.  The aim of the Archive is to make information on protected areas more accessible.  The CEP welcomed the initiative, and a number of members suggested that the Archive be added to the CEP website, so that it could be made easily available to all of the Antarctic community.  The United Kingdom therefore further developed and adapted the Archive into a form that was suitable for incorporation into the CEP website.  To this end, the United Kingdom is transferring the Archive to Australia for integration into the existing CEP website architecture.

Publication of the Antarctic Protected Area Information Archive on CD-ROM
Recognising that it could be very useful if the information contained in the Archive was also made available at stations in Antarctica, where access to computers is usually possible although internet usage may be constrained or unavailable, the UK adapted the archive for publication on CD-ROM.  In addition to distributing the CD-ROM to Antarctic stations, the resource was envisaged as being potentially useful for distribution to scientific and tourist ships, where again internet access may not be possible, although computers are generally available.  The CD-ROM uses the same interface as the internet resource and contains the same materials, including the following types of information, where there were available:
    1. The complete listing of ASPAs, using the revised 3-digit numbering system, ASMAs, Historic Sites and Monuments, CCAMLR CEMP Sites, and CCAS Seal Reserves, with their locations on maps;
    2. Summary descriptions of the sites, and for all ASPAs, the Management Plans and their maps;
    3. Photographs of key features and bibliographies of relevant literature; 
    4. Site visit data, such as records of permits and site visit reports;
    5. Supplementary information, such as species lists, information on significant changes to an area, etc.

Naturally, on the CD-ROM it is not possible to include live links to all information on Antarctic protected areas that is available over the internet.  However, the most important information as listed above is included. This should be helpful to the scientific community, to national Antarctic programme operators, and to groups such as the tourist industry, for practical use in the field.

The protected area information archive CD-ROM will be distributed at the XXVI ATCM in June 2003. The UK will be pleased to make it available to all Parties that would find it useful for transfer to their Antarctic stations, to ships operating in the Antarctic, to members of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators, and to other interested groups as resources allow.


