
º


















Third International Polar Year initiative


Main element which determining relevance of developments in the Arctic and Antarctic is scientific research activ¡ty in both polar regions.

In 1879, the Second Meteorological Congress approved the idea of arranging a first International Polar Year (IPY), wh¡ch was heid in 1882-1 883. The second International Polar Year was heid fifty years later, in 1932-1 933. The results of the first and second lPYs marked considerable progress in developing knowledge of the Arctic and Antarotio environments, and a system was developed for hydrometeorological observations in poorly accessible polar regions. The first two IPYs were held at different stages in the evolution of the Earth’s climate: a period of cooling at the end of the nineteenth century, and of warming during the period 1920-1940 in the twentieth century. The International Geophysical Year (1957-58) was heid during the cooling that lasted from 1950 to 1970.

In the last decades of the twentieth century, global climate warming set ¡n, and is expected to continue into the twenty-f¡rst century. As th¡s happens, the greatest changes are expected in the Arctic. Available data conf¡rm the global warm¡ng trends ¡n polar regions, which have regional differences and consequences, and, depending on their scale, may have a noticeable impact on complex natural processes and socio-economio activities. The significant climate changes in the Arct¡c and their consequences are a very important issue for the economy. This problem w¡th changes of climate and ecosystems is important to the Antarct¡c. In this connection, reliable methods are needed for forecasting atmospheric, ionospheric, cryospheric and marine processes based on contemporary scientific and observation systems. Besides natural changes, the environment of polar regions is undergoing man-made effects. Pollutants entering the polar regions through the atmosphere, r¡ver and sea waters affect the ecosystems and ultimately Man himself. Th¡s could have an impact on the indigenous population of the Arctic, whose lifestyle is closely linked to the environment.

The worldwide nature of global change and its consequences in the polar regions, the sensitivity of polar ecosystems to human and natural effects are making the need to develop forecasting systems for processes occurring in high latitudes of our planet.

In recent times, the issue of holding a Third International Polar Year has been actively d¡scussed at international forums.

During 7 — 24 May 2003, the 14 WMO Congress has been held in Geneva, where the Russian Federation proposed that WMO take the initiative to hold a Third International Polar Year in 2007-2008.


Congress noted with satisfaction the proposal of the Russian Federation that WMO propose an initiative to hold a Third International Polar Year (IPY) in 2007-2008.

Congress expressed the opinion that the main international cooperation efforts under a Th¡rd IPY should be aimed at determining current and evaluating future climate change and the state of polar environments. The observational data and scientific results obtained would ensure the further development of the monitoring and forecasting system for hydrometeorolog¡cal processes in polar regions, and would also form a basis for developing recommendations to government agencies and interested organizations conducting activities in the Arctic and Antarctic.

CONGRESS adopted Resolution 9.1/3 (Cg-XIV) - Holding of a Third International Polar Year in 2007-2008, where

APPROVED the idea of holding a third IPY in 2007-2008 under the auspices of WMO; and

REQUESTED the Executive Council at its fifty-sixth session to examine the preparation and holding of a Third International Polar Year in 2007-2008 in collaboration with other international organizations such as the Arctic Council, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, SCAR, lOC and IASC and the establishment of an ad hoc working body to prepare a plan of action in preparation for a third IPY and coordinate its implementation.


Russia is beginning already a preparation for the Third International Polar Year: a Concept for conducting of the Third International Polar Year is prepared.
