º



THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR SCIENCE

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH












SCAR Report to XXVI ATCM
Madrid, Spain
2003


XXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Madrid, Spain, 9–20 June 2003

SCAR Report to XXV ATCM
Warsaw, Poland
10–20 September 2002


Report under Recommendation XIII-2


Executive Summary
The Twenty-seventh Meeting of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (XXVII SCAR), held in Shanghai, China, 15–26 July 2002, was a landmark meeting at which the major work of re-structuring SCAR was achieved.  The process of re-organization will continue during the next two years, as the new Scientific Standing Groups refine their modi operandi, and will be completed at XXVIII SCAR in 2004 with the new style of SCAR meeting.
The first week began with the meetings of the SCAR Working Groups, followed on Wednesday by a successful symposium on “The Antarctic sea ice zone: physical and biological processes and interactions”.  On Thursday and Friday three new Scientific Standing Groups on Geosciences, Life Sciences and Physical Sciences were formed.  This new structure will enable SCAR to address inter-disciplinary science more efficiently and integrate more effectively with other international and global programmes.  Each group elected three officers and established sub-groups to accommodate their various activities.  During the week the Executive Committees of SCAR and COMNAP held a joint meeting.  On Saturday morning there was a SCAR–COMNAP discussion forum with presentations on: Subglacial Lakes, Antarctic Neotectonics, the Cybercartographic Atlas, and the Southern Ocean.
At the SCAR Delegates Meeting, Delegates accepted Peru as a Full Member of SCAR and noted, with regret, the withdrawal of Estonia from Associate Membership.  Two Delegate Committees were formed to discuss scientific and organizational matters and two. new Standing Committees were established on the Antarctic Treaty System, and on SCAR Finance.  The arrangements for the XXVIII SCAR meeting in Germany during 2004 were confirmed to provide a SCAR Science week in July followed by the Delegates meeting about 3 months later, thereby allowing more adequate consideration of the reports from the Scientific Standing Groups.  A new President, Professor Dr Jörn Thiede (Germany), and two new Vice–Presidents were elected.  Delegates also agreed that an Executive Director should be appointed to reinforce the staffing of the SCAR Secretariat.
The highlight of the year was the award to SCAR of the Prince of Asturias Prize for International Cooperation 2002 in recognition of SCAR’s role in international cooperation in Antarctica.  Delegates agreed that the Prize should be used to establish a SCAR Fellowship Programme to fund five young scientists to undertake Antarctic research in a country other than their own.

SCAR Report to XXVI ATCM
Madrid, Spain
9–20 June 2003


Report under Recommendation XIII-2


Introduction
Since XXV ATCM in Warsaw, Poland, September 2002, the principal event for SCAR was the award to SCAR of the Prince of Asturias Prize for International Cooperation 2002.  This prestigious Spanish prize was awarded in recognition of SCAR’s role in international cooperation in Antarctica.  Dr R H Rutford (Past President), Dr R Schlich and Professor J López-Martínez (Vice Presidents) and Dr P D Clarkson (Executive Secretary) represented SCAR at the magnificent award ceremony in Oviedo during October 2002.  The cash prize of ¤ 50,000 has been used to establish a SCAR Fellowship Programme.  Five young Antarctic scientists will each receive a     $ 10,000 bursary to pursue a research project in a country other than their own.  SCAR wishes to continue the Fellowship Programme and will be seeking additional sources of income to fund the Programme in future years.
As reported to XXV ATCM, SCAR implemented many of the recommendations of the ad hoc Group on SCAR Organization and Structure at the biennial XXVII SCAR meeting in Shanghai during July 2002 with the re-organization of the former Working Groups and Groups of Specialists into three Standing Scientific Groups with subordinate Action Groups and Expert Groups, and a Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System to co-ordinate activities and input from across SCAR.  One outstanding recommendation was the appointment of an Executive Director for SCAR.  In May this year the position was widely advertised in the leading scientific journals and on many Antarctic websites.  Interviews for the post will be held shortly and it is expected that the successful candidate will take up the position later this year.
During the past 10 months the new Standing Scientific Groups and their subordinate groups have been establishing themselves and developing new modes of operation.  In addition, proposals have been prepared for establishing a limited number of major new research programmes within SCAR.  These will be assessed by the SCAR Executive Committee and those approved will develop scientific and imple-mentation plans for presentation to the XXVIII SCAR Delegates Meeting to be held in Bremerhaven, Germany in October 2004.  Three months prior to that, the SCAR Science Meeting will be held in Bremen, Germany.  During this week the Standing Scientific Groups will hold their business meetings around a 2-day symposium on “Antarctica and the Southern Ocean - Processes of Interaction in Time and Space”.
The International Council for Science (ICSU) is planning a Fourth International Polar Year (IPY4) 2007–08 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the International Geophysical Year (IGY) 1957–58 and highlight the key role that the polar regions now play in our understanding of the Earth System. SCAR is considering various proposals for Antarctic research programmes that will contribute to IPY4.
Principal scientific activities
Geosciences
An Antarctic Geodesy Symposium was held in Wellington, New Zealand in November 2002. A major focus of the symposium was the status of regional geodetic networks in Antarctica and their future integration. Tide gauge operation and calibration were discussed at length, as were the new advances in remote GPS operational technology for Antarctic sites.  The 5th Antarctic Geodesy Symposium will be held in Lviv, Ukraine, during September 2003.
The International Permafrost Association (IPA) will hold a workshop in July 2003 to review current permafrost and periglacial science activities; to formulate where attention should be focused; and to consider how permafrost and periglacial science be organised within IPA and linked to other groups and programmes.  A specific aim will be to achieve consensus within the Antarctic permafrost community to identify the key research questions for the next 10 years; to develop a strategy to answer them; and to establish a basis for an organisational structure to foster these activities and their linkages to other scientific groups and activities. 
The second international Antarctic GIS workshop on was held in Freiburg, Germany, during April 2003.  The workshop focused on GIS applications in Antarctica; Internet GIS;Web Portals; and Antarctic GIS Standards.  A meeting  on the SCAR Composite Gazetteer of Antarctica was also held in conjunction with the workshop.
The Antarctic Neotectonics (ANTEC) programme is preparing a set of papers on “Ice Sheets and Neotectonics” that will be published during the coming year in a special volume of the Elsevier Journal “Global and Planetary Change”. It is hoped also that the ISMASS programme scientific plan and recommendations will also be published in full in this special volume.
Antarctic Climate Evolution (ACE) is a new international research initiative to study the climate and glacial history of Antarctica through palaeoclimate and ice-sheet modelling integrated with the geological record by promoting the exchange of data and ideas between research groups focusing on the evolution of Antarctica’s climate system and ice sheet.  ACE will exist to facilitate scientific exchange between the modelling and data acquisition communities for the purposes of project development and hypothesis testing.  The broad outcomes of the programme will be: (1) quantitative assessment of the climate and glacial history of Antarctica; (2) identification of the processes which govern Antarctic change, and those which feed back this change around the globe; (3) improvements in our technical ability to model past changes in Antarctica; and (4) precisely documented case studies of past changes, against which models of future change in Antarctica can be tested.  The ACE initiative will be presented to SCAR for adoption as a major SCAR research programme.
The 9th International Symposium on Antarctic Earth Sciences will be held in Potsdam, Germany, during September 2003.
Life Sciences
The planning group for the “Evolution and Biodiversity in Antarctica (EBA): the Response of Life to Change” held a meeting in February to prepare a draft outline of the proposed programme.  The proposal is to amalgamate the existing programmes on Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone (EASIZ), Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms (EVOLANTA) and Regional Sensitivity to Climate Change in Antarctic Terrestrial and Limnetic Ecosystems (RiSCC).  The programme also aims to collaborate closely with the climatic research programmes being proposed.
SCAR has been invited to provide the Antarctic regional component to the Global International Waters Assessment (GIWA) being undertaken by the United Nations Environment Program.  A workshop is being planned for Brazil to collate the relevant data and prepare the text for inclusion in the global report.
The Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine held its inaugural meeting in May 2003 to establish its working procedures and review its current and future research priorities.  It also reviewed Antarctic healthcare practices in SCAR member countries, particularly with respect to developing minimum standards for medical screening procedures.  The meeting was followed by a very successful 2-day symposium on “Extreme Medicine and Antarctica” with presentations under the following themes: Antarctica and Space Medicine; Psychology; Living in the Dark; How useful is Telemedicine?; Physiology; Current and Past Research.
The Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) programme is in the process of completing the analysis of the collected data and is expected to publish a final report providing reliable population statistics for Antarctic seal species.  These figures will be essential for determining the required protection status for each of the species and also provide valuable data for any State of the Antarctic Environment Report.
Selected papers from the VIII SCAR Biology Symposium held in Amsterdam in 2001 have now been published under the title “Antarctic biology in a global context”.  The 50 contributions provide topical coverage of the effects of climate change, evolution and adaptation, biodiversity and human impacts.
SCAR recognizes that it is now some time since the publication of “A strategy for Antarctic Conservation” by IUCN in 1991.  Conservation and environmental management are actively developing fields and during the past 12 years new thinking and new objectives have been developed.  In order to bring the key elements of best practice into the Antarctic arena, SCAR intends to hold a workshop on “Antarctic conservation in the 21st century”.  
Together with COMNAP, SCAR produced the manual for environmental monitoring in 2000.   This was based on workshops in Norway (1995) and the USA (1996) and deals with chemical and physical measurements.  It is clear that scientific progress since this time has provided considerable new information on the biology of a range of species.  It is therefore intended to hold a workshop in the United States, within the next twelve months, on biological monitoring.  
Physical Sciences
The SCAR Expert Group on Antarctic Astronomy and Astrophysics (AAA) will hold its first meeting at a special session on Antarctic Astronomy to be held at the International Astronomical Union (IAU) General Assembly in Sydney in July 2003.  The related Action Group on Plateau Astronomy Site Testing in Antarctica (PASTA) will also meet here, prior to establishing a more formal structure for interchange of ideas and data.
The collection of the surface meteorological data for the Reference Antarctic Data for Environmental Research (READER) project is almost complete and the final Russian observations should be received by the end of January.  All the READER monthly mean data are online at  http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/met/READER/ .  A paper on the first results of the project entitled “Climate Change over the Antarctic During the Last 100 Years From Station data: Results from the SCAR READER Project” has been submitted to the Journal of Climate.
Under the Antarctic Katabatic Winds (MOSAK) project the individual meteorological reports, collected as part of the READER project, are being assembled into a comprehensive data set of the Antarctic near-surface wind field.  This will also be used to validate numerical model runs.  A high-resolution model run has been carried out and has produced what is believed to be the best field of Antarctic winds created to date.
SCAR was represented at the WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology in November 2002.  The International Antarctic Weather Forecasting Handbook, which has been compiled with input from members of SCAR, ICPM, members of the working group and scientists in many countries active in Antarctic, was well received.  WMO has provided financial assistance to have a hardcopy version of the handbook printed by Cambridge University Press.
The Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate (ASPeCt) committee met in New Zealand in December 2002 in conjunction with the 16th International Symposium on Ice.  Substantial progress has been made on both the sea ice thickness and ice core data bases.  These are compilations of field data from numerous national programs for use by the broader scientific community and it is expected they will be online by the end of 2003.  A number of cruises to the Antarctic are planned which will directly address the goals of ASPeCt, including the Ice Station Polarstern (ISPOL) in 2004–05 and a remote sensing validation experiment aboard Aurora Australis in 2003.
Climate is the mean state of the physical and chemical attributes of the atmosphere over a period of time, concerning the troposphere, stratosphere and higher levels, where they affect the conditions near the surface. The proposed Antarctica and the Global Climate System (AGCS) programme will focus primarily on the last 2000 years and out to 100 years in the future, but will extend back several glacial cycles where necessary to several hundred thousand years.  The programme will study a variety of parameters including: mechanisms controlling Antarctic climate variability; ice sheet and ice shelf responses to and affects on climate; the Antarctic ozone layer; oceanic reactions to changes in the sea ice/ice shelves/ice sheet and vice versa; and solar activity.
The proposed Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy on Environmental, Solar–Terrestrial and Atmospheric Research (ICESTAR) programme will establish a five-year international research programme for coordinated bi-polar research in the field of solar-terrestrial physics and polar aeronomy.  The uniqueness of the new programme is that it will focus for the first time on quantification of various mechanisms that control bi-polar regional differences (or commonalities) in the magnetosphere–ionosphere coupling and corresponding upper atmospheric phenomena over both the northern and southern polar regions.  These bi-polar or interhemispherically conjugate features might be intrinsic to the polar ionosphere and upper atmosphere or be caused by the long-term or abrupt changes in the near-Earth electromagnetic environment forced by solar activity (i.e., geo-magnetic storms and substorms). It is proposed that SCAR will lead this new programme in collaboration with the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC).
The 7th International Symposium on Antarctic Glaciology will be held in Milan, Italy, during August 2003.  Here there will be presentations by and meetings of the SCAR groups on the International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE) and Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level (ISMASS)
Multi-disciplinary research
The Group of Specialists on Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration (SALEGOS) held its fourth meeting in April 2003.  Progress on further remote-sensing studies of Vostok Subglacial Lake were discussed, including the underlying sedimentary sequences, dynamic processes of ancient lake systems and the modelling of subglacial systems.  Further studies on the accreted ice were also reported, including its physical properties, its history and chemistry and those of its inclusions, and investigations of its microbial content.  An exciting development was the identification of a possible second giant Antarctic subglacial lake towards the southern end of the extensive rift system occupied in part by Jutulstraumen Glacier in Dronning Maud Land.  This was identified from RADARSAT images where a large area (about 200 km long by 50 km wide) of remarkably smooth ice centred on 82.5°S, 18°E that has a surface expression similar to Vostok Subglacial Lake.  The Group also determined a set of site selection criteria for investigating a subglacial lake and provided comments on the Russian draft CEE for water sampling at Lake Vostok.  These comments have been submitted to XXVI ATCM as an Information Paper.

Antarctic data
The Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) is hosted by the Global Change Master Directory(GCMD) on behalf of SCAR.  The AMD holds metadata (descriptions of Antarctic data sets and how to access them).  The number of entries is steadily increasing as these are processed into the correct format by staff of the GCMD.  The number of “hits” to the AMD is also increasing as more scientists and others make use of this valuable resource.

Appendix 1
Membership of SCAR
Full members:	Date of admission to	Date of admission to
		Associate Membership	Full Membership
	Argentina		3 February 1958
	Australia		3 February 1958
	Belgium		3 February 1958
	Chile		3 February 1958
	France		3 February 1958
	Japan		3 February 1958
	New Zealand		3 February 1958
	Norway		3 February 1958
	South Africa		3 February 1958
	Russia (formerly Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)	3 February 1958
	United Kingdom		3 February 1958
	United States of America		3 February 1958
	Germany (including former German Democratic Republic)	22 May 1978
	Poland		22 May 1978
	India		1 October 1984
	Brazil		1 October 1984
	China		23 June 1986
	Sweden	(24 March 1987)	12 September 1988
	Italy	(19 May 1987)	12 September 1988
	Uruguay	(29 July 1987)	12 September 1988
	Spain	(15 January 1987)	23 July 1990
	Netherlands	(20 May 1987)	23 July 1990
	Korea, Republic of	(18 December 1987)	23 July 1990
	Finland	(1 July 1988)	23 July 1990
	Ecuador	(12 September 1988)	15 June 1992
	Canada	(5 September 1994)	27 July 1999
	Peru	(14 April 1987)	22 July 2002
Associate Members:
	Switzerland	16 June 1987
	Pakistan	15 June 1992
	Ukraine	5 September 1994
	Bulgaria	5 March 1995

ICSU Union Members
	IGU	International Geographical Union
	IUBS	International Union of Biological Sciences
	IUGG	International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
	IUGS	International Union of Geological Sciences
	IUPAC	International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
	IUPS	International Union of Physiological Sciences
	URSI	Union Radio Scientifique Internationale


Appendix 2
SCAR Executive Committee

President
Professor Dr J Thiede
Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung, Columbusstraße,
Postfach 120161, D-27568 Bremerhaven, Germany 
Tel:	+49 471 4831 1100 / 1101;	Fax:	+49 471 4831 1102;
E-mail:	jthiede@awi-bremerhaven.de

Past President
Dr R H Rutford
Geosciences Program, The University of Texas at Dallas, PO Box 830688,
MS: FO 21, Richardson, TX 75083–0688, United States of America.
Tel:	+1 972 883 6470;	Fax:	+1 972 883 2482;
E-mail:	rutford@utdallas.edu

Vice-Presidents
Dr R Schlich
Ecole et Observatoire des Sciences de la Terre,
5 Rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.
Tel:	+33 3 88 45 01 91;	Fax:	+33 3 88 60 38 87;
E-mail:	roland.schlich@eost.u-strasbg.fr

Professor C G Rapley
British Antarctic Survey,
High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ET, United Kingdom.
Tel:	+44 1223 221524;	Fax:	+44 1223 362616;
E-mail:	c.rapley@bas.ac.uk

Professor J López-Martínez
Departamento Geología y Geoquímica,
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Facultad de Ciencias, Madrid 28049, Spain
Tel:	+34 91 397 4513;	Fax:	+34 91 397 4900;
E-mail:	jeronimo.lopez@uam.es

Dr C Howard-Williams
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research,
Box8602, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Tel:	+64 3 348 8987;	Fax:	+64 3 348 5548;
E-mail:	c.howard-williams@niwa.co.nz

Executive Secretary
Dr P D Clarkson
SCAR Secretariat, Scott Polar Research Institute,
Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB2 1ER, United Kingdom.
Tel:	+44 1223 362061;	Fax:	+44 1223 336550;
E-mail:	execsec@scar.demon.co.uk
Web-site:	http://www.scar.org
Appendix 3
SCAR Chief Officers
STANDING SCIENTIFIC GROUPS
Geosciences
Dr P E O’Brien, Australian Geological Survey Organization, PO Box 378, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
E-mail:	Phil.OBrien@ga.gov.au
Life Sciences
Professor S L Chown, Department of Zoology, University of Stellenbosch,         Private Bag X1, Matieland 7602, South Africa
E-mail:	slchown@sun.ac.za
Physical Sciences
Dr J Turner, British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge    CB3 0ET, United Kingdom.
E-mail:	j.turner@bas.ac.uk

STANDING COMMITTEES
Antarctic Treaty System
Professor D W H Walton, British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ET, United Kingdom.
E-mail:	d.walton@bas.ac.uk
Finance
Dr R Schlich, Ecole et Observatoire des Sciences de la Terre, 5 Rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.
E-mail:	roland.schlich@eost.u-strasbg.fr
SCAR–COMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management
Mr D Peterson, Antarctica New Zealand, International Antarctic Centre,        Orchard Road, Private Bag 4745, Christchurch, New Zealand.
E-mail:	d.peterson@antarcticanz.govt.nz

Appendix 4
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations
AAA	Antarctic Astronomy and Astrophysics 
ACE	Antarctic Climate Evolution 
AGCS	Antarctica and the Global Climate System 
AMD	Antarctic Master Directory 
ANTEC	Antarctic Neotectonics 
APIS	Antarctic Pack Ice Seals 
ASPeCt	Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate 
ATCM	Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
CEE	Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
COMNAP	Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
EASIZ	Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone 
EBA	Evolution and Biodiversity in Antarctica: the Response of Life to Change
EVOLANTA	Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms 
GCMD	Global Change Master Directory
GIS	Geographic Information Systems
GIWA	Global International Waters Assessment 
IASC	International Arctic Science Committee.
IAU	International Astronomical Union 
ICESTAR	Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy on Environmental, Solar–Terrestrial and Atmospheric Research 
ICPM	International Commission on Polar Meteorology
ICSU	International Council for Science 
IGY	International Geophysical Year 
IPA	International Permafrost 
IPY4	Fourth International Polar Year 
ISMASS	Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level 
ISPOL	Ice Station Polarstern 
ITASE	International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition 
IUCN	The World Conservation Union
MOSAK	Antarctic Katabatic Winds 
PASTA	Plateau Astronomy Site Testing in Antarctica 
READER	Reference Antarctic Data for Environmental Research
RiSCC	Regional Sensitivity to Climate Change in Antarctic Terrestrial and Limnetic Ecosystems 
SALEGOS	Group of Specialists on Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration 
SCAR	Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
WMO	World Meteorological Organization





Appendix 5
Papers Scheduled to be Presented to XXVI ATCM
Information Papers
SCAR Report to XXV ATCM
Antarctic Specially Protected Species
Acoustics Technology and the marine ecosystem
Comments on the Lake Vostok CEE
Biological responses to temperature change in Antarctic marine systems.
Predicting the state of the Southern Ocean during the 21st century



