

ATCM XXVI
Information Paper IP-___
Submitted by Russia
Agenda Item 12
English
Original - Russian

Russian studies
of the subglacial Lake Vostok 
in 1995-2002

At the first stage (1995-2000), the study of Lake Vostok was carried out using methods of remote sensing geophysical measurements and by investigating 85 m lake ice core retrieved to the surface in the course of deep drilling of the Antarctic ice sheet at Vostok station.

Remote sensing geophysical studies of the Lake Vostok area

The objectives of the remote sensing geophysical studies that were carried out by specialists of PMGRE and RAE included contouring the Lake Vostok boundaries, determination of the morphological parameters of the lake bottom and water layer thickness, revealing bottom sediments, determination of their thickness and area of spreading and determination of the ice sheet thickness overlapping the lake. The indicated objectives were addressed at the first stage by the methods of seismic sounding and radio-echo profiling. In total over this period, about 200 seismic shots and more than 2000 km of radio-echo sounding profiles was made (Fig. 1). As a result of these large-scale field operations, mapping of the lake boundaries was completed, its area (15000 km2) and the thickness of the ice cover (2400-4350 m), water layer (up to 1200 m) and sedimentary mantle at the lake bottom (up to 330 m) were determined. In the course of the studies, a deepwater trough was determined within the lake whose bottom is 1600 m below the sea level. According to data obtained, maps of the ice sheet thickness, bottom ice surface and water layer thickness were constructed as well as summary geophysical sections with two of them (along the long lake axis and AB profile) presented in Fig. 2.
As a result of vertical seismic profiling in deep borehole 5G-1 at Vostok station, the average propagation velocity of seismic waves in the ice sheet of Central Antarctica was obtained for the first time to a depth of 3623 m (it comprised 3810 ms-1) and the strata rate in pure ice was determined (3920 ms-1). 
Due to these studies, it became possible to estimate with sufficient accuracy the distance from the bottom of borehole 5G-1 (3623 m) to the ice sheet contact with water (13025 m), which is of great importance for planning the continuation of drilling operations in the borehole. 
The southern tip of the lake where the Vostok station is situated was especially well studied (Fig. 3). The water layer thickness beneath the borehole 5G-1 comprises 600 m whereas the sedimentary mantle thickness is 370 m – the maximum value for the entire lake. The latter makes promising to use the existing borehole 54G-1 for penetrating Lake Vostok in order to conduct the direct studies of subglacial water and bottom sediments. 
Based on the obtained bathymetry data, the AARI carried out theoretical studies of the circulation of Lake Vostok. Numerical experiments with a two-dimensional non-hydrostatic model of the lake have allowed us to reveal that horizontal convection caused by the tilt of the lake ice ceiling determines not to a lesser extent than the vertical one induced directly by the geothermal flux the thermal hydrodynamic circulation characteristics of this subglacial water body, and that a correct description of these two interrelated types of water motion in Lake Vostok is possible only within a framework of a three-dimensional non-hydrostatic thermal hydrodynamic model. 

Fig. 1. Routes of geophysical studies of PMGRE and RAE in the area of the subglacial Lake Vostok
    • Routes of radio-echo profiling in the 47th RAE
    • Routes of radio-echo profiling in the 44-46th RAE  
    • RSS points in the 47th RAE
    • RSS points in the 44-46th RAE  
    • Lake coastline position 
    • Boundaries of the water layer registration zones
    • Daytime surface isohypses, m
    •  Water table of the subglacial Lake Vostok
    • Location of the “Mirny-Vostok” route
    • Designations of seismic profiles

Fig. 2. Summary geophysical transects of Lake Vostok
    • Ice cover, Varea= 3.8 km/s;
    • Water layer, Varea= 1.49 km/s;
    • Sediments, Varea= 2.5 km/s;
    • Basement;
    • Reflecting boundaries from radio-echo sounding data;
    • Reflecting boundaries from seismic data:
1 – reliable; 2 – assumed.


Fig. 3. Subglacial landscape in the vicinity of Vostok station according to data of seismic and radio-echo sounding data

Interpretation of geophysical data on the Lake Vostok area and the adjoining territory
The study of the geological nature of Lake Vostok hidden under a thick (4 km) ice cover is predominantly based on geophysical data. To determine the deep structure of the Earth’s crust of Lake Vostok, its tectonic location within the Antarctic platform and the history of geological development, the materials of gravimetric studies made during the period 1961-1964, new PMGRE data (1995-2002) on the bedrock relief depth of the lake and its shores and the results of aero-geophysical surveys in Central Antarctica (area of the Gamburtsev Mountains) were used. The data collected allow us to reveal the regional interrelations of Lake Vostok depressions with other mainland structures. In particular, they indicate that Lake Vostok presents a rift graben filled with sediments of the predominantly Early Jurassic-Paleogene age (140-15 million years) more than three kilometers thick. The typical indications allowing this conclusion include: width (tens of kilometers) of the lake depression; significant amplitude of the faults restricting it (up to 2 km in the bedrock surface relief and more than 5 km if the sedimentary mantle is taken into account) and their stepped shape, which is connected with the Earth’s crust extension; longitudinal segmentation of the depression (presence of two troughs revealed from seismic and gravimetric data), its cranked spatial configuration and the development of diagonal (contouring) breakups in the western flank occurring at tensile stresses. In the structure of East Antarctica, the Lake Vostok graben occupies the inland (epi-craton) position. In the regional respect, the lineament identified displays a spatial and genetic similarity with the extensive rift trough of the Lambert-Amery Ice Shelf and its supposed extension in the foot of the Gamburtsev Mountains that in total (see Fig. 4) can comprise one system similar by the scale of manifestation of destructive processes with the rift belt of East Africa.

Fig. 4. Lake Vostok location in the morphological and tectonic structure of Antarctica

Study of physical-chemical parameters of Lake Vostok based on the results of analyses of ice core from deep borehole 5G-1

A typical feature of the southern lake area where the Vostok station is located is that here lake water freezes to the lower surface of the Antarctic ice sheet. The total thickness of congelation (lake) ice formed under the ice sheet in the vicinity of Vostok station comprises 21025 m. The borehole 5G-1 (3623 m) entered the ice layers of Lake Vostok at a depth of 3538 m. By the present time, 85 m (3538-3623 m) of the ice core presenting frozen lake water were retrieved to the ice surface (Fig. 5). The objective of investigating this ice core was to establish a mechanism of lake ice formation and based on the results of its analysis to assess the isotopic, gaseous, chemical and biological composition of Lake Vostok without penetrating it. In 2002 at the final stage of work on the first Project stage, the AARI specialists made studies of the lowest layers of congelation ice using an ice core from a depth of 3611-3623 m. In addition, detailed isotope measurements were made in the ice core ranges 3571.4-3574.0 and 3620.0-3621.0 m that have allowed obtaining for the first time vertical profiles  18O with resolution of 1.5 cm (Fig. 6).
In the course of the ice core studies, two types of lake ice - I and II were identified differing by the formation mechanism. The upper layer bedding in the 3538-3609 m interval is characterized by the presence of mineral inclusions of lacustrine sediments that are not encountered in ice bedding deeper than 3609 m (Fig. 6b).  
Based on the results of measurements of the isotopic composition and the total ice core gas content (Fig. 6 a, b), it was determined that lake ice was formed under the conditions of weak water super-cooling (0.01-0.1 oC), which resulted in the formation of frazil ice crystals accumulating under the ice roof of the lake. At the formation of the upper layer of lake ice (1), consolidation of the initially loose layer of ice crystals as a result of slow freezing of water containing them was accompanied with trapping and subsequent freezing of liquid water inclusions (“water pockets”). The latter according to data on the gas content of the ice core comprised at the time of end of ice formation not more than 1% of the total volume of lake ice I. The formation of water pockets contributed to ice trapping bottom sediment particles that are present in the form of suspended matter in lake water. The formation of the upper layer of lake ice probably occurred within a shallow water bay, which is located at a distance of 45 m from Vostok station upward along the ice flow line. The lower layer of lake ice (II) was formed under the conditions of deepwater body. Its formation was not accompanied with entrapment of water pockets, that is why, there are no mineral inclusions in this ice and the concentration of gases and soluble admixtures is two orders of magnitude less than in the above layer.
Interpretation of the results of the ice core chemical analyses taking into account the aforementioned understanding of the ice growth suggested that the total mineralizing of subglacial water was within 0.1 to 1 ppt.  
As a result of measurements of the total gas content in the glacial and lake ice, data necessary for an assessment of the gaseous regime of Lake Vostok were obtained. In particular, it was established that due to melting of glacial ice in the northern lake area and water freezing in its southern part, saturation of subglacial water with atmospheric gases coming to the lake through the ice sheet in the form of air hydrate occurs. Theoretical calculations allowed us to formulate the conditions of air hydrate stability and assess solubility of atmospheric gases in the subglacial lake. It was shown that if saturation of subglacial water with gases as a result of water turnover in the ice sheet-lake system continued for 0.9 million years, the concentrations of dissolved N2 and O2 achieved their limits (2.25 g N2 l-1 and 1.3 g O2 l-1), corresponding to equilibrium solubility of these gases in the presence of air hydrate. In this case, the hydrates melting from the glacial ice do not dissolve in subglacial water. The concentration of oxygen dissolved in the lake is within 0.027 to 1.3 g l-1 (Fig. 7) and is, hence, much (2-90 times) greater than the concentration of O2 in water under the normal conditions.
                 
Fig. 5. Ice core of Lake Vostok retrieved from a depth of 3620 m

Fig. 6. Structure and composition of the near-bottom part of the ice cover based on the results of studies of the ice core from borehole 5G-1 at Vostok station
A – isotopic ice composition, 18O (ppt); b – quantity of mineral inclusions visible by unaided eye in 1 m of the core, M (m-1); c – total gas content in the ice, V (cm3g-1); d – ice crystal diameter, D(cm); e – specific ice crystal surface, S (cm-1). 

Fig. 7. Change in the concentration of dissolved oxygen in Lake Vostok with saturation of lake water with atmospheric gases coming to the lake through the ice sheet in the form of air hydrate
High concentration of oxygen in lake water results in a rapid degradation (oxidation) of DNA molecules and does not contribute to preservation of viability of microbial cells that penetrated the lake from the outside. Thus, the obtained results have a large importance for interpretation of data of molecular-biological studies of the ice core from Vostok station.
The main physical-chemical characteristics of Lake Vostok determined from the results of ice core studies at the first stage of work under this Project are given in Table 1.
Mineral inclusions detected in the ice core of borehole 5G-1 present microscopic samples of lacustrine sediments that are discharged to the lake predominantly as a result of glacial bedrock gouging and thus contain proxy data on the geological structure of the bedrock upward the glacier flow. At present, these mineral inclusions present practically the only material that allows us to some extent approach the solution of the problem of geological structure of Central Antarctica. At the first stage, the study of mineral inclusions carried out at the Department of lithology and geochemistry of VNIIOkeangeologiya were restricted to the optical determination of the mineral composition of sedimentary substance, degree of roundness of some crystals and their quantitative relation. The study showed that the main mass of inclusions was represented by clayey-mica aggregates often saturated with iron hydro-oxides where grains of many other minerals are present (tourmaline, epidote, zoisite, zircon, hornblende, anatase, obsidian, leucoxene, quartz, dolomite, aragonite and calcite). Such minerals as aragonite, dolomite, calcite and clayey minerals could form directly in Lake Vostok itself. The detection of thermophilic bacteria in the lake ice core (see below) indicates a possible hydrothermal activity at the lake bottom. In this case, study of the genesis of sedimentary material trapped by ice can yield additional information on the chemistry of water and solutions coming to the lake from the Earth’s subsoil.
Detailed studies of the inclusions collected by the method of electronic microscopy, isotopic geochemistry, chemical and mass-spectrometric analysis will be carried out at the second stage at the Center for Isotopic studies of the All-Russia Geological Institute (VSEGEI). Special attention will be devoted to the determination of rare elements and stable isotopes in minerals whose composition and relationship will allow revealing sedimentation conditions, sources of drift and character of transportation of sedimentary substance.
                                                                                                                   
Table 1
Physical-chemical characteristics of Lake Vostok determined from the results of study of lake ice core from a deep borehole
Measurements made using the ice core samples
Lake characteristics
Value (note)
Determination of concentration of soluble admixtures (SO42-, Cl-, Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+) by the ion chromatography method 
Lake water salinity
0.1 … 1.0 ppt
Mass-spectrometric measurements of the isotopic ice composition
Isotopic water composition, 18O                                Isotopic water composition, D
-58.9 … -57.7 ppt              -458 … -448 ppt  (lake formed by melt water) 
Determination of the total gas content in ice
Concentration of dissolved N2 Concentration of dissolved O2 Time of lake saturation with atmospheric gases                          Ice melting point in the melting zone (P = 37.8 MPa)                   Ice melting point in the adfreeze  zone (P = 33.9 MPa)
0.086 … 2.25 g.l-1         0.027 … 1.3 g.l-1
0.2 … 1.6 million years

-2.86 … -3.15 oC                  

-2.62 … -2.85 oC
Measurement of CH4 and CO2 concentration by the gas chromatography method
Concentration of CH4 and CO2 in water (preliminary estimate0
Increased (indicating discharge of gases from lake sediments)
Mass-spectrometric measurements of the content and isotopic composition of helium in ice (3He/4He)
Isotopic 3He/4He ratio in ice
3.5.10-7 (typical of ancient non-activated cratons)
Micro-structural and X-ray structural ice analyses 
Density of dislocations in lake ice
5.10-7 … 6.109 m-2 (indicating the absence of deformations in ice) 

Biological studies of the ice core of Lake Vostok

The urgency of investigating Lake Vostok, which is the largest subglacial water body of our planet, is primarily related to the fact that it potentially presents a unique aquatic ecosystem isolated from the Earth’s atmosphere and surface biosphere for many millions of years. At the first stage of work, the main object of studies of biologists was a lake ice core retrieved from the 3538-3623 m depth. The studies were made by the methods of molecular biology (Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics (PNPI, RAS) and classical microbiology (Institute of Microbiology (INMI, RAS). 
In the biological respect, ice of Lake Vostok is an exceptionally clean material (with concentration of organic carbon, inorganic and organic acids and salts varying within 0-20.10-9). Therefore, for the ice core biological analyses, special methods for treatment of specimens and chemical-biological control of sampling purity were developed and introduced. In particular, PNPI specialists developed a new method for decontamination of ice of super-small volume using ozone. The decontaminating solutions of new generation were tested and protocols of their use were specified. For pollution control, a method of post-biological control was selected based on comparison of the findings with contaminant bases. Six such bases were created including a negative control in PCR and the base of borehole liquid contaminants.   
The molecular biology study of microbial contents of Lake Vostok accretion ice (originating from lake water: type I – shallow depth bay and type II – open water) was conducted at PNPI. Due to a very low DNA content revealed in a preliminary trial, the PCR-based (Polymerase Chain Reaction) methods were correspondingly advanced to detect 2-8 cells in 1 ml of melt water by using semi-nested PCR schemes and broad-range (16-17 of more than 20 bacterial divisions) updated degenerate primers for representatives of three Kingdoms of Life – Prokaryote, Archaea and Eukaryote (only Fungi). The target for PCR was a V3 variable region of bacterial and archaeal 16S rDNA and an ITS region of fungal nuclear rDNA. For example, the new bacterial primers allow us to match most of known bacteria 
A molecular biological analysis of lake ice I (samples from the 3546, 3571 and 3604 m depths) revealed the absence of the known representatives of cyanobacteria (the most ancient of the Kingdom of Bacteria), archaea and fungi. For fungi, the same result was obtained during the study of one sample of lake ice type II (3619 m). However, under the special (“non-specific”) conditions of PCR with “archaeal” and “fungal” primers, the DNA of unknown origin was discovered in some samples. One sample of such a DNA (3571 m) showed a distant relation to the known sulfite-reductases of bacterial origin whereas up to now the other DNA clones (3604 m) cannot be identified.
Detailed studies were made on the samples of lake ice I from 3551 and 3607 m depths. To make the findings confident, 6 databases of potential contaminants were established. As a result, the overwhelming majority of the bacteria found in these samples were recognized as contaminants. Only three bacteria (their fragmented 15000 year-old DNA), all from the 3607 m sample, have passed all controls and can be considered as true representatives of Lake Vostok microbiota. All these bacteria (three different species) proved to be related to chemolithoautotrophs and mesothermophiles, whose representatives were found in hydrothermal vent areas and fields in oceans and continents at temperatures up to 40-60°С (Fig. 8). The first species (Hydrogenophilus thermoluteolus) represents microorganisms discovered in hot springs (Japan, Izu district and USA, Yellowstone) and deep mines (Japan) and capable to oxidize hydrogen in the presence of carbon dioxide as a source of carbon. The second species is related to thiosulfate-oxidizing hydrothermal vent strains isolated from the Galapagos hydrothermal system. The third species is related to uncultured bacterial strains of OP11 division isolated from deep-sea (2 km) sediments of the hydrothermal Guaymas basin (Gulf of California, Mexico), which contains sulfides-sulfates and methane in anaerobic and organic carbon rich environment and from deep-sea (4 km) sediments of the Izu-Bonin trench (Japan Islands).
Based on the results of the studies, it is suggested that Lake Vostok microbiota is probably concentrated in its bottom sediments especially in the area of deep crust faults where water can be heated geothermally and circulate through cracks to the open lake (frazil ice) due to weak episodic seismotectonic events. Rare bacterial findings in lake ice can be explained by both a possible DNA (cells especially) degradation in the oxygen saturated lake water (as supposed now) and a low probability of life in the open lake due to a high oxygen tension which is known to be toxic in general. 
The microbiological (microscopy) studies of lake ice were conducted at INMI using ice core samples retrieved from 3541-3611 m depths. It was shown that microorganisms – representatives of both Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes, are present in all samples. Their numbers and morphological diversity were non-uniform at different horizons and correlated to some extent with the presence different ice-entrapped organic and inorganic impurities. Part of observed biological objects including bacteria, micro-algae and pollen of higher plants were morphologically similar to the objects earlier detected in the main ice sheet strata while others were detected for the first time. 
Special experiments using radio-isotopic labels and incubation at 15°- 28°С were also conducted at INMI to find viable cells in the lake ice. As a result, such cells were revealed in several samples, which disagree with the molecular biology results mentioned above. The same was shown by epifluorescent microscopy - viable cells were counted up to 30-40%, however, their amount was lower in lake ice as compared to the glacial ice sheet. A higher lake water temperature and alternating melting-freezing processes may not contribute to good preservation of glacier-released cells. To confirm the data obtained, new ice core samples for microscopy will be decontaminated and treated under special super-clean conditions worked out for molecular biology studies. 


Fig. 8. Phylogenetic analysis of the clones from the Lake Vostok ice core sample at the 3607 m depth  

    
Perspectives of Lake Vostok penetration with the aim of water and bottom sediment sampling
In future, it is proposed to continue the studies of physical-chemical and biological characteristics of Lake Vostok on the basis of water and ground specimens that will be sampled from the lake as a result of penetrating it. The ecological problems related to penetration of Lake Vostok and other subglacial lakes of Antarctica are being widely discussed at present at the international level with special attention from SCAR and other international organizations controlling the observance of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Fig. 9. Principal schemes illustrating the technology of penetration to the subglacial Lake Vostok (a, b) and tests of the TBPO-132 drill at the test bench at the Laboratory of the St. Petersburg State Mining Institute (c)

The first step in creating the ecologically clean technology of penetrating Lake Vostok was a joint project of the State Mining Institute and the AARI based on using the existing borehole 5G-1 and a new thermal drill TBPO-132. The work was performed under the contract with Minpromnauka of Russia in the framework of the Federal Research Theme “Studies and developments in the priority directions”. The Project consists in accessing the lake using a special drill, subglacial water entry to the borehole due to creating a positive pressure difference of water and borehole liquid and subsequent ice core sampling after water freezing in the borehole (Fig. 9). The proposed technology was approved by the State Ecological Expert Examination and patented in the Russian Agency for Patents and Trademarks. 
The main results of the studies of Lake Vostok at the first stage of the program are as follows: 
    • mapping of the lake boundaries was completed and its main morphometric characteristics were determined;
    • first estimates of chemical, gas and biological parameters of the lake were made;
    • biological evidence of the presence of life in lacustrine sediments and modern (0-15 kyr BP) hydrothermal activity at the bottom of Lake Vostok was obtained;
    • ecologically clean technology for penetrating the subglacial lake was developed.

Based on the materials of the studies made, the project participants in 1999-2002 published in total 49 papers.  The results obtained at the first stage open vast perspectives for new discoveries in the area of exobiology, paleoclimate, glaciation history and geology of Antarctica that will be made in the course of continued studies of Lake Vostok at the second stage of implementation of the Federal “World Ocean” Program in 2003-2007. In particular, it is planned to obtain new data on the chemical, gaseous and microbial composition of lake water as a result of continuing core drilling of borehole 5G-1 to a mark of 3670 m.  
