
Sofia, April 2003
26 ATCM- MADRID, JUNE 2003, 

INFORMATION PAPER
SUBMITTED BY THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

SUBJECT: Visit by Bulgarian officials to “St. Kl. Ohridski” Bulgarian Polar Station, Antarctica 

From 11th to 23rd January 2003 the “St. Kl. Ohridski” Bulgarian Polar Station in Antarctica was visited by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs Mrs. Katya Todorova, the Ambassador of the Republic of Bulgaria in Buenos Aires, Mr. Atanas Budev, the Member of Parliament, Mr. Miroslav Sevlievski and other representatives of various Bulgarian institutions. It was the first visit by high-ranking Bulgarian officials to the Station since Bulgaria had become a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty in May 1998. 

The visit was organized as a sing to the Bulgarian society of the strong commitment of the Bulgarian state to Antarctic matters and the state control of the Bulgarian Antarctic activities. Moreover, the purpose was to gather direct impressions on the conditions the Bulgarian scientific researchers live and work in as well as on the infrastructure of the Base and to prove on spot the research work carried out by the members of the Bulgarian expedition. The visit was also aimed at providing more fundings for scientific research programs and equipment for the Base. 

As a result, appropriate measures are now being taken with the purpose to improve the National Antarctic scientific program. A new internal mechanism to coordinate and support the Bulgarian Antarctic activities is being presently developed, too. The internal interministerial expert group has been informed about the experience gathered during the visit and relevant conclusions and plans for further action on governmental level have been elaborated. The beginning of a new National Antarctic Program has been set up.

During the visit, a Bulgarian Christian temple was inaugurated and a Bulgarian post office was set to operation under the supervision of the Minister of Transport and Communications. 

The Bulgarian delegation highly appreciated their visit to the neighbouring Spanish Antarctic base “Juan Carlos I” which offered useful ideas for the improvement of the infrastructure of the Bulgarian Base.
 
The Republic of Bulgaria considers the international scientific research a powerful means to pursue a foreign policy of peace and human prosperity. Therefore, Antarctic matters and cooperation with other countries on Antarctic matters are regarded as an important aspect of the Bulgarian foreign policy.
