
ATCM XXVI
Information Paper IP-___
Submitted by Russia
Agenda Item 12
English
Original-Russian




Main results of the first stage of the Subprogram  “Study and Research in the Antarctic” under the Federal Research Program “World Ocean” of Russia

The first stage of the Subprogram  “Study and Research in the Antarctic” under the Federal Research Program (FRP) “World Ocean” of Russia that began in 1998 was completed in late 2002. This subprogram is the major document formulating the main scientific and practical interests of the Russian Federation in this region of the planet. The Federal Client of this Subprogram is the Ministry for Economy and Trade of the Russian Federation, whereas the responsible executive body of the subprogram management is the Federal Service of Russia (Roshydromet) for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring. Organizations of Roshydromet, Ministry for Natural Resources of the Russian Federation, Ministry for Natural resources of the Russian Federation, Federal Service of Geodesy and Cartography, Ministry for Defense of Russia, Ministry for Education of Russia, State Committee for Fishery of Russia and the Russian Academy of Science.
	The Subprogram has 5 directions:
    • Basic studies of the Southern Polar Area;
    • Scientific-applied studies and developments 
    • Environmental monitoring of the Antarctic;
    • Environmental protection; 
    • Logistics support of activity of the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE). 
The budget financing of the subprogram was performed from two sources: FRP “World Ocean” – basic studies and investments, and by a separate line in the Federal budget – operational RAE activity.
The main purpose of basic studies of the Antarctic is to obtain new data on the Antarctic environmental state, determine past, current and future changes in its environment and assess their influence on global changes. To achieve this goal is impossible without the development and improvement of technologies supporting man activity in the Antarctic. 
	Twenty-nine scientific organizations of Russia took part in 19 projects under 8 topical sections in the direction of basic studies.
As a result of work under this direction, a perspective plan for the development of infrastructure, transport scheme and organization of RAE expedition operations up to the 2010 was prepared given the requirements of the Russian Federation Government for providing interests of Russia in the Antarctic. 
One of the most important problems of current Antarctic studies is to determine the place and role of the Antarctic in global climatic changes. It is known that the Antarctic is an integral part of the climatic system of our planet. The processes occurring in the atmosphere, ice sheet and the ocean around Antarctica are decisive in forming global climate. These processes can cause quite serious and sometimes even catastrophic changes in the environment. Antarctica is covered with an ice sheet up to 4500 m thick, which contains 90% of the world ice reserves and 70% of the world freshwater reserves. Melting of this sheet due to climate warming will lead to a 55 m rise of the ocean level. Without regular observations and understanding of these processes it is impossible to reliably predict the climate changes. In addition, the Antarctic as the most remote region from industrial centers is an indicator of global changes occurring in the Earth’s atmosphere, hydrosphere and cryosphere.
In the framework of subprogram activities, parameters of the current state of Antarctic climate including the atmosphere, ocean and land and sea ice were determined. One observes warming of the troposphere in West Antarctica, absence of significant trends in East Antarctica and cooling in Central Antarctica. An increase in surface temperature and precipitation (especially in the summertime) at the coastal stations in West Antarctica can be attributed to the increased “cyclonicity” of the atmospheric circulation in this area, i.e. displacement to the south of the trajectories of cyclones transporting a comparatively warm and humid air from temperate latitudes to the shores of Antarctica. This is confirmed by data of the Russian Bellingshausen and Novolazarevskaya stations demonstrating a relationship between the air temperature increase and the atmospheric pressure drop. Warming in the surface layer above the Antarctic Peninsula (2.5 оС for 50 years) is the largest in the Southern Hemisphere. Surface warming coincides with the temperature changes in the troposphere above the peninsula – at a height of 5 km a temperature increase by 1.5 оС over the same period was recorded. Warming occurs simultaneously with the sea ice decrease in the Bellingshausen and Amundsen Seas located to the west of the Peninsula. Degradation (margin retreat) of outlet glaciers in the west of the Antarctic Peninsula and intensified melting of the ice shelves near the coast of the Peninsula are observed as well as the associated changes in the regional terrestrial and marine ecosystems manifested in appearance of more thermophilic forms. 
Studies of the changes in the climatic system of the Antarctic due to the increase in carbon dioxide  (СО2) concentration in the atmosphere leading to the “greenhouse effect” and climate warming were carried out. Based on the mathematical climate model, the Antarctic climate response to a continuous 1% increase in СО2 concentration in the atmosphere was calculated. As a result of the calculations, estimates of the climate changes by the end of the 21st century relative to its present state were obtained. The average surface air temperature in Antarctica can comprise 2.5 С with the average increase in precipitation of 0.06 mm/day. At a given scenario, a dramatic decrease in the sea ice area will occur in the second half of the 21st century in the Southern Hemisphere. The precipitation increase above Antarctica is due to the changes in the atmosphere dynamics – displacement of the trajectories of cyclones surrounding Antarctica southward, which is in turn caused by a decrease in the ice cover area of the Southern Ocean. The increased precipitation at little changing evaporation and melting confirm the hypothesis about the “compensating” role of Antarctica in increasing the average level of the world ocean due to climatic warming. At this scenario of climate warming, its ice sheet will grow instead of melting due to precipitation increase in the form of snow above Antarctica, restraining the ocean level rise.
The Antarctic ice sheet is a unique natural storage of paleoclimatic information allowing reconstruction of climate changes throughout several hundreds of thousands of years, which is extremely important for understanding the mechanisms of climate variability, for example, establishing the relations between the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and air temperature. Paleoclimatic information is interpreted on the basis of the analysis of air bubbles in different horizons of the ice strata of Antarctica. The deepest borehole in the world for extracting ice samples (cores) from different horizons was drilled at the Russian Vostok station. Deep drilling and study of the Vostok ice core began as early as 1970. At present, ice coring at Vostok station is completed, and a depth of 3623 m from the glacier surface was reached. The non-disturbed climatic signal in the air bubbles “conserved” in the ice core is traced to a depth of 3310 m (ice age of 420 kyr), allowing reconstruction of the Earth’s climate history over the last 4 glacial and 5 interglacial periods. The temperature fluctuations in the past at the center of Antarctica were within 20оС. During the warmest epochs, climate was warmer by five degrees than now and during the coldest periods – colder by fifteen degrees relative to the current state. Close correlation was established between the fluctuations of air temperature, carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere and the World Ocean level. The results of measurements of carbon dioxide in the ice core indicate that the concentration of carbon dioxide in the current atmosphere was maximum for the last 420 kyr due to the increased anthropogenic emission of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. 
On the bedrock of Antarctica under the ice strata in the vicinity of Vostok station, a unique natural body – a lake 50 х 300 km in size was detected using radio-echo sounding methods. This subglacial lake is of exclusive interest to specialists all over the world, and discussions are held with respect to its origin and evolution. It is assumed that though a weak but a constant heat flux from the subsoil from beneath and the presence of a thick isolating ice “blanket” from above allows maintaining the water temperature higher than the temperature of freezing. The water age in Lake Vostok is about one million of years and the most ancient simplest life forms can exist there. Study of Protozoa organisms will permit us to better understand the evolution of life on Earth. For understanding the Lake Vostok system, knowledge of its geomorphologic characteristics is required including information on the lake dimensions, its bathymetry, thickness of the water layer, ice cover, information on origin and distribution of lacustrine sediments. In 2002, data on the ice sheet thickness and the character of the underlying surface were obtained on the basis of 64 profile lines of seismic and radio-echo sounding surveys in the eastern, northern and western lake areas with a total length of 774 km. The thickness of the ice covering the lake (2400-4350 m), water layer (100-1200 m) and the sedimentary mantle at the lake bottom (up to 300 m) was determined. A depression lying by 1600 m below sea level was detected in the lake. 
The lower 85 m of the Vostok ice core present an ice formed as a result of lake water freezing. Based on the study of the accreted lake ice core, the main characteristics of the gaseous and chemical composition of lake water were determined. The molecular-biological studies of the lake ice core allowed us for the first time to identify bacteria that present the true biota of the lake. All three types identified belong to thermophilic bacteria. Bacteria of such type usually inhabit hydrothermal vents with a water temperature of about 20о С. Thus, detection of thermophilic bacteria is an indirect evidence of the existence of hydrothermal vents at the bottom of Lake Vostok, which can significantly change our understanding of the thermal regime, gaseous composition and microbiota of the near-bottom part of Lake Vostok.  
The mechanisms and tendencies of ozone variability in the atmosphere of the Antarctic were determined. Over the last 30 years, a significant depletion of the total ozone concentration was observed above Antarctica, which is especially noticeable in spring (the so-called “ozone hole”). The Antarctic ozone anomaly has been and still is much more significant than a similar anomaly in the Northern Hemisphere. Its study plays a very important role as the increase of ultraviolet emission in the ozone hole areas inflicts serious damage on the health of people and agriculture. The observations in the last few years revealed that the ozone decrease rate in spring during the last decade was more than 3-fold slower compared to 1970 – 1980. In 2002, the “ozone hole” above Antarctica developed according to a non-typical scenario for the last 15 years. In August, the “ozone hole” was small increasing only in the middle of September and then its area sharply decreased and it divided into two holes with the total ozone values in August and September being significantly higher that during all last years. An analysis of the observation data indicates that the ozone concentration changes are determined to a greater extent by the variability of the upper atmosphere circulation processes rather than by the photochemical processes with participation of freons. 
The Antarctic is an area of the solar wind capture by the Earth’s magnetic field. Here, the most powerful disturbances of the Earth’s magnetic field that influence the health state of people and operation of radiotechnical communication and navigation systems of the entire planet are recorded. Studies of the influence of the ionospheric processes on the processes and phenomena in the surface layers and the upper atmosphere of the Southern Hemisphere were carried out. It was shown that a change in the intensity of galactic space rays produces a significant effect on the atmospheric parameters above the South Near-Pole Area. The existence of the mechanisms of influence of the solar wind magnetic field on the variations of the surface electric field was proved. The influence in some situations of helio-geophysical perturbations on the change of ozone concentration in the atmosphere was detected. The influence of helio-geophysical perturbations and gravity field variations on living organisms including the rate of oxidation in biochemical reactions that determine the processes of life activity of living organisms was investigated. It was found that helio-geophysical perturbations and gravity field variations correlate most strongly with the hemoglobin level in blood and the rate of erythrocyte precipitation. If these perturbations and variations are extreme, then the inadequate response of a human organism can occur especially with unhealthy people. Such studies can become a basis for developing recommendations for health protection of people in the case of predicted extreme deviations of helio-geophysical parameters.
Antarctic waters possess the colossal volumes of biological stocks. The population structure of Antarctic krill and commercial fish species (Champsocephalus gunnari, Notothenia squamifrons and Patagonian toothfish – Dissostichus eleginoides) of the South Georgia Island area was investigated based on the results of the 2001-2002 survey. An assessment of the krill biomass according to the results of the international survey made with participation of the Russian ship “Atlantida” in the Atlantic sector of the Antarctic was performed not only for the area in general, but also for the sub-regions of the South Shetland, South Orkneys and South Sandwich Islands. New data and calculations showed that a safe limit of the krill catch in each sub-region might comprise annually 1 million of tons. At the current total krill catch in the Atlantic sector equal to 100 thousand tons, such catch limit will not be achieved soon.
	In Antarctica and its offshore zones, geological aero-geophysical surveys of different scales were conducted in the area of about 5 million square km with a length of profiles of more than 450 000 km as well as geological exploration field studies. In the Antarctic Seas, about 50 000 km of multi-channel seismic and gravity-magnetic observations were made. On this basis, a set of digital geological-geophysical charts of the Antarctic was generated including a chart of the subglacial Antarctic relief, a chart of the anomalous magnetic field of the Antarctic, a chart of the gravity field of the Antarctic and a tectonic chart of the Antarctic. Along with seismic data obtained in the Antarctic water areas, the magnetic and gravity data allow us to reliably define the geological structure of the Antarctic shelf seas.
	With respect to the direction of scientific-applied studies and developments, the work on the development of the energy supply of the Antarctic stations using the renewable sources (wind and solar radiation) and also on the design of snow-ice air strips for receiving heavy wheel transport aircraft of the IL-76 type was undertaken. A test sample of the solar-energy module was tested at Vostok station for obtaining water by snow melting on a 24-h basis. At the end of 2001 at Novolazarevskaya station, the runway for receiving IL-76 aircraft was introduced into operation in compliance with all requirements of the State Service of Civil Aviation of Russia. For Progress Base, design of a similar airstrip was completed. 
	The work on monitoring the Antarctic environmental state (upper, free and surface atmosphere and hydrosphere including waters of the Southern Ocean and Antarctic lakes, lithosphere, marine continental ice sheet and biosphere of the Antarctic Seas and the continent) was performed at all Russian Antarctic stations (Mirny, Vostok, Novolazarevskaya, Bellingshausen and Progress) on a year-round basis and at the seasonal field Druzhnaya-4 Base and onboard the expedition vessels (“Akademik Fedorov” and “Aleksandr Karpinsky”) during the seasonal period. Equipment of the observation network with modern measurement complexes to investigate the state of the surface and free atmosphere, magneto- and ionosphere and satellite data receiving was continued.   The first stage of re-equipment of RAE stations and vessels with modern communication and telecommunication facilities was completed allowing transmission of significant information volumes from the Antarctic to the territory of Russia and international data centers on an operational basis.  
	The Antarctic environmental protection activities were carried out in strict compliance with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. To this end, an environmental impact assessment of RAE activity and of the other projects extending the traditional expedition objectives (runway at Novolazarevskaya station, project of penetration to the water layer of the subglacial Lake Vostok, etc.) was prepared. A 4-year cycle of nature protection measures for cleaning the territory of the Bellingshausen station was completed. It was carried out jointly by the RAE representatives and a non-governmental organization of Great Britain ”Mission in Antarctica”. At Novolazarevskaya and Progress stations, complexes for treatment of domestic and sewage water and incinerators for burning domestic waste were introduced.   
	Modernization of the transport scheme for supporting the RAE activities, improvement of the communication and navigation facilities and of the infrastructure of the Antarctic stations and support of personnel life activity in the Antarctic are continued.      
