º

XXVI ATCM
Information Paper IP-111
Agenda Item: CEP 4a
JAPAN
Original: English

Antarctic Meteorites; Status of Research in Japan and their Preservation

Meteorites in Antarctica
1.	Meteorites are extraterrestrial material that might reveal the origin of planets and evolution of the solar system. The Antarctic ice sheet is a unique reservoir of meteorites, keeping many meteorites free from the contact with terrestrial organic material. In this paper, Japan reports the status of Antarctic meteorite research in Japan and expresses its concern about their proper preservation for scientific purposes.
2.	In 1969, the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) first collected 9 pieces of meteorites in bare ice fields in the vicinity of the Yamato Mountains, East Antarctica. Since then, JARE teams have been searching for meteorites in several ice fields in the Antarctic continent. Other parties, including the United States, New Zealand, Germany, European Union and China, have also been collecting Antarctic meteorites by national or international teams.
Antarctic Meteorite Research Center at NIPR, Tokyo
    3. About 16,500 pieces of meteorites have been collected by JARE by now, which comprises 60% of the Antarctic meteorite collection in the world. The collection contains meteorites from the moon and the Mars. They are kept in the Antarctic Meteorite Research Center (AMRC;http://yamato.nipr.ac.jp/AMRC/AMRCindex. html) at the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Tokyo, established in 1998. The center classifies the meteorites and lists them in “Meteorite Newsletter” and “Catalog of Antarctic Meteorites”. They are also available on-line. 
4.	These meteorites are fully open to international scientific community. The Committee on Antarctic Meteorite Research at NIPR, composed of meteorite specialists, reviews the research proposals and the committee allocates the meteorite specimens under the guidelines of allocation. NIPR sponsors annual symposium on Antarctic meteorites and publishes a scientific journal, Antarctic Meteorite Research. 
5.	Antarctic meteorite specimens of NIPR are also loaned to museums and schools for scientific exhibitions and public educational purposes. Sets of meteorites and thin sections for microscopic observation are also loaned to science classes of schools and universities.
A Concern about Preservation
6.	As the Antarctic tourism develops, the access to Antarctic continent is getting easier. In private sector, many mountain climbers and travelers visit inland Antarctica by airplane. It is probable that those visitors would encounter meteorites in Antarctica either accidentally or intentionally in the near future. In fact, NIPR was once contacted by a tour operator on the feasibility of a trip to the Yamato Mountains area for searching meteorites in bare ice fields. 
7.	In the Japanese law system, relating to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, no Japanese can collect Antarctic minerals, who is not permitted in advance by Ministry of the Environment, Japan. Collecting minerals in Antarctica is permitted only for scientific research, which results should be open to public. We expect other party nations (cf. the United Kingdom; XXV ATCM/IP-20) might have similar laws to prevent its citizens from collecting meteorites in Antarctica for private or commercial purposes. 
8.	All meteorites collected in Antarctica should be curated and preserved in research or educational organizations as universities and museums. They should not be handled for private or commercial purposes. We strongly hope that all parties to the Environmental Protocol to recognize the value of the Antarctic meteorites and to establish international consensus to take such legal or administrative steps as are necessary to preserve Antarctic meteorites so that they are collected and curated according to accepted scientific standards, and are made available for scientific purposes (Resolution 3, 2001) only.

