
CEP VI
Information Paper IP-___
Submitted by Russia
Agenda Item 4c
English
Original-Russian

ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE
RUSSIAN ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION













ADDITIONAL 50m DRILLING OF DEEP BOREHOLE AT VOSTOK STATION

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION









SAINT PETERSBURG
2003

1. INTRODUCTION	4
2. DISCRIPTION OF THE PURPOSE AND NEED FOR THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY  Continuation of drilling additional 50 m to a depth of 3673m	5
3.  DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED ACTIVITY	6
4. ALTERNATIVES AND NO ACTION ALTERNATIVE	9
5. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT	9
5.1. Physical-geographical description of the area of activity	9
5.2. Glacial cover in the  borehole  area	9
5.2.1. Characteristics of the current state of borehole 5G-1	11
5.2.2. Assessment of the ice layer thickness separating the borehole 5G-1 bottom from the ice-water interface based on data of ice temperature distribution with depth	11
5.2.3. Crystallographic and structural properties of lake ice with respect to its permeability for the drilling fluid	12
5.2.4. Probability of changes in physical and structural properties of lake ice (towards its permeability increase) within a depth range from 3623 m (current borehole bottom) to 3750 m (estimated depth of ice-water interface)	12
6. ANALYSIS OF THE ANTISIPATED ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT	13
6.1. Anticipated direct impact and contamination risks	13
6.2. Possible indirect impact	16
6.3. Cumulative impact	17
6.4. Anticipated impact on the aesthetic and wilderness values of the environment	17
6.5 Anticipated impact on the areas of scientific, historic and cultural significance	17
7. UNAVOIDABLE IMPACT AT CONTINUATION OF DRILLING THE BOREHOLE 5G-1	18
8.  PROPOSALS FOR MITIGATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT	18
9. GAPS IN KNOWLEDGE	18
10. CONCLUSIONS	19
11. REFERENCES	20



1. INTRODUCTION 

Due to the discovery of a subglacial lake, SCAR (Cambridge, 1994) recommended to the participants of a joint Russian-US-French Project to suspend drilling of borehole 5G-1 upon reaching an ice thickness above the lake of 30-40 m ensuring a sufficient safety of the lake from penetration of the drilling fluid. Drilling was actually terminated at a depth of 3623 m with ice 130 m thick separating the lake water surface from the borehole bottom (determined from independent data of radio-echo and seismic soundings). 
Due to a significant interest of biologists and glaciologists to the accretion ice at the bottom ice sheet portion beneath Vostok station, they have proposed to continue drilling of additional 50 m of ice applying the technology tested and used at Vostok station. 
In compliance with the Decision of the V Session of the Committee of Environmental protection carried out within the frame of the XXV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Warsaw, 2002 .) the Russian Party prepared the Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) for drilling the additional 50 meters of deep borehole at Vostok station. 
The above evaluation is based on the data described in detail in the revised project of the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation “Water sampling of the sub-glacial lake Vostok” presented at the XXVI ATCM.
The IEE was prepared in compliance with the Resolution 1 (1999) “Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica”, adopted at the XXIII ATCM and the requirements of the Russian law. 
2. DISCRIPTION OF THE PURPOSE AND NEED FOR THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY  Continuation of drilling additional 50 m to a depth of 3673m
This activity presents a continuation of the Project on deep borehole 5G-1 drilling with the aim of extracting ice cores for further scientific research, analysis and filling gaps in the knowledge necessary for a successful implementation of the Lake Vostok study project.  
To achieve this objective characterizes the essence of using further the borehole 5G-1 – to continue drilling and ice core sampling. At present, the borehole 5G-1 has already penetrated that part of the glacial strata that was most likely formed at freezing of lake water. Hence, further drilling, sampling and study of ice cores will provide new information on the origin and chemistry in the past of lake water and a possible existence of life in it. 
In addition to their own value, these data will be invaluable for the development of subsequent technologies of direct studies of lake and its sediments and for updating the results of modeling and remote sensing studies. 
Studies of deep boreholes at Vostok station and of the continuous ice core extracted from the borehole 5G-1, whose age is greater than 500 kyr have already allowed us to obtain significant scientific results:
    • based on the ice core isotopic and glaciological studies, scientists of Russia (AARI, Institute of Geography of RAS), France (LGGE of the CNRS) and the USA (University of Miami) have established for the first time the cyclicity of climate change on Earth and identified four glacial and interglacial periods;
    • methodology for aseptic microbiological sampling from the ice core was developed and tested at the level of scientific discovery of anabiosis duration of microorganisms of more than 200 kyr (SPSMI jointly with the Institute of Microbiology of RAS and AARI); 
    • data on the temperature regime of the glacial cover were obtained for the first time in central Antarctica and were used as a basis of mathematical modeling of the heat-mass transfer processes in the glacier. 
Studies in the area of geophysics, glaciology, paleoclimatology and microbiology will permit us to collect numerous materials of unique significance for world science.

3.  DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED ACTIVITY 

The Russian Antarctic Program has in its plan to continue borhole drilling of the ice cover, with the purpose to further study the lake ice up to the depth of 3673 m.
 During the summer Antarctic season 2003/2004 the following actions shall be carried out:
    1. Geophysical survey in the deep borehole which should include the borehole closure (deformation), ice temperature, fluid density and pressure controls;
    2. Field observations and measurements of the ice texture and fabric in the fresh ice core, which would allow a timely detection of possible changes in the mechanical properties of ice related to ice permeability;
    3. Developed emergency plan, which should be employed immediately in case the monitoring means indicate dangerous conditions (the conditions should be specified).

The obtained results will be of extreme importance not only for the science but also as confirmation of the physical and mechanical properties of ice of the Vostok lake surface layer.
Based on practical and economic considerations with respect to organization and logistics of drilling a new borehole, the Russian scientists propose to use for accessing Lake Vostok the already existing borehole 5G-1.
Drilling of a deep hole at Vostok station was initiated in the 35th SAE (1990) by a thermal method using TELGA and TB3S types of drills. During the 38th RAE (1993), the borehole 5G-1 reached a depth of 2755 m. Due to insufficient funding of the 39th RAE and some technical and organizational problems, the Vostok station was temporarily decommissioned and no drilling activities were hence carried out. During the 40th RAE (1995), drilling of borehole 5G-1 was resumed from a depth of 2755 by the electrical mechanical drill and without any complications the depth of the borehole 5G-1 has increased from 2755 m to 3109 m. After suspension of Vostok station during the 41st RAE (1997), no drilling operations were undertaken in the borehole 5G-1 in the wintering periods. In the seasons of the 41st, 42nd and 43rd RAE (1995-1996, 1996-1997 and 1997-1998), the borehole 5G-1 was run from a depth of 3109 to 3623 m, which is almost 600 m as deep as the maximum depths achieved by specialists of EC countries (3032 m and 2953 m) and the USA (3057 m) in drilling the boreholes under more favorable conditions of Greenland. Drilling of boreholes by the EC specialists was stopped due to accidents in these depths. To compensate the overburden pressure, the EC specialists use a drilling fluid similar to that used by Russia. Its composition includes aviation fuel of JP-8 type as the main component and Freon F-141b as heaver. Same fluid is applied for drilling a deep hole at Dome C in Antarctica under the European Program EPICA, which has achieved a depth of 1450 m by February 1, 2001. 
Drilling of the borehole was performed in the framework of the Russian-French-US Program of Deep Drilling and Ice Core Study at Vostok station.
At present, the borehole 5G presents a complex multistage structure (Fig.3.1.).
 





































	





Fig.3.1. Borehole 5G (5G-1) at Vostok station (scheme) 
а –  borehole profile with indication of depth and age 
b –  borehole design with indication of the types of corers used (electrical thermal- TELGA, TBЗS; electrical-mechanical – KEMS).
. In the upper portion of the hole, a casing to a depth of 120 m is installed with an internal diameter of 165 mm. To a depth of 2200 m (the hole was run by a TB3S-152 thermal drill with an external diameter of 152 mm), the minimum borehole diameter is equal to 153 mm. The minimum diameter by depth intervals comprises: 22003095 m – 139 mm; 30953321 m – 138.4 mm; 33213500 m – 137.9 mm; 35003570 m – 136.2 mm; 35703623 m – 135 mm. 
Using a thermal TB3S-152 drill, the borehole was drilled to a depth of 2500 m. During the recovery of the drill at a depth of 2250 m, it was stuck in the hole. The cable was cut at the place of its seal in the drill. After that using a thermal TB3S-132 drill with the external diameter of the bore bit of 132 mm, a new borehole 5G-1 was drilled from a depth of 2200. Initially, the hole drilled from a depth of 2200 m to a depth of 2755 m by the thermal TB3S-132 drill had a minimum diameter of 133 mm. 
Before the beginning of drilling using a mechanical method, this borehole segment was enlarged to a diameter of 139 mm. In the process of drilling by a mechanical method (the maximum external diameter by bore bits of 135 mm), the drilled segments of the hole were periodically reamed resulting in a stepwise shape of the hole. The total volume of the drilling fluid (mixture of the aviation fuel ТS-1 and freon F-141b) in the borehole comprises around 60 m3. The drilling fluid level as of January 21, 1999 was at a depth of 95 m, its average density equaling 928 kg/m3. To a depth of 2200 m, the hole is practically vertical, then the deviation angle of the borehole axis from the vertical changes within 6 to 8 оС.
Before passing to a mechanical method of drilling, a casing for shutting off the permeable firn zone was installed in the borehole 5G-1. All equipment for installation of the casing (directly the casing, mechanical reamer and TV instrumentation for observations in the borehole) was prepared at the Laboratoire de Glaciologie et Geophysique de L’Environnement   (LGGE, CNRS, France).

The drilling of additional 50 m will not require any changes in the activity and will be carried out in accordance with a tested technology that has proved to be reliable.


4. ALTERNATIVES AND NO ACTION ALTERNATIVE

An alternative to the above method could be the use of another type of drilling tool and core lifting technique, which would be not appropriate in the case of positive results from the previous work.  
The effective use of the given borehole from the point of view of environmental protection and the alternative methods of penetration to the lake surface are described in detail in the Draft CEE “Water sampling of the sub-glacial lake Vostok”.
Refusal from the conduct of activity does not mean closing the Vostok station where other research studies are carried out and planned. This signifies that during the next few years, the station will operate as a logistics base with all implications of the anthropogenic impact. The major impact on the natural conditions in the station area will be related as before to the issues of life support: accommodation of the expedition participants, supply of fuel, equipment and food products, operation of DES, galley and transport, snow withdrawal, accumulation of wastes, etc. That is why a refusal from drilling will only partly diminish the anthropogenic load and will not be able to drastically influence the changes in the current environmental state of natural conditions at the glacial surface in the Vostok station area. 
At the present time, the bottom of the borehole 5G-1 is located at a depth of 3623 m, i.e. approximately in 130 m from the boundary of the bottom glacial surface and water of Lake Vostok. At the refusal from further drilling, the borehole will be finally decommissioned and probably lost for scientific research.  

5. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

5.1. Physical-geographical description of the area of activity

Vostok  station is located on the plain snow surface of the glacial plateau in East Antarctica (78028’ S, 106048’ E) at a height of 3488 m above sea level. The least distance from the coast is 1260 km, from Mirny station  - 1420 km and from the South Pole - 1253 km.  The ice sheet thickness in this area is 3750 m and the thickness of the snow-firn strata is about 120 m. The glacier bed beneath the station is at a mark of about 200 m below sea level. 
The natural water bodies are absent in the station area. There are no bedrock outcrops. The east Antarctic ice sheet presents an extensive, high and thick whole massif, which contains more than 4/5 of the entire Antarctic ice volume. The landscapes of this area are distinguished by a significant monotony while natural components are characterized by uniformity.

5.2. Glacial cover in the  borehole  area

As follows from the data of geophysical and glaciological studies, the upper portion of the ice sheet at the drilling site of borehole 5G-1 is comprised of a 100-m snow-firn layer overlying the monolithic ice strata. It is composed of the “interglacial” and “glacial” ice seams differing in the grain size and orientation of their crystallographic axes. In the upper portion of the section, these differences are quite insignificant, however at depths greater than 2700 m, the “interglacial” and “glacial” ice seams differ significantly by their structure and mechanical properties /8/.  In addition, at the 3310-3370 m depth range, some indications of tectonic inconsistency in the bedding of strata were observed. At the 3460-3538 m range, there is layered ice, which is characterized by alternating layers of fine- and coarse-grained ice. Finally, the basal ice layer detected below the 3538 m mark and traced to the borehole bottom (3623 m) is formed by giant-grained ice  (ice crystals greater than 1 m in diameter). This ice contains rare scattered small inclusions (1-6 mm in diameter) presenting concentrations of clayey particles of morainic origin. According to /8/, the structure of basal ice indicates its stationary state and a congelation origin, i.e. the ice forming during the process of water  freezing.
The ice flow above the lake in the Vostok station area is directed southeastward. The presence of a basal layer of stationary ice in the lower ice section suggests that the ice sheet here beds predominantly on the underlying mountain rocks, whereas the dissected subglacial bed relief presents a hindrance to the lower layers of the glacial strata. The maximum shear deformations occur within the higher layer (3460-3540 m). Beginning from these depths and higher, the ice strata are involved into motion whose rate at the ice sheet surface comprises about 3 m/year /9/. 
Large dimensions and depths of the lake are direct evidence that the total transport of melt water entrapped in the basin by the ice cover can be zero or close to constant. At the bottom ice sheet surface at the ice-water phase divide, the ice melting/accretion rate can differ in different parts of the lake both in value and sign. This rate at the divide is determined by the local vertical heat flux that consists of geothermal and climatic components.
Calculations showed a decrease of 100-150 m in the ice sheet thickness in the lake area during the global cooling events in the past due to a significantly reduced atmospheric precipitation /10/. 
At the present time at an average pressure at the ice-water divide estimated as 340 bars the freshwater freezing temperature is assumed to be –2.6о С, while the corresponding optimal value of the current ice sheet thickness was determined to be 37763 m. Based on seismic sounding data, the ice thickness at this location is 3750 m. The difference of 26 m is equivalent to the offset of the lake water freezing point from –2.6о С to –3.1о С, which is less likely.
According to studies of the ice core from the deep borehole at Vostok station, it is known that the upper 3540-m of the ice sheet overlying the stationary basal ice layer is subjected to intense displacement and deformation heating in the contact zone. Based on the vertical temperature distribution measurements in the ice sheet (in the borehole) and climatic reconstructions from isotopic ice composition data, the heat flux, ice sheet thickness and bottom ice melting/accretion rate were estimated. They have revealed that the best coincidence of the calculated and measured temperatures for the present conditions can be obtained at the bottom heat flux of 0.0360.006 W/m2 that produces the average water rate freezing of 1.10.6 mm/year /11/. This is in agreement with the results of structural ice core studies according to which the 220-m basal layer is represented by congelation ice that was formed from water freezing to the bottom ice surface.





5.2.1. Characteristics of the current state of borehole 5G-1

	The drilling of borehole 5G-1 was interrupted at the end of the seasonal operations of the 43rd Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) in January 1998 when the borehole depth comprised 3623 m, which is approximately 130 m higher than the “ice-lake water” interface. After the end of drilling, the borehole was suspended. The present design of borehole 5G-1 is presented at Fig.3.1. The total volume of the drilling fluid in the borehole is about 60 m3.  The drilling fluid level is at a depth of 95 m and its average density is equal to 928 kg/m3. The difference between the overburden pressure of the ice strata and the hydrostatic pressure of the drilling fluid is about 0.1 MPa. The rate of the borehole narrowing in the bottom area at the existing undercompensation of the overburden pressure is not greater than 0.1 mm/year. The borehole head has been sealed. The borehole is practically vertical to a depth of 2200 m, then the deviation angle of the hole axis from vertical comprises 6 to 8о. 

5.2.2. Assessment of the ice layer thickness separating the borehole 5G-1 bottom from the ice-water interface based on data of ice temperature distribution with depth

Experimental data on the temperature distribution in the ice sheet and their model extrapolation up to the ice melting point at the lower ice sheet surface allow us to estimate the distance from the borehole bottom to the ice-water interface with a greater accuracy.   
Due to a slight curvature of borehole 5G-1, its total length (3623 m) is only 3 m greater than the vertical depth from the ice sheet surface to the borehole bottom (3620 m). That is why no correction of the results of ice core and borehole studies by depth is required in most cases. The precision temperature measurements in borehole 5G-1 were conducted repeatedly with borehole drilling. The last series of measurements (3 cycles of continuous measurements made during lowering of the geophysical devices from the top to the bottom of the borehole) was undertaken in the summer season 1999-2000, i.e., 2 years after drilling. As a result of these measurements, a continuous temperature profile with and absolute accuracy of 0.1 ºC was obtained from 100 m to a 3613 m depth [1]. The ice temperature near the borehole bottom at a depth of 3612.6 m comprised  -6.06 ºС. 
The temperature at the ice sheet bottom corresponds to the ice melting point, which depends on water pressure, salinity and concentration of dissolved gases. An analysis of available data shows that the temperature at the ice-water contact in the vicinity of Vostok station is within -2.85 to -2.62 ºС [2]. To construct a temperature profile between the 3613 m depth and the bottom of the ice sheet, a mathematical model of the heat-mass transfer in the ice sheet described in [3] was used. As a result of the calculations it was determined that the temperature distribution in the near-bottom strata of the ice sheet is close to linear, the temperature gradient in ice in close proximity to the bottom equals 0.0208 ºС m-1 (corresponds to a heat flux of 47 mW m-2) and the distance from the borehole bottom to the ice-water contact comprises 145±15 м (corresponds to the total ice sheet thickness of 3765±15 m) [4]. The obtained values are in agreement within the indicated range of errors with the results of the vertical seismic profiling in borehole 5G-1 (the distance from the borehole bottom to the lake was in this case 130 m) [5] and ground-based radar sounding of the ice sheet in the Vostok station area (the total ice sheet thickness according to these measurements is equal to 3775±15 m, which corresponds to the distance of 155±15 m from the borehole bottom to the lake) [6]. Thus, the estimates performed using three independent methods indicate that the remaining distance from the current borehole bottom (3623 m) to the subglacial lake is not less than 130 m. 

5.2.3. Crystallographic and structural properties of lake ice with respect to its permeability for the drilling fluid

Studies of the ice core extracted from borehole 5G-1 have revealed that at a depth of 3538 m in the Vostok station area there is an interface between glacier ice of atmospheric origin and accretion ice formed as a result of Lake Vostok water freezing to the ice sheet bottom [7, 8]. Lake ice has a coarse-grained crystalline structure with a random orientation of c-axes. The average crystal size is about 25 cm in diameter whereas in some horizons the diameter of the crystals is greater than 1 m [7, 8]. 
As a result of studies of the crystalline structure of the ice core samples from horizons of 3553 and 3610 m made by the method of x-ray diffraction measurements, it was established that lake ice is characterized by an almost perfect crystallographic structure and a low density of lattice dislocations (<108 m-2) [9]. These data indicate absence of deviatoric stresses in ice and also point to a perfect structure of ice crystals excluding a possibility for the drilling fluid (kerosene/freon F-141b mixture) to diffuse through the ice lattice.
However, it is known that at high temperatures (beginning from ~6 ºС below the ice melting point), a quasi-liquid film forms at the ice-grain boundaries. The thickness of this film at the triple junctions of ice grain increases up to several tens of microns close to the melting point. Thus, triple junctions form in polycrystalline ice a system of connected microscopic veins through which (under the action of pressure and/or concentration gradient) liquid water and soluble impurities including the borehole fluid, can migrate. A theory of diffusion of soluble impurities through a vein system is given by Rempel et al. [10]. Applying theory [10] to the conditions (ice temperature, grain size) appropriate to the near-bottom strata of the ice sheet at Vostok, one can calculate that the total penetration depth of the drilling fluid from the borehole to ice (also in the direction towards the ice-sheet bottom) will be less than 1 m over the first millennium. Thus, a possible penetration of the drilling fluid from the borehole through ice to Lake Vostok is practically excluded provided that ice bedding deeper than the current borehole bottom (3623 m) has a structure similar to that observed in the investigated section of the lake ice core (3538-3623 m). 

5.2.4. Probability of changes in physical and structural properties of lake ice (towards its permeability increase) within a depth range from 3623 m (current borehole bottom) to 3750 m (estimated depth of ice-water interface) 

The lake ice properties determining its permeability for the borehole fluid may change with depth as ice becomes younger near the ice formation zone. An analysis of isotope data from the lake ice core has revealed that the mechanism of ice accretion near Vostok station is related to thermohaline circulation in the lake being thus similar to the mechanism of water freezing to the ice shelf base [11, 12]. In particular, it was shown that frazil ice plays a significant role in accretion of lake ice. The crystals of frazil ice form due to super-cooling of melt water, which rises along the inclined ice ceiling of the lake from a zone of subglacial melting in the north towards a zone of ice accretion in the south of the lake. The consolidation of originally loose layer of frazil ice crystals accumulating under the ice-sheet base occurs as a result of slow freezing of host water. According to the isotope data, the frazil ice forms 42 to 70 % of the total volume of newly accreted lake ice. 
By analogy with sea ice accreting at the ice shelf base, it is reasonable to suggest that young lake ice has a fine-grained structure with a grain size not greater than some millimeters in diameter [13]. Such structure increases ice permeability as a rule, especially at the annealing temperatures typical in the ice overlying the accretion zone. Interpretation of data obtained from thin-section, chemical and x-ray diffraction studies of the available ice core leads to a conclusion that after its formation, the lake ice experiences an abnormal grain growth under the prolonged annealing conditions [9]. We do not know at present at what distance from the ice-water interface the formation of this secondary lake ice structure characterized by a negligible low permeability for the borehole fluid (see above) is completed. As a reliable estimate a distance of 25 m from the ice-sheet bottom can be taken. The calculated temperature at this depth is equal to 0.5 ºС below the melting point [4], while the ice age exceeds 2 kyr [4, 14], which is more than sufficient for the secondary structure formation. 
In summary, within overall uncertainties of the aforementioned estimates, the 3725 m depth should be considered as a lower boundary to which the ecologically safe conditions of ice drilling with a conventional electromechanical drill are assured. Continuation of drilling below a 3725 m depth should be considered as the beginning of Lake Vostok entry and thus requires employment of new equipment and technology specifically designed for this operation.   

6. ANALYSIS OF THE ANTISIPATED ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
The anticipated  impact on the environmental values and its analysis are described in detail in the Draft CEE "Water sampling of the subglacier lake Vostok". In this  IEE we will consider the impact that has relation to the drilling of additional 50 m of the borehole. 
 
6.1. Anticipated direct impact and contamination risks 

The direct impact of the suggested drilling operations on the environment consists in the following: 
1) environmental impact from the applied drilling fluid; 
2) drilling of the borehole to the depth 3673 m and introduction of additional amount of the drilling fluid (change of glacier structure along the borehole depth).
Besides, we should consider the risks of the loss of equipment and the fluid leak penetration into the glacier strata. .

Impact: influence of the drilling fluid on the environment.  The drilling technology of a deep borehole 5G-1 envisages application of the drilling fluid consisting of the aviation fuel TS-1 and Freon 141b as heaver. The greatest danger for the environment is related to Freon losses as a more volatile and active substance.
Freon 141b is delivered to the station in sealed drums and its losses during transportation and storage are practically excluded. The technological losses in the process of drilling can be divided into two portions: evaporation of the drilling fluid from the surface in the borehole and fluid, which is carried to the surface in the process of round-trip operations. 
The technological process and the design of the borehole 5G-1 ensure a minimum loss of the drilling fluid including Freon). The upper part of the borehole passing through the snow-firn zone is overlapped by the plastic casing excluding any losses of the drilling fluid in it. The lower (200-300 m above the bottom) and the upper (200 m) segments of the borehole are filled with the drilling fluid with a relatively low level of Freon. The fluid density on these segments is not greater than 900 kg/m3. Freon and kerosene are added separately to the borehole. Pure Freon is delivered to the borehole to the chosen horizons by a special device while kerosene is poured from the surface contributing to a decreased Freon concentration at the drilling fluid surface. At the beginning of the drill run, the drill is filed at the surface by a practically pure kerosene, which is delivered to the bottom as the design of the drill does not allow the fluid circulate over it in the process of round trip operations. 
At the drill recovery, the carrying cable extracts about 40 liters of the drilling fluid from the hole, whose density corresponds to an average density of the drilling fluid in the upper 100 m in the borehole. Together with cuttings, around 35 liters of fluid is extracted from the near-bottom zone in the sludge trap. The fluid flowing from the cable and the drill is collected to trays from which it is again poured to the borehole.
To assess the losses of the drilling fluid during the season of the 43d RAE, the drilling group has carried out a complex of geophysical observations including regular measurements of he density of the fluid extracted from the borehole and fluid depth, fluid sampling from different horizons and temperature measurements along the entire borehole drilled. 
A comparison of the fluid density during the 1998 season with the measurements made in January 1997 before the borehole was suspended has not revealed any changes during the preceding year thus indicating a high stability of the kerosene/Freon mixture and the absence of Freon losses during the borehole standby. 
The fluid extracted from the borehole with the carrying cable and in the drill remains in the open containers at the drilling site for about an hour. After that at the beginning of the next run it is poured to the hole with the descent of the drill. At first, the fluid has a temperature of about -40 0С and then at pouring to the hole about –20 0С. Over 10 hours the fluid density decreased by around 10 kg/m3. It is obvious that with increasing temperature Freon will evaporate more quickly from the fluid. Assuming that Freon evaporates uniformly with time, we obtain that approximately 0.2 kg can evaporate from 80 liters of the drilling fluid.
Some portion of the fluid extracted from the hole is lost with cuttings. After each run the cuttings extracted from the drill are melt to determine the volume. The fluid is heated up to the above freezing temperature and Freon evaporates from it practically completely. According to measurements made after each run, approximately three liters of the drilling fluid remains.
In spite of the fact that special trays are set up under the deflecting rollers and the cable over its entire length from the borehole to the winch to collect the flowing fluid, some portion is irrevocably lost due to splashing. These losses can be estimated as about two liters a run. 
Then the total irrevocable losses of the drilling fluid during a run (round trip operations) will be about five liters, or 1 kg of Freon 141b. Given the losses due to evaporation from the extracted drilling fluid, we have 1.2 kg of Freon per run. 
To drill 50 m of ice, the maximum number of the drilling runs to the borehole can be around 40. Thus, the total quantity of Freon that can be retrieved to the surface and produce an environmental impact can be 50 kg.
Impact: change of the glacial structure along the borehole 5G-1 below a depth of 3623 m.  At continued drilling from the bottom of borehole 5G-1 to the depth 3673 m in the basal glacial horizons, the drill will run additional 50 m. The total volume of the extracted ice cores for investigation (at their diameter of 105 mm) will be around 0.6 m3.

Contamination risk: loss of the drilling equipment in the borehole. In the process of borehole drilling by a mechanical or thermal methods, emergency situations are possible. Their causes can be divided into two main types: technological and technical. The main technological causes include the disturbance of the borehole sides and of the drilling process. The technical causes include equipment failures (both on the surface and in the borehole).
The most dangerous among emergencies is when the drill is stuck in the borehole. During thermal drilling, the drill can be frozen at the bottom in case of some failure in the system of melt water removal from the bottom. In addition, during thermal drilling, the clearance between the bore bit and the borehole sides is small and can be comparable with deformations of the hole sides due to overburden pressure and displacement of glacial layers. At the drill recovery from the hole, some drags in the deformed zone are possible In case of the bore bit failure, he drill will be stuck and it will be impossible to extract it to the surface. For the electrical-mechanical method used for drilling of borehole 5G-1, the probability of such situation is much less, however, it cannot be fully excluded.  
In case the drill is stuck, the minimum loss is to leave the drill in the borehole. Then the borehole is deflected from the drill that has failed and drilling is continued. This can be, however, achieved if the possibility of cutting the carrying cable directly at the place of its fixation in the drill is envisaged or if there is a safety element in the upper part of the drill, which is destroyed at a specific cable tension force. Otherwise, there is a large probability of the cable tearing off near the surface at deflecting roller or the winch drum. At such tearing off of the carrying cable, the hole is lost completely.
Contamination risk: penetration of the drilling fluid into the ice strata.
The main problems of possible penetration of the drilling fluid from borehole 5G into the ice strata on which we should focus include:
  1) Drilling-induced hydrofracturing. This can occur if the borehole is overpressurized, that is when the pressure of the drilling fluid exceeds that of ice. This phenomenon is well known to Russian drillers who have also learned it by experience at Vostok. At present, the fluid pressure in the Vostok hole is monitored by two independent methods: (i) calculation of pressure from the precise fluid density profile measured in the hole, and (ii) direct pressure measurements with an accuracy of 1 bar. The pressure at the bottom of the hole is maintained to be slightly less than the ice load. The problem of the hole closure (which is also monitored at Vostok) caused by a negative fluid-ice pressure difference is solved by enlarging the hole with a special device used between the routine drilling runs. 
2) Hydrofracturing which occurs due to deviatoric stresses of the ice flow and develops due to high pressure of subglacial water. It is believed that “the 220 m of accretion ice at Vostok forms an ice massif blocked against the eastern edge of the lake and overridden by the moving glacier. A shear layer (likely active) is found above the interface (around 3540 m depth) between the glacier and accretion ice”. This suggests that the deepest section of the accretion ice (to be drilled) experiences very low (if any) deviatoric stresses. The latter conclusion is fully supported by the high crystalline quality of the ice crystals, as revealed by X-ray diffraction measurements (Montagnat et al, 2001), which is only possible if the lake ice is not plastically deforming under in-situ conditions. Hence, the formation of open crevasses often observed in grounded ice can hardly be expected in the case of basal ice at Vostok.
3) Permeability of ice for the drilling fluid. Low lattice distortion (low dislocation density) of accretion ice crystals rules out a significant diffusion of the drilling fluid through ice lattice (Montagnat and others, 2001). However the presence of liquid water along the grain boundaries provides a route for diffusive transport. The veins form a continuous network of microscopic channels that remains liquid at subfreezing temperatures. Hence, the contamination from the drilling fluid may be associated with both the downward advection of intercrystalline water and the diffusion of the drilling fluid through the vein system. A theory of this is given by Rempel et al. (2001). Using this theory and the field data (ice temperature, grain size) from Vostok, one can estimate that the total advection of the drilling fluid from the borehole towards the ice-water interface will have an order of 1 meter over millennial timescales. Moreover, the recent re-interpretation of the helium data from Jean-Baptiste et al. (2001) suggests the presence of an upward component of velocity in the accretion ice layer of about 6 mm per year, which can be the result of hydrostatic compensation in this region (Souchez et al., in press). Obviously, such an upward movement of ice, if present, would overcompensate expectedly a very slow downward advection of the fluid. 
4) Expected changes in mechanical properties of ice with depth. The properties of ice may be different in the deeper (younger) section of the ice sheet soon after ice accretion. Changes towards poorer quality of ice are expected. 
The accretion ice below 3609-m depth (accretion ice II) is characterized by the extremely low gas and soluble impurity content, absence of mineral inclusions, exceptionally large ice crystals (from 10 to 100 cm and larger) and perfect crystalline quality of ice. The data available at present have been interpreted in terms of abnormal grain growth, which occurs under annealing temperature during the long time span after the ice accretion (Montagnat et al., 2001). 
The age of accretion ice at 3675 m (temperature is about 1.5º below melting point), at which depth the drilling will be stopped after completing coring of an additional 50 m of ice, is estimated to be of an order of 10 kyr. Thus, we can safely assume that the ice at this depth will have mechanical properties similar to those already studied at a depth of 3623m. However, monitoring of grain size and other properties, which can be easily measured in the field during drilling operations should be recommended.
5) Damage of the borehole due to ice flow. As the ice above the 3540-m depth moves with a maximum velocity of 2-5 m/yr at about 130º relative to the north (Bell et al., 2002), there is a potential risk that the hole filled with the drilling fluid will at some time collide with the elevated eastern edge of the lake located about 5 km downstream of Vostok (see Fig. 4 in Bell et al., 2002). Although this can not happen in the near future (but only in 1000 years or so from now), this point should also be taken into account and the drilling fluid should be removed from the Vostok borehole in due time.  


6.2. Possible indirect impact

Environmental impact during the logistics supply of the proposed activity.  To implement the proposed activity will require logistics support, i.e. it will cause some increase of anthropogenic impact on the Vostok station area. This impact will be produced for one Antarctic summer season when a 4-6 people glaciological-drilling team will stay and work at the station. Since it is planned to use the Vostok station during these years as a logistics base for conducting other research studies, this activity will produce only an additional and in general insignificant environmental impact.  The impact components will be addressing the life support issues of the glaciological-drilling team: supply with the food products, extraction and melting of snow for water supply, supply and consumption of additional diesel fuel, running diesels for power supply of the living premises and the drilling installation and appearance o additional life activity waste. It is noted that all aforementioned environmental impact factors are within the usual level of operations for life support at Vostok station. 
Directly for drilling the borehole 5G-1, about 1.2 t of aviation kerosene TS-1 and about 160 kg of Freon 141b (that are already at Vostok). 

6.3. Cumulative impact

Continuation of drilling of the borehole 5G-1 will impact all environmental compartments at Vostok station: the atmosphere, surface relief of the area, glacial strata and.  However, this impact will be insignificant and if compared with other options for achieving the proposed scientific objective –minimum.
In particular, the proposed drilling of additional 50 m will require only a small additional quantity of the drilling fluid resulting in disturbing the ice sheet structure where upward the section these irreversible changes already exist. If the objective is achieved by using a preliminary drilling of the new borehole, the ice structure at the point of drilling will be changed throughout the entire ice strata. Depending on the drilling method, this will require delivering to this Antarctic area many tons of kerosene and Freon (mechanical method) and ethanol (thermal drilling), as well as a large quantity of diesel fuel for energy supply of long-term drilling activities.
The activity at Vostok station will be carried out in the area, which belongs to the category of non-recoverable area (NRA). The logistics operations related to continuation of activity in the borehole 5G-1 will be only part of the anthropogenic load on the Vostok station area during the periods of seasonal activity. It is obvious that in case of using the borehole 5G-1, drilling equipment of the station and the existing life support conditions here, the total environmental impact of the proposed activity will be much less compared to drilling of a new borehole in the station area and the subglacial Lake Vostok. 

6.4. Anticipated impact on the aesthetic and wilderness values of the environment
Drilling and ice core recovery from the borehole 5G-1 has changed the vertical ice sheet structure at the borehole location
The drilling of additional 50 m will not cause any additional impact on the aesthetic and wilderness environmental values. 

6.5 Anticipated impact on the areas of scientific, historic and cultural significance

The presence of the borehole 5G in the glacial strata disturbing the natural ice structure will not allow the repeated drilling of the ice strata in order to obtain ice cores or enter Lake Vostok at a distance of 100 m from the borehole head. 
The ice core extracted from the borehole is of unique value for paleoclimatic reconstructions both for the given Antarctic region and on a global scale. In accordance with the existing rules, this ice core after sampling is subdivided into several segments that are studied in many laboratories of the world. It is important that some part of the ice core remains as a reference collection in the core storage at Vostok station. Thus, future studies of the ice sheet characteristics in the Vostok station area will not require drilling a new borehole with core sampling, i.e., the influence of the existing borehole 5G-1 on future glaciological activities in the vicinity of the Vostok station will be practically zero.

7. UNAVOIDABLE IMPACT AT CONTINUATION OF DRILLING THE BOREHOLE 5G-1

Conduct of the proposed activity will inevitably have the following environmental impacts:
- change of the ice sheet structure at the drilling point of the existing borehole 5G-1 from a depth of 3623 m and to the depth 3673 m;
- retrieval to the surface and evaporation to the atmosphere of about 50 kg of Freon 141b during drilling operations;
- total impact on the Vostok station area due to the delivery here, living and work of 4-6 specialists for one summer Antarctic season.

8.  PROPOSALS FOR MITIGATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

The main source of Freon losses in the process of drilling and lowering-recovery operations is the drilling fluid remaining in the sludge or flowing from the cable, the drill and the measurement instruments. To reduce these losses it is planned to use a centrifuge for further drilling activities that will separate the sludge and the drilling fluid. At present such device is used for drilling a deep borehole at Dome C in Antarctica under the EPICA Project. In this manner more than 90% of the fluid can be separated from the sludge. The remaining kerosene is easily separated at melting the sludge, but Freon will go to the atmosphere. Thus, the Freon losses will be decreased to 0.6 kg a run during subsequent measurements and monitoring observations in the borehole.

9. GAPS IN KNOWLEDGE 

The main gaps in our knowledge revealed in the process of preparation of the present IEE are as follows: data obtained by direct instrumental measurements on the thermodynamic conditions of the glacial strata. However, to fill the aforementioned gaps is possible only by the direct studies of the lower ice strata layers being the scientific goal of the proposed activity.

10. CONCLUSIONS

The proposed continuation of additional 50 m drilling in the borehole 5G-1 (Vostok station, Antarctica) is planned for the summer Antarctic season 2003/2004. This activity aims at obtaining the new scientific data on the composition, properties and structure of ice in the vicinity (up to 100 m) of the section “Ice cover- subglacier lake”.
Like any other practical activity in Antarctica, continuation of drilling the borehole 5G-1 imply an environmental impact. An evaluation performed indicates that it will inevitably include an insignificant influence by scale and duration on the atmosphere (evaporation of Freon 141b), on the glacial structure in the borehole 5G-1 in depths up to 3673 m.  
The risks of contamination accompanying this activity that are primarily related to the presence of the drilling fluid in the borehole can be practically excluded during preparation and conduct of work. 
Conduct of the proposed activity will require additional logistics support, which will insignificantly increase the current impact of the station activity on the glacial surface environment. 
Based on the IEE performed, it is concluded that the significance of the impact of the proposed activity on the environment of the station area and ice sheet is no more than a minor or transitory. 
The activity under consideration can be conducted on condition of undertaking all measures envisaged to mitigate the environmental impact. 

11. REFERENCES

    • Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (signed on October 4, 1991 in Madrid, Spain)
    • Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (XXIII ATCM)
    • Water sampling of the subglacial lake Vostok. Draft CEE (revised). 2003 (WP XXVI ATCM)
    • XXII ATCM/IP 66, Application of the “minor or transitory impacts” criterion of EIA in different regions of Antarctica , submitted by Russia

[1] Барков Н.И., Р.Н. Вострецов, В.Я. Липенков, А.Н. Саламатин. Колебания температуры воздуха и осадков в районе станции Восток на протяжении четырех климатических циклов за последние 420 тыс лет // Арктика и Антарктика – М., 2002 – Вып. 1(35) – С. 82-89.
[2] Lipenkov V.Ya., Istomin V.А. On the stability of air clathrate-hydrate crystals in subglacial lake Vostok, Antarctica. - Mater. Glyatsiol. Issled., N91, 2001, p. 138-149.
[3] Salamatin A.N., Lipenkov V.Ya., Barkov N.I., Jouzel J., Petit J.R., Raynaud D. Ice-core age dating and palaeothermometer calibration based on isotope and temperature profiles from deep boreholes at Vostok  Station (East Antarctica).- Journal of Geophysical Research, 1998, vol. 103, N D8, p.8963-8977
[4] Salamatin A.N. Paleoclimatic reconstructions based on borehole temperature measurements in ice sheets. Possibilities and limitations. In: Physics of Ice Core Records, T. Hondoh (Ed.), Hokkaido University, 2000, 243-282.
[5] Masolov V.N., Lukin V.V., Sheremetiev A.N., Popov S.V. Geophysical Investigations of the Subglacial Lake Vostok in East Antarctica, Doklady Earth Sciences, 379A, 6, 2001, 734-738.
[6] Popov S.N., Mironov A.V., Sheremetiev A.N. Results of ground-based radio-echo survey of the subglacial Lake Vostok in 1998-2000. (in Russian). Mater. Glyatsiol. Issled., 89, 2000, 129-133.
[7] Lipenkov V.Ya., Barkov N.I. Internal structure of the Antarctic Ice Sheet as revealed by deep core drilling at Vostok Station. In: Lake Vostok Study: Scientific Objectives and Technological Requirements,International Worckshop, March 24-26, 1998,AARI, St.Petersburg, 1998, p. 31-35.
[8] Jouzel, J., J.R. Petit, R. Souchez., N.I. Barkov, V.Ya. Lipenkov, D. Raynaud, M. Stievenard, N.I. Vassiliev, V. Verbeke,  F. Vimeux. 1999. More than 200 meters of lake ice above subglacial lake Vostok, Antarctica. Science, 10 December, 286, 2138-2141.
[9] Montagnat M., Duval P., Bastie P., Hamelin B., Brissaud O., de Angelis M., Petit J.R., Lipenkov V.Ya. (2001): High crystalline quality of large single crystals of subglacial ice above Lake Vostok (Antarctica) revealed by hard X-ray diffraction. Sciences de la Terre et des planets / Earth and Planetary Sciences, 333, 419-425.
[10] Rempel A.W., Waddington E.D., Wettlaufer J.S., Worster M.G. Possible displacement of the climate signal in ancient ice by premelting and anomalous diffusion. Nature, 2001, vol 411, 568-571. 
[11] Souchez R., Petit J.R., Tison J.-L., Jouzel J. and Verbeke V. Ice formation in subglacial Lake Vostok, Central Antarctica. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 181, 2000, 529-538.
[12] Souchez R., Jean-Baptiste P., Petit J.R., Lipenkov V.Ya., Jouzel J. What is the deepest part of the Vostok ice core telling us? Earth Science Review, 2002, in press.
[13] Tison, J.L. et al. Linking landfast sea ice variability to marine ice accretion at Hells Gate ice shelf, Ross sea. Antarctic Research Series, 74, 375-407 (1998).
[14] Bell R.E., Studinger M., Tikku A.A., Clarke G.K.S., Gutner M.M., Meertens C. Origin and fate of Lake Vostok water frozen to the base of the East Antarctic ice sheet. Nature, 2002, vol. 416, 307-310.
