º





XXVI ATCM
Information Paper
IP
Agenda Item ATCM 5b
IUCN
Original: English




REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION
 (IUCN)

Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
XXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting














9-20 June 2003
Madrid, Spain
XXVI ATCM
Information Paper
IP
Agenda Item ATCM 5b
IUCN
Original: English


REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION1
 (IUCN)
Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
XXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting



Summary

The World Summit on Sustainable Development in September 2002 hasdrew global attention to the importance of high seas biodiversity and called for coordinated efforts to maintain the biodiversity and productivity of important and vulnerable marine areas beyond national jurisdiction. IUCN would encourage the ATCM, particularly the CEP, in conjunction with CCAMLR, to consider further action to: 1) develop guiding principles to assist with the selection and designation of a network of Antarctic marine protected areas; 2) extend the systematic environmental geographic framework to the offshore marine environment; and 3) begin considering potential areas for new Antarctic Specially Protected Areas to protect examples of major marine ecosystems; areas with important or unusual assemblages of species; and other special areas deserving of protection. 

Part I.  Antarctic and Southern Ocean Marine Protected Areas

The World Summit on Sustainable Development in September 2002 called for efforts to maintain the productivity of important and vulnerable marine areas beyond national jurisdiction. It set target dates of 2012 for the completion of an effectively managed, ecologically representative network of Marine and Coastal Protected Areas and 2010 for application of the ecosystem approach to the marine environment. The UN General Assembly last year supported urgent consideration of means to integrate and improve the management of risk to marine biodiversity of seamounts and certain other underwater features within the framework of the United Nations Convention on Oceans and Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). The Convention on Biological Diversity’s advisory body (the Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice) has recently agreed that there is an urgent need to establish marine protected areas (MPAs) beyond national jurisdiction, consistent with international law and based on scientific information, and recommended collaborative efforts among international institutions to identify appropriate mechanisms…”(UNEP/CBD.SBSTTA.8/L.11). It specifically mentions seamounts, hydrothermal vents, cold-water corals, and the open ocean – features which all occur within the Antarctic Treaty Area.

IUCN notes that the Antarctic Treaty System demonstrated an early awareness of the value of protected areas through the ‘Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora’ in 1964. This was continued through expansion of this system to form Annex V on ‘Area Protection and Management’ in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991. The Antarctic Treaty System is again well positioned to lead global protected areas thinking in implementing this widely recognized imperative of protecting marine areas. 

At the XXVth ATCM in September 2002, the United Kingdom introduced a paper (ATCM XXV/ WP 9) on implications of the May 2002 entry into force of the Environmental Protocol’s Annex V on Area Protection and Management.  It recalled that Article 3 of Annex V calls for parties to seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, and to include in a series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs):

    1) Areas kept inviolate from human interference;
    2) Representative examples of major terrestrial, aquatic and marine ecosystems;
    3) Areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
    4) The type locality or only known habitat of any species; and
    5) Other areas that may be appropriate to protect for their outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, or ongoing or planned scientific research.

Among the general observations put forward in the United Kingdom paper was that the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), in cooperation with the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources may wish to give consideration to developing some guiding principles to assist with the selection and designation of a network of Antarctic marine protected areas.  

In a similar vein, New Zealand introduced a paper on developing a systematic environmental-geographic framework for protected areas  (ATCM XXV/ WP 13). This paper noted work on terrestrial and coastal models, and invited CEP to use specialists to further refine the suggested criteria, possibly under the auspices of SCAR.  It also noted that the framework might need to be extended to incorporate the offshore marine environment.

At the XXIst Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) (Hobart Tasmania, Australia 21 October-1 November 2002) IUCN put forward some recommendations regarding Marine Protected Areas in Antarctica. Noting that MPAs may enhance both fisheries productivity and conservation of marine biodiversity, IUCN encouraged CCAMLR Members to consider developing, in conjunction with the Committee for Environmental Protection, guiding principles to assist with the selection and designation of a network of Antarctic marine protected areas and extending the systematic environmental geographic framework to the offshore marine environment. IUCN further urged CCAMLR to consider the development of a system of protected areas for the wider Southern Ocean and developing criteria for review of proposed MPAs that reflect how they will contribute to CCAMLR’s goals of conservation, ecosystem-based management and precautionary decision-making.  The Scientific Committee agreed to refer IUCN's recommendations on marine protected areas to its Working Group on Ecosystem Management and Monitoring for further consideration 

Annex V of the Madrid Protocol in conjunction with Articles IX.1(f) and IX.2 (g) of the Convention on Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources provide an opportunity for CEP and CCAMLR to develop a system of marine protected areas that can protect ecosystem services, biodiversity and productivity in the greater marine environment.



IUCN would encourage the ATCM, particularly the CEP, in conjunction with CCAMLR, to consider further action to: 

    1) develop guiding principles to assist with the selection and designation of a network of Antarctic marine protected areas; 
    2) extend the systematic environmental geographic framework to the offshore marine environment; and 
    3) begin considering potential areas for new Antarctic Specially Protected Areas to protect examples of major marine ecosystems; areas with important or unusual assemblages of species and other special areas deserving of protection.  

In order to gain experience with the practicalities of site selection, management and enforcement of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas critical for the conservation of marine biological diversity, it is important to begin considering potential areas now, rather than awaiting final completion of the theoretical framework.

The preliminary work might be started, for example, though an expert Antarctic Marine Protected Areas Workshop involving CEP, CCAMLR, SCAR, SCOR, IUCN, and others with pertinent interest and expertise prior to XXVII ATCM in 2004. This would build on the valuable work done at the generic Antarctic Protected Areas Workshops previously held in Tromso in 1998 and Lima in 1999, prior to the XXII and XXIII ATCMs respectively. IUCN looks forward to discussing the possibility of co-hosting such a workshop with participants at this meeting, and particularly with the hosts of XXVII ATCM.

Part II.  Relevant IUCN Activities

IUCN has been concerned with Antarctic conservation issues for over 40 years and has been participating in ATCMs and CCAMLR since the opportunity first became available in the 1980s. Some of our most recent activities relevant to Antarctic conservation are listed below.

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee

IUCN’s Antarctic Advisory Committee was re-established in 1994 to provide a focal point for IUCN’s involvement with Antarctic conservation activities. It consists of a Chair appointed by the Director-General and eleven further members appointed for their expertise in matters relating to the conservation of Antarctica, the Sub-Antarctic Islands and the Southern Ocean. Antarctic Advisory Committee activities include efforts to promote the establishment and management of new forms of Antarctic protected areas, with particular emphasis on marine sites; steps to insure that cumulative environmental impacts are understood and taken into account in decision–making within the Antarctic Treaty System; and efforts to stop IUU fishing in the Southern Ocean while improving CCAMLR’s legal and enforcement systems.  IUCN has also participated in intercessional discussions on revision of Annex II regarding protection of species of flora and fauna.  

High Seas

As reported last year, IUCN, its World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) and WWF International have commenced a High Seas Marine Protected Areas Project, as part of a major initiative to conserve marine living resources and biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction.

In January of 2003, IUCN, WCPA and WWF jointly convened an experts' workshop on High Seas Marine Protected Areas (HSMPAs) in Malaga, Spain. Invited international lawyers, scientists, marine managers, NGOs and ocean governance experts developed elements of an action plan to stimulate international action to halt biodiversity loss, protect vulnerable ecosystems and ensure sustainable use of living resources through high seas marine protected areas. 

The Malaga Experts Workshop on HSMPAs identified the clear need to use and build upon existing legal regimes, in particular UNCLOS and the CBD, as well as the creation of new agreements to supplement this framework where necessary. Any legal framework for HSMPAs, whether at the regional or global level, should have the effect of strengthening the linkages and co-operation between states and international institutions; it should facilitate conservation and management of high seas biodiversity and ensure that these measures are enforced. The workshop concluded further that immediate action was essential to protect seamounts and other vulnerable deep-sea ecosystems and improve implementation of the existing legal framework for oceans governance. 

The Malaga Workshop experts highlighted the opportunities for developing systematic and representative marine protected areas systems; for example, in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean through Annex V of the Environmental Protocol and utilizing the scope for complementary conservation measures under CCAMLR.  The full proceedings: Towards a Strategy for High Seas Marine Protected Areas-- Proceedings of the IUCN, WCPA and WWF Experts Workshop 15-17 January 2003, Malaga Spain are available upon request.  Contact information is provided below. 

IUCN and partners are now developing a long-term strategy and action plan to map and highlight areas of high biological diversity and productivity or rare or endangered species, bring together experts to build support for an initial demonstration HSMPA and create opportunities for expansion of the global representative network into the high seas, publicize imminent threats, engage with key industry sectors, and highlight the need for urgent action. 

At the World Parks Congress a special season on high seas governance issues will further inform and carry forward action by the international community. The session will discuss with a view to adoption a ten-year Strategy for development of the representative network of HSMPAs and a set of recommendations for global action to conserve and maintain high seas biodiversity and productivity both within and beyond protected areas. IUCN and partners will also recommend the establishment of expert working groups to 1) assess rare and vulnerable species in seamounts, and 2) develop criteria and guidelines for HSMPAs. A substantial portion of this session will be used to explore opportunities for development of a HSMPA network under the auspices of existing mechanisms such as the Antarctic Treaty System, with particular reference to Annex V of the Environmental Protocol. Interested Committee members are welcome to attend. More information about the World Parks Congress is provided below and at www.wcpa.iucn.org.

World Commission on Protected Areas

Established in 1959, the World Commission of Protected Areas (WCPA) is the world’s leading body of parks and protected areas experts. WCPA’s 1,300 plus members promote the establishment and effective management of a worldwide representative network of terrestrial and marine protected areas, as an integral contribution to IUCN’s mission. WCPA’s structure includes global regions – and Antarctica is one of these regions. Antarctic and sub-Antarctic issues are thus also fed into thematic groups such as WCPA Marine. The WCPA Marine aims to increase the capacity of management institutions and practitioners while building a sustainable network of globally representative marine protected areas. WCPA-Marine is developing mechanisms and global standards for improving management effectiveness of marine protected areas. Current programmes of high relevance to protected areas in the Antarctic include the demonstration of MPAs as a tool for sustainable fisheries management as well as for the protection and restoration of marine biodiversity. 

A WCPA High Seas Working Group has been established to bring together organizations and individuals committed to high seas biodiversity and productivity conservation. The Executive Committee includes non-governmental organizations such as IUCN, WWF and Greenpeace, and facets of IUCN including the Antarctic Advisory Group, the Environmental Law Center, and WCPA Mediterranean. Dr. Alex Rogers, of the British Antarctic Survey, is the scientific advisor.

The World Parks Congress: Benefits Beyond Boundaries
8 – 17 September 2003, Durban, South Africa

The World Parks Congress, convened by IUCN every ten years, is the premier global event where the big issues for the protected area profession are drawn out and debated. The Congress program seeks to balance vigorous debate on these issues with a technical focus that will deliver useful outputs for those working in the field. The key outputs expected are a new UN List of Protected Areas, updating the last global census of 1997, and the Durban Accord, a strategic, collective vision for the future of protected areas. In addition, an array of practical tools, policies, and recommendations aimed at professionals and decision-makers will be developed. The Congress will feature development of formalized alliances in support of protected areas with resource and tourism sectors, among others. 

The marine component of the World Parks Congress aims to mobilize action to implement the target set by the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) of establishing representative networks of marine protected areas (MPAs) by 2012. It will contribute to meeting WSSD targets for sustainable fisheries and help realize the application of the ecosystem approach to ocean and fisheries management by 2010. Efforts will be made to relate inventory and assessment to relevant regional and global policy processes so as to scale up national designations into ecologically coherent networks and a global network. The World Parks Congress will strengthen the application of coastal and ocean governance to MPAs through developing a new guidance tool, "Integrating Marine Protected Area Management with Coastal and Ocean Governance." Protecting biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction is another important focus, ensuring that a globally representative system of MPAs includes the high seas. 

On the practical side, the marine program will evaluate tools and approaches to halt the loss of marine biodiversity, including coral reefs and wetlands, maintain important habitats for marine biodiversity and sustainable fisheries, and make MPA management more effective. Other goals are the development of a working alliance with the tourism and fisheries sector and identifying sustainable financing mechanisms for national MPA systems. 

IUCN Environmental Law Centre
Genetic Resources of the Oceans: Access and Benefit-sharing and “Bioprospecting”

IUCN’s Environmental Law Centre (ELC) has long been involved in the difficult work of actualising the concept of Access and Benefit-sharing (“ABS”) as originally promulgated under the Convention on Biological Diversity and as it has spread across global and national law and policy.  Currently, in conjunction with many other sectors of IUCN, the ELC is undertaking an in-depth examination of several key legal issues affecting the implementation of the ABS concept.  One specific area addressed is the rights and obligations of countries and private entities with regard to marine genetic resources, including especially resources of areas beyond national jurisdiction.

This project extends to the full range of ABS issues, from the so-called “access” issues (rights of entry and sampling, sometimes also called “bioprospecting”) through the full range of legal issues regarding the use of genetic resources, sharing of its benefits, protecting the rights of users and suppliers (including Intellectual Property Rights).  The project is also focusing on finding possible solutions to the difficult issues of how compliance with ABS agreements and obligations will be assured.  

Key elements of this work that are relevant to the current work under the Antarctic Treaty System include –  
    (1) efforts to promote the use of existing voluntary codes regarding genetic sampling and collection processes in marine areas, and to recommend amendments or annexes to those codes to improve their applicability to marine “bioprospecting” activities; and 
    (2) efforts to improve the knowledge and capacity of professionals and negotiators who are expert in either marine issues or biodiversity (ABS) issues, so that both have a clearer and more comprehensive understanding of the nexus between their respective areas and can work together to address the full range of marine ABS issues.  
The latter includes the development of better factual information concerning the extent and nature of bioprospecting activities in marine areas, as well as the legal and practical difficulties arising in the application ABS concepts to marine biodiversity.

Concluding Remarks

IUCN continues to place a high priority on helping the Antarctic Treaty System to maintain and enhance its effectiveness in conserving and protecting the Antarctic region. As always, IUCN puts its resources and expertise at the service of the ATCM towards this end.


For further information on the High Seas MPA project and the full report of the Malaga High Seas MPA Workshop, please contact:

Kristina M. Gjerde
IUCN, WCPA, WWF High Seas MPA Project Coordinator
Ul. Piaskowa 12C
05-5-1 Konstancin-Chylice, Poland
Tel:+48-22-754-1803
kgjerde@it.com.pl


For further information on IUCN’s Global Marine Programme please contact:

Carl Gustaf Lundin
Head, IUCN Global Marine Programme
IUCN World Headquarters
Rue Mauverney 28
Gland – 1196 Switzerland
Tel: +41-22-999-0001
Carl.Lundin@iucn.org


For information regarding IUCN’s Environmental Law Centre Project on Genetic Resources of the Oceans, please contact:

Tomme Rosanne Young
Senior Legal Officer
IUCN Environmental Law Centre
Godesbergerallee 108-112
Bonn 53175
Tel:  +49 228 269 2223
Tyoung@elc.iucn.org


Annex 1. Summary of IUCN World Conservation Congress (2000) Resolutions and Recommendations relevant to IUCN Antarctic Policies (attached)

Annex 1.
Summary of IUCN World Conservation Congress (2000) Resolutions and Recommendations Relevant to IUCN Antarctic Policies

The elements of IUCN’s policy and programme are agreed by the World Conservation Congress of members and their execution is coordinated by an international Secretariat.  The most recent World Conservation Congress, in Amman, Jordan in 2000, agreed three resolutions and two recommendations pertinent to the deliberations of this body.  These are summarized below.  

1) Resolution 2.20 on the conservation of marine biodiversity.

Resolution 2.20 arose out of concern for human impacts on biodiversity and productivity in areas beyond national jurisdiction and the need to protect areas as part of a representative system of marine protected areas at regional and global scales.  It calls for action based on the framework of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, the Convention on Biological Diversity, the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, and past decisions of the UN Commission on Sustainable Development.  In Resolution 2.20 the Congress calls for IUCN members and multilateral agencies to explore an appropriate range of tools including high seas MPAs, with the objective of implementing effective protection, restoration and sustainable use of biodiversity and ecosystem processes on the high seas. It also calls on national governments, NGOs and international agencies to better integrate with established multilateral agencies and existing legal mechanisms to identify areas of the high seas suitable for collaborative management action and to reach agreement by consensus on regimes for their conservation and management.

2) Resolution 2.54 on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean 

Resolution 2.54 stresses, inter alia, the importance of the conservation of the ocean ecosystem around Antarctica and the urgent need to ensure that all use of living resources is sustainable according to the ‘ecosystem as a whole’ conservation standards contained in Article II of the CCAMLR.  It further calls for the development of a comprehensive network of protected areas pursuant to Annex V of the Protocol, which includes appropriate representation of the principal habitats and biological diversity of the region as well as other values, and consideration of new forms of Antarctic protected areas, with special emphasis on marine sites.

3) Resolution 2.66 on pirate fishing and seabird mortality from longlining in the Southern Ocean and adjacent waters.  

In Resolution 2.66, the Congress called on States and fishery bodies to combat pirate fishing for toothfish in the Southern Ocean by all practical means, including by 1) undertaking at-sea patrols, 2) removal of economic incentives that lead to the re-flagging of vessels to non-CCAMLR nations, 3) adoption of strict port and trade controls, by passage of domestic regulations, 4) the documentation and certification of international trade in toothfish, including the implementation of the CCAMLR Catch Documentation Scheme, and 5) the adoption and implementation of the FAO International Plan of Action on IUU fishing.  The Congress also called on States to consider other national and international measures to address the problem of IUU fishing for toothfish. 

4) Recommendation 2.75 on Southern Hemisphere albatross and petrel conservation.

This recommendation stems from concern over the major threat that longline fishing activities pose to populations of Southern Hemisphere albatrosses and petrels, but also considers ecosystem issues such as “pollution introduced predators…and the effects of climate change.” It requests, inter alia, that all Members whose vessels are undertaking fishing activities within the waters covered by CCAMLR implement the Commission’s conservation measures and encourages all relevant Members and Range States to participate in the Agreement for the Conservation of Southern Hemisphere albatrosses and petrels (“Albatross Agreement”) under the Convention on Migratory Species and to implement the FAO International Plan of Action for Reduction of Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries. Since the Congress’s adoption of this recommendation, the Albatross Agreement has been concluded. When it enters into force, it will mandate parties to address the two primary threats to the conservation status of albatrosses and petrels: 1) non-sustainable fishing methods; and 2) habitat factors (“degradation and disturbance… pollution, reduction of food resources.”)

5) Recommendation 2.78 on promoting sustainable fisheries 

Recommendation 2.78 recommends inter alia, that States take appropriate measures to identify critical or endangered zones for the reproduction of marine species and the creation of protected areas within these zones for biological diversity conservation at the local, national and global levels.


