º


XXVI ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
Madrid, ESPANA, 16th June 2003

Status of Hydrography and Nautical Cartography in Antarctic
and
Proposals for its Improvement
Submitted by the International Hydrographic Organization

I.-	Introduction.

 	According to its Convention, the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), was established as an Intergovernmental Organization of a consultative and purely technical character. 

 	The International Hydrographic Conference, integrated by 73 Member States that meets each 5 years, and the International Hydrographic Bureau (IHB), managed by a Directing Committee that has the responsibility of its administration, composes the Organization. The IHB has 20 persons, including the three Directors, and has its headquarters in the Principality of Monaco. 

 	The Mission of the Organization is: “ to facilitate the provision of adequate and timely hydrographic information for world-wide marine navigation and other purposes, through the co-ordination of the endeavours of national hydrographic offices.”

 	The IHO Strategic Plan in force was approved by Member States at the Second Extraordinary Hydrographic Conference that took place in 2000, specially held for that purpose. The XVIth Conference approved the IHO Work Program 2003-2007 in April 2002. Both documents constitute the guides leading the Organization’s effort towards the achievement of its objectives that are provided below:  

    • promote the use of hydrography for the safety of navigation and all other marine purposes and to raise global awareness of the importance of hydrography; 

    • improve global coverage, availability, quality and access to hydrographic data, information, products and services;

    • improve global hydrographic capability, capacity, science and techniques.
    • establish and support the development of international standards for the quality and formats of hydrographic data, information, products, services and techniques and to achieve the greatest possible uniformity in the use of these standards;

    • give authoritative and timely guidance on all hydrographic matters to governments and international organisations;
    • facilitate coordination of hydrographic activities among Member States;

    • enhance cooperation on hydrographic activities amongst States on a regional basis. 

 	The Organization’s Budget is mainly constituted by the contributions of Member States, in function of the tonnages of their fleets. This annual budget does not exceed 2.5 million euros. This situation demands the Organization an intense and creative work, aiming to solve Member States’ growing hydrographic products demand, vital to support national, regional and global priority problems. 
 	To accomplish the above, the Organization has developed a structure to provide a centralized attention on technical matters related to hydrography, through the work of Committees, Commissions and Working Groups, established to deal with particular topics.  On the other side, operates de-centralized to provide a much better attention to problems and specific activities of regional interest, through the Regional Hydrographic Commissions.


II.-	The IHO Antarctic Hydrographic Committee

 	The XIVth International Hydrographic Conference in 1992, decided to establish a Permanent Working Group on Cooperation in the Antarctic, mainly to:

        ◦ Development of an International Chart Scheme, covering all Antarctic waters, acting as a regional cartographic group coordinated by the IHB.
        ◦ Examine the status and quality of hydrographic surveying
        ◦ Identify the needs to improve surveys and charts  
 
 	This Working Group met 4 times and its main two outcomes were the Cartographic Scheme (Annex A, Appendixes 1 and 2) and a compendium of symbols particularly developed for the Antarctic, nowadays in force. 

 	The XVth International Hydrographic Conference in 1997, decided to grant the Group the hierarchy of Regional Hydrographic Commission, establishing the IHO Antarctic Hydrographic Committee, changing its Terms of Reference by Statutes. With this action, the IHO had wanted to give a preferential treatment to the necessary coordination for the execution of hydrographic surveys and the production of nautical charts, essential to provide safety to navigation and contribute with other activities in the maritime field.

 	This committee has had 2 meeting, in 1998 and 2001, to define the Statutes today in force; consider the progress had in the nautical chart production according to the scheme, and coordinate the hydrographic surveys. 

 	Next meeting of the Committee will take place 8 to 10 September 2003 at the IHB headquarters in Monaco. (Annex B provides the Draft Agenda for this meeting, in English).        


III.-	Status of Hydrographic Surveying

 	It should be noted that National Hydrographic Office survey programs would, in general, be prioritised according to the following criteria.

    • Areas around ports and port approaches.
    • Offshore coastal areas including offshore banks, shoals and areas where vessel traffic may be restricted as a result of the geographical nature of the area.
    • Areas of specific National or International interest.

 	These areas are usually surveyed using equipment and techniques that result in high accuracy surveys with thorough bottom coverage. Ideally the surveys will conform to the Standards laid down in IHB publication S44, ‘Standards for Hydrographic Surveys’, 4th Edition, April 1998.

 	The cost of conducting high order controlled surveys is high, and these costs escalate rapidly when the area has a hostile environment and is distant from logistical support. This is, of course, the situation in the Antarctic. However whilst many navigable areas in high latitudes might not have been covered by controlled high order surveys they may well have been the focus of scientific research programs. This has resulted in a considerable amount of single track-line hydrographic information becoming available. Given that the widespread use of Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) has improved the positional accuracy of these data, they could become an important source of information for charts covering remote areas such as the Antarctic, understanding that the acceptation or not of that data is responsibility of the appropriate cartographic institution.
 	
 	In the recent past there has been an important progress on the capability to gather hydrographic data to dress INT charts of the agreed scheme. That capability has allowed a significant improvement as reflected in the number of new nautical charts edited in the last 5 years, as we will see later in the presentation. 

 	Considering that IHO S-59 publication “Status of Hydrographic Surveying and Nautical Cartography on Antarctic” dates 1998, the IHO Work Programme approved by Member States in 2002, has considered the updating of this publication, and IHB is developing this activity. It is expected that the result would be a real digital database, to facilitate the updating process with the participation of Member States, serving as a valuable source of information to identify priorities and coordinate hydrographic surveys.

 	The next meeting of the Antarctic Hydrography Committee will constitute an excellent opportunity to precisely define the coverage accomplished since the 3rd edition of the publication just mentioned. 


IV.-	Status of Nautical Cartography.    

 	Until early the 90’s the nautical chart coverage of the Antarctic was limited to those produced by Member State’s  Hydrographic Offices, following their own interest. The coverage was non consistent and there was much duplicity. The Russian Federation, United Kingdom and the United States of America shown a global cartographic coverage. 

 	As already mentioned, in order to harmonize the coverage, to lower the production and to provide a better service to the mariner, the IHO adopted in 1994, the INT Scheme for international nautical charts for Antarctic waters (South of 60o S.), based on the following criteria:

    • adequate coverage for the international shipping 
    • following IHO cartographic specifications
    • with the minimum number of charts
    • special coverage for the access to the permanent scientific bases and those areas mostly visited by tourist cruisers 
    • a shared responsibility of IHO Member States over a voluntary based chart production
    • adoption of WGS-84 as a common geodesic datum

COMNAP cooperated and assisted in achieving the fourth bullet. 

 	The result is the INT Scheme consisting in over 70 charts with nearly half of hem covering the Antarctic Peninsula. The maintenance of the scheme is supervised by the IHB through the Committee, with the valuable contribution from COMNAP, SCAR and IAATO.

 	The production of these INT charts is shared by the following 17 IHO Member States: Argentine, Australia, Brazil, Chile, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Norway, New Zealand, Peru, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom and USA. 

 	The forcing strength for the progress in the production of INT charts is the availability of high quality hydrographic data for the area of interest. In several areas there is no data or the existing are old with a non satisfying quality. Any significant progress towards the improvement of the production would depend on the capability to execute hydrographic surveys following modern standards.

 	The following table provides information on the INT chart status. Today it is estimated that 30 INT charts has been published. 

INT/Year
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Projected
74
74
74
85
85
Published
5
7
16
16
25
  
 	Again we can highlight the importance of attending the next IHO Meeting of the Antarctic Hydrographic Committee, as in that event the progress would be precisely identified and future activities been projected.  


V.-	ATCM and IHO Relations

 	On the light of the elements provided, to keep smooth communications and cooperation with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCP) is a high priority for the IHO. Following there are some indications that sustain this position:

    a) Membership: Out of the 45 countries that through one or another way are related with the Antarctic Treaty, only 8 are not members of the IHO, constituting a motivation for the 73 IHO Member States. This situation has been interpreted as an Organization strength, contributing to improve the hydrographic activity and therefore to a safer navigation in the Antarctic. 


    b) XIX ATCM, Resolution 1 (1995):  The desires expressed by the Parties through the mentioned Resolution, strongly invites IHO to exercise its best for cooperation and strengthening of the hydrographic and nautical cartography activities in the Antarctic. Its text is still valid, nevertheless, it might be convenient to update it and launched again, as a way to keep active the interest of both organizations on the matter, including at least one subject not considered in the initial text, I refer to the SOLAS Convention. 

    c) New SOLAS Chapter V: On the 1st of July 2002 entered in force an amended SOLAS Convention of which Regulation 9 of Chapter V is provided next, as an example:

Hydrographic services
1 	Contracting Governments undertake to arrange for the collection and compilation  of hydrographic data and the publication, dissemination and keeping up to date of all nautical information necessary for safe navigation.
2 	In particular, Contracting Governments undertake to co-operate in carrying out, as far as possible, the following nautical and hydrographic services, in the manner most suitable for the purpose of aiding navigation:
.1 to ensure that hydrographic surveying is carried out, as far as possible,
adequate to the requirements of safe navigation;
.2 to prepare and issue nautical charts, sailing directions, lists of lights, tide
tables and other nautical publications, where applicable, satisfying the
needs of safe navigation;
.3 to promulgate notices to mariners in order that nautical charts and
publications are kept, as far as possible, up to date.
.4 to provide data management arrangements to support these services.
3 	Contracting Governments undertake to ensure the greatest possible uniformity in charts and nautical publications and to take into account, whenever possible, relevant international resolutions and recommendations.*
4 	Contracting Governments undertake to co-ordinate their activities to the greatest possible degree in order to ensure that hydrographic and nautical information is made available on a world-wide scale as timely, reliably, and unambiguously as possible.   
* Refer to the appropriate resolutions and recommendations adopted by the International Hydrographic Organization.

 	All countries related to the Antarctic Treaty are members of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and therefore likely to adopt the necessary measures to implement SOLAS and in particular this Regulation.  In this respect, the IHO in its role of recognized technical intergovernmental organization is ready to provide support in achieving the identified obligations.  

    d) Capacity Building:  IHO sees that several of its Member States related to the Antarctic Treaty, have an outstanding potential for the execution of hydrographic activities in the Antarctic. This condition would allow these States to go in support to strengthen the capabilities of others that require that support. Then, through the exchange of experiences of different nature: administrative, technique, methodological, business, etc., it could be possible to facilitate the coordination and cooperation, as mechanisms to enhance hydrography in the Antarctic.   

VI.-	Conclusions.

1.- 	IHO assigns priorities, among others, to an effective worldwide coverage by hydrographic services, with emphasis on those weak areas such as the Antarctic, believing that international cooperation and between Hydrographic Services is vital. For the precise treatment of the subject, the IHO has established the Antarctic Hydrographic Committee.      

2.- 	The IHO Work Programme for the period 2003-2007 considers diverse activities to raise worldwide awareness on the importance of hydrography, highlighting the responsibilities of National Hydrographic Offices and the own, regional and global benefits associated to the development of this activity. This presentation is in line with that initiative.

3.- 	Within the IHO activities for the period 2003-2007, the studies aiming to identify the way to improve the Organization as well as to provide attention to the Capacity Building issues constitute the highest priorities of the IHO. In that sense, the hydrographic knowledge of the Southern Ocean, its seas and coastal waters constitute a challenge to the existing mechanisms to go in support of the hydrographic capacity building activities. 

4.- 	The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting constitutes an important tribune for the IHO through which could receive proposals and indications that would allow improving the IHO Strategy and Work Programme, with focus on the Antarctic. The expected result is to facilitate the supply of hydrographic information for safe to navigation of Antarctic waters, contributing to preserve the marine environment and support other relevant activities of priority to the Parties of the Antarctic Treaty.

VII.-	Proposals for Improvement.

1.- 	It is proposed to the ATCM to invite Consultative Parties to raise their national priorities and degree of hidro-cartographic activities in the Antarctic, as a measure to speed the availability of the nautical charts identified in the international cartographic scheme in the Antarctic.

2.- 	It is proposed to the ATCM to invite Consultative parties to consider with special attention the importance of the participation of their National Hydrographic services at the next Antarctic Hydrographic Committee meeting to be held in Monaco, 8 to 10 September 2003.

3.- 	It is proposed to the ATCM to update Resolution 1 (1995) adopted at the XIX ATCM in conformity to the changes occurred within the IHO and the SOLAS Convention. Annex C attached is a draft of this proposal in English.

Thank you.            
