º
Report on clean-up and removal of the old power building at the Great Wall Station
The old power building at the Great Wall Station (China) was constructed in 1987, two stories, elevated foundation, steel structure. The building area occupied 450㎡.The Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA) decided to close and remove the old power building because the 15-year service life was drawing near, the condition of the foundation, steel structure, wall boards and roof have been deteriorated due to the gale and blizzard, and thus a new power building has been decided to put into service. 

CAA scheduled to dismantle the building, collect the materials and clean up the site during the 2002/2003 season. The work began on 5 December and was completed on 22 December 2002. Three specialists from the China Railway Construction Engineering Bureau were carefully chosen to carry out the work, assisted by some experienced workers in case the nearby environment was polluted or damaged. No heavy equipment was used except a 16-ton vehicle’s crane.

Clean-up and removal comprised: 
(1) 21 tons of steel structure; 
(2) 36.5 tons of composite asbestos panels;
(3) 12 tons of the boards of wall and roof; 
(4) 15 tons of other materials. 
Most of the materials mentioned above were loaded on the M/V Xuelong and shipped to Shanghai for recycling or safe disposal.

During the removal, great efforts were made to protect the local environment, which CAA confirmedly insists on all the time. In particular, some necessary methods were taken: (1) the building materials were classified and tidily piled; 
(2) steel structure was cut into fixed pieces and fasten with screws; 
(3) composite asbestos panels and the boards of wall and roof were bound by iron chain; 
(4) small pieces of materials and debris were put into containers; 
(5) waste scattered around the site were collected.

The foundation was retained because M/V Xuelong left Great Wall Station earlier than the planned date. The remains will be removed during 2004/2005 season.

Some photographs would show the removal of the old power building in the Great Wall Station was completed efficiently and successfully.



The old power house before pulling down.






Engineers working at the spot.







The old power house without walls.





Only the foundation retained.

