º


CEP VI / ATCM XXVI
Information Paper  IP 81

Original: English















PROGRESS REPORT OF ESTONIAN ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES























Submitted by Estonia




Estonia acceded to the Antarctic Treaty on May 17, 2001. On March 19, 2002 Estonian Polar Research Committee adopted the preliminary program for starting national Antarctic activities.

The first stage of the program is a project named the Estonian Antarctic Expedition. The key elements of the project are described in Information Paper 12 presented by the Estonian delegation at the XXV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting held in Warsaw from 10th to 20th of September 2002.

In January 2003 a representative of the Estonian Antarctic Expedition visited the Ross Sea and coast of Victoria Land in the region of Terra Nova Bay and Wood Bay. The aim of the trip was to carry out a reconnaissance of the future operation area and to select a suitable site for establishing a polar research station. The Italian and New Zealand Antarctic Programs to whom we are sincerely grateful made this possible by providing a full logistical support.

The passage aboard RV Italica provided a very useful insight into the sea ice conditions in the Ross Sea, which were extremely difficult during the last austral summer. Four reconnaissance flights using Squirrel helicopters were made from Terra Nova Bay Station, covering the whole coastline from Inexpressible Island to Tinker Glacier Tongue. Altogether five potential sites on this stretch of coast were examined and only one found entirely suitable for the planned activities. The rest had a very rough terrain or poor access in the inland direction.

The selected area is a small snow and ice-free coastal oasis on the coast of Wood Bay. A potential location for establishing a polar station was found at coordinates 74 21.6’ S and 165 07.8’ E which is near the NE end of the oasis about 50 meters from coastline. Please find an aerial oblique photograph of the area, made from approximately 100 meters height and roughly from the east, attached. The selected area stretches approximately 700 meters inland and has a width of 100 – 200 meters. The terrain is basaltic moraine. At least five small shallow lakes were found in the area, most of them connected by a stream discharging into the Ross Sea. The area is characterized with patches of relatively rich vegetation and inhabited by a limited number of Skua gulls. A penguin rookery indicated on earlier maps was found non-existent.

The planned summer-only research station for 6 persons will include two 5 X 5 meters prefabricated huts, fuel storage and a small shed/workshop for over wintering two snowmobiles. The latter will be the only means of land and sea ice transport of the station. The total area of the station is planned to be 100 X 50 meters including the helicopter landing spot. All buildings will be erected without any removal of terrain and snowmobiles used only on sea or land ice/snow. All movements on the snow-free and ice-free territory of the area will be by walking along depicted paths and only for scientific purposes in order to keep the area intact as much as possible. The water supply is planned to use stream water from the nearest point to the station. All waste except grey water will be removed from Antarctica. For the disposal of grey water the tidal crack will be used with a condition that the dilution factor is considered. The electric power supply of the station will be a portable diesel generator with maximum output of 10 kW. However, solar panels and wind generators as well as heat exchangers will be used in order to minimize the fuel consumption.

The research program is in initial stage of design. The experience and results of the earlier Antarctic research made by Estonians are being used and developed and call for new ideas has been launched among the scientific community of Estonia. Depending on the geographical range of planned activities in the Ross Sea Region, in general terms most projects will aim at history, structure and function of marine and terrestrial environments and ecosystems. More specifically, so far sketches of projects have been proposed  in geological evolution (incl. volcanics) of the lithosphere and in meteoritics, in the lithology and stratigraphy of the Precambrian and Palaeozoic sedimentary rocks, in recent climate change and sea ice research using  isotope-geochemical methods, in the functioning and the evolution of lake ecosystems, and in some other fields.

Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has prepared all necessary documentation for accession to the Protocol on Environmental Protection. At the time being Estonian Ministry of  Environment and Estonian Ministry of Justice are processing this matter and the final and positive decision by Riigikogu (Estonian Parliament) will hopefully be made during autumn 2003.

Estonian Antarctic Expeditions, a newly formed institution responsible for the logistics of all Antarctic activities, has submitted a preliminary environmental impact assessment (Environmental Memorandum according to Estonian legislation) of the planned research station to the Ministry of Environment where this is currently reviewed according to the Protocol and Estonian legislation. The results will be made available to all interested Parties as soon as possible.



















