º

INFORMATION PAPER
POLAND
26 ATCM

GREENHOUSE CULTIVATION OF VEGETABLES IN ANTARCTIC MINERAL SOIL ENRICHED BY PENGUIN GUANO

	The Antarctic Continent is a large landmass surrounded by the Southern Ocean. It is practically free of vegetation, constituting a desert of snow and ice. Small patches of simple vegetation mainly consist of cryptogames, usually algae, lichens and mosses. Only two - three species of vascular plants have been found there: Deschampsia antarctica, Poa sp. (Graminae) and Colobanthus quitensis (Caryophyllaceae). All of them occur in the warmer regions of Maritime Antarctica.	An  interesting question arose, whether mineral Antarctic soil  fertilized with penguins  guano (Adelie) would be appropriate to meet demands cultivated vegetables in the greenhouse under controlled conditions. Such study was carried out at the Polish Antarctic Station Henryk Arctowski at King George Island. The cultivated vegetables can be the  source of vitamins and, what is more important may act as a socio-psychological factor for the isolated  over-wintering people.
First, the whole greenhouse building was disinfected with a 4% solution of formalin. After the disinfection, two greenhouse tables were constructed and each one was divided into four 90 x 90 cm fields. The layer of experimental substrate was  20cm thick. A series of experiments were conducted.	The experiment lasted for more than 4 months, from the moment of planting the seedlings in their final place (January 13th  2003 to the end of harvest on May 15th  2003). In an earlier stage, from December 4th  2002 tomato and cucumber seedlings had been prepared. Seeds had been planted in boxes and the young tomato plants were transfered into plastic foil containers in order to allow them to develop root systems. During the seeding formation the same soils were used in the experiment. The average temperature in the greenhouse was 21.8oC amounting to 8oC on cold nights and 37o on sunny days. In the same period, air humidity varied between 36% and 100% average was 74%.
The study  was carried out in two complementary experimental set-ups. The first set-up involved three substrates containing different proportions of soil from the Petrified Forest (volcanic origin) and from a former penguin rookery. In the other set-up, suitability assessment included soil from Point Thomas (basalt formations). As in the first scheme, three substrates were used differing in the proportion of rookery soil. In both set-ups, the substrates consisted of: 
(1) three parts of mineral soil and one part of penguin guano, 
(2) four parts of mineral soil and one part of guano, and 
(3) five parts of mineral soil and one part of guano. 
In both set-ups pure mineral soil without any ornithogenic additions was used as control. Sterile seeds of the following species were planted: tomato (Lycopersicon esulenium L.), cucumber (Cucumis sativa L.), radish (Raphanus sativus L. subvar. radicula Pers.), and leaf parsley (Petroselinum crispum Mill. ssp. crispum).
	Radish, which is a long-day plant, requires daylight periods of less than 12 hours for its vegetative growth and for the development of edible roots in particular. Therefore, special covers were prepared for radishes that allowed for controlling the day length independently from other plants in the experiment. Temperature and humidity measurements were carried out every day with a thermo-hygrographs. Changes inn the pattern of  temperature and humidity changes during the development of vegetables are an important factor for the early maturing and crop productivity. They are related   water requirements of the plants, which vary in accordance with changing light conditions and have a profound influence on their life processes. Length, width and weight measurements of edible roots, as well as fruit weight measurements were carried out in standard SI units.
	
RESULTS
	First edible radish roots were collected after 37 days of cultivation and first cucumber crops were obtained exactly 2 months after the beginning of the experiment.  From the beginning of the study, throughout the vegetative period, such features as plant height, number of leaves and fruits, as well as weight of fruit and edible roots in radishes were measured. The results have revealed that, in most cases, crops of radishes R. sativus L. subvar. radicula Pers. were higher in the basalt-derived soil. In both experimental set-ups radish crops had a similar pattern. Crops were the highest in the third (3) combination in the case of both basalt and volcanic soil. In this combination, the average weight of edible roots was 8 g but several individuals reached as much as 30 or 40 g. Radish cultures in control substrates did not yield any positive results. Roots failed to develop bulbs thick enough for consumption.
	In the case of leaf parsley P. crispum Mill. ssp. crispum and cucumber C. sativa L., crops were higher in the second experimental set-up where volcanic soil was used. Relative crops in different substrate combinations were identical as in the case of radishes. In both set-ups highest crops of parsley and cucumbers were obtained in the third (3) combination. The average weight of cucumbers on volcanic substrates was 192 g, as opposed to 176 g on basalt substrates. The maximum weight of cucumbers was 236 g in the first and 240 g in the second se-up. Respective average lengths were 15.6 and 16.2 cm. In the first set-up, cucumbers yielded edible crop on the control substrate, whereas in the second set-up, where volcanic soil was used, no such satisfactory results appeared. The maximum weight of cucumber fruit on that field was 84 g.
	A crop model very similar to that for cucumbers and leaf parsley was obtained for tomatoes – Lycopersicon esculentum L. As in other cases, the highest crop was achieved in the second experimental set-up with volcanic soil. The highest average weight of one tomato 60 g was achieved at the third field (3). The maximum weight of one tomato was 66 g and this fruit came from the third field of the first set-up (with basalt soils).
	After the collection of first vegetable crops it can already be stated that it is possible to grow them on natural Antarctic substrates. Despite very high nutrition requirements of both tomatoes and cucumbers, natural soils of the Antarctic proved to be sufficiently rich for those plants. The structure of substrates used in the experiment was also sufficiently permeable and airy to allow for good growth. Crops of the cultivated variations are within norm and very satisfying. Obviously there are certain problems with providing appropriate light and temperature. This is due to constant changes in the intensity of natural light, which varies rapidly during the Antarctic winter. At this stage of the experiment, radishes were found to attain elongated shapes, or which is caused by temperatures higher than optimum and low light intensity. The process of “running  away” in plants is caused by intensive respiration with small amounts of assimilates created. If the temperature is below the optimum, there is a positive balance between the amount of assimilates and their consumption in the process of respiration. However, it frequently leads to vegetation overgrowth. The problem of possible control of temperature during sunny days was partially solved by additional ventilation.
 The aim of this project was to investigate the possibilities of vegetable cultivation based on natural fertilized soils of the Antarctic. This purpose has been achieved. The study has both cognitive, as well as practical aspect. The results may provide the basis for devising efficient methods of vegetable production for polar teams.

