º
XXVI ATCM
Information Paper
IP-093-GE
Agenda Item: VI CEP 4b
GERMANY
Original: English
Annual Report of the Federal Republic of Germany
pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(2002)
Madrid, 9/20 de junio 2003
 
 
Umweltbundesamt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 February 2003  
I 2.4 - 94 002 - 2/0 
 
 
 
Annual Report of the Federal Republic of Germany pursuant to Article 17 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
(2002) 
 
 
 
(1) 
Notification of the measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs  
1 and 2, of the Protocol 
 
The Federal Republic of Germany has taken the following measures to ensure compliance 
with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: 
 
− Adoption of the Act on the Protocol on Environmental Protection of 4 October 1991 to the 
Antarctic Treaty (Gesetz zum Umweltschutzprotokoll vom 4. Oktober 1991 zum 
Antarktis-Vertrag) of 22 September 1994 (Federal Law Gazette, part II, p. 2478 et seq.), as 
amended by Regulation of 21 September 1997 (Federal Law Gazette, part I, p. 2391 et 
seq.). 
 
− Adoption of the Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection of 4 October 
1991 to the Antarctic Treaty (Gesetz zur Ausführung des Umweltschutzprotokolls vom 4. 
Oktober 1991 zum Antarktis-Vertrag) of 22 September 1994 (Federal Law Gazette, part I, 
p. 2594 et seq.), as amended by Regulation of 29 October 2001 (Federal Law Gazette, part 
I, p. 2785 et seq.). 
 
− Adoption of the Regulation on the Composition, Appointment and Procedure of an 
Independent Commission of Scientific Experts Under Sec. 6 Para. 5 of the Act to 
Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection of 22 September 1994 (Verordnung 
über Zusammensetzung, Berufung und Verfahren einer unabhängigen Kommission 
wissenschaftlicher Sachverständiger nach § 6 Abs. 5 des Umweltschutzprotokoll-
Ausführungsgesetzes vom 22. September 1994) of 22 July 1999 (Federal Law Gazette, part 
I, p. 1660 et seq.). 
 
− Adoption of the Regulation on Specially Protected Areas, Specially Managed Areas, 
Historic Sites and Monuments in Antarctica (Verordnung über besonders geschützte 
Gebiete, historische Stätten und Denkmäler in der Antarktis) of 10 July 2000 (Federal Law 
Gazette, part II, p. 830 et seq.). 
 
− Adoption of the Regulation on Costs for Official Acts Under the Act to Implement the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection of 22 September 1994 (Kostenverordnung für 
Amtshandlungen nach dem Umweltschutzprotokoll-Ausführungsgesetz vom 22. 
September 1994) of 17 April 2001 (Federal Law Gazette, part I, p. 834 et seq.). 
 
Other regulations under the Act to Implement the Protocol, in particular a regulation on 
compliance and monitoring, are still being prepared. 
 
 
 
 
The Act on the Protocol on Environmental Protection of 4 October 1991 to the Antarctic 
Treaty entered into force on 6 October 1994. The Act to Implement the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection of 4 October 1991 to the Antarctic Treaty entered into force on 14 
January 1998. Since then, a considerable number of licensing procedures has been concluded. 
To facilitate procedures, several questionnaires for applicants have been developed. 
Guidelines for waste management plans have also been set up.  
 
From 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002, 33 licences have been granted for activities in Antarctica. 
 
 (2) 
Contingency plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the 
Protocol 
 
For the German Neumayer Station, an Oil Spill Contingency Plan and Emergency Response 
Plan has been established. As far as ships are concerned, Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency 
Plans (SOPEPs) exist, in accordance with MARPOL regulations, for RV Polarstern, MV 
Vistamar, MV Hanseatic and MV Bremen. 
 
An Emergency Manual Antarctica has been updated according to the COMNAP/SCALOP 
guidelines. The manual deals with an Oil Spill Contingency Plan and Plans for Other 
Contingencies for Neumayer Station, with Ship Loading Operations, Aircraft Operations, and 
with Traverses. 
 
(3) 
Arrangements for  
– 
collecting and exchanging records and statistics concerning the 
numbers or quantities of each species of native mammal, bird 
or plant taken annually in the Antarctic Treaty Area, 
– 
obtaining and exchanging information as to the status of native 
mammals, birds, plants, and invertebrates in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area, and the extent to which any species or population 
needs protection, 
– 
establishing a common form in which this information shall be 
submitted by Parties 
(Annex II, Article 6 (2) of the Protocol) 
 
Records and statistics concerning the numbers or quantities of species of native mammal, bird 
or plant taken annually in the Antarctic Treaty Area are being drawn up annually by the 
Umweltbundesamt. They are based on the post activity reports prepared by researchers whose 
activities were licensed under the Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection. 
 
As far as information on the status of native mammals, birds, plants, and invertebrates in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area is concerned, Germany has been a co-sponsor of the research project 
 
 
 
„Antarctic Site Inventory“ which has monitored environmental changes of areas in the 
Antarctic peninsula and also collected some of this information. 
 
(4) 
Number and Nature of Permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol 
during the period 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002 (Annex II, Article 6 (2) 
of the Protocol) 
 
During the period 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002, three (3) permits were issued under Annex II 
of the Protocol. One of these allowed importing spores of Bacillus subtilis (fixed on polyester 
foils) for scientific purposes into the Antarctica Treaty Area. In the permits, the proponent 
was required to make sure that the spores could not be released into the Antarctic 
environment. Two other permits allowed their holders to obtain scientific information from 
individuals of Pygoscelis adeliae, Pygoscelis  antarctica, Macronectes giganteus, Catharacta 
ssp. and Oceanites oceanicus. 
 
(5) 
Waste Management Plans Prepared in Accordance with Annex III, 
Article 8 of the Protocol (Annex III, Article 9 (1) of the Protocol) 
 
A waste management plan (parts I and II) has been prepared for research stations run by the 
Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven, for the research 
vessel “Polarstern”, and for expeditions for which the Institute is responsible. 
 
Other waste management plans are being developed at present. 
 
Annual reports on waste management for the tourist ships MV Hanseatic and  MV Bremen as 
well as for land activities are being provided to the Umweltbundesamt. 
 
(6) 
Inventory of Past Activities in Accordance with Annex III, Article 8 
(3) of the Protocol (Annex III, Article 9 (1) of the Protocol) 
 
A first inventory containing the main past activities carried out by German research 
institutions has been completed in spring 1999. Based on this report, a comprehensive 
inventory of past activities is being prepared at present.  
 
(7) 
Number and Nature of Permits issued under Annex V of the Protocol 
during the period 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002 (Annex V, Article 10 
(2) of the Protocol) 
 
During the period 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002, five (5) permits were issued under Annex V 
of the Protocol for scientific purposes. Three of these referred to ASPA 132 (Potter 
Peninsula), and two to ASPA 150 (Ardley Island). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Umweltbundesamt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 February 2003 
I 2.4 - 94 002 - 2/0 
 
 
 
Report of the Federal Republic of Germany pursuant to Annex I, Article 6, 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
(2002) 
 
 
(1) 
Procedures to Consider the Environmental Impacts of Proposed 
Activities in Antarctica 
(Annex I, Article 6, lit. a, of the Protocol) 
 
General 
The procedures to consider the environmental impacts of proposed activities in Antarctica are 
laid down in the Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty of 4 October 1991 (Gesetz zur Ausführung des Umweltschutzprotokolls zum 
Antarktis-Vertrag vom 4. Oktober 1991) of 22 September 1994 (Federal Law Gazette, part I, 
p. 2593 et seq.), as amended by Regulation of  29 October 2001 (Federal Law Gazette  
I p. 2785 et seq.). Under sec. 3 et seq. of this act, a general licence by the Federal 
Environmental Agency (Umweltbundesamt) is required for all activities in Antarctica  
− proceeding from, or organized on, German territory and  
− carried out by German individuals, other individuals resident in Germany, and German or 
other legal persons or unincorporated associations.  
 
In addition, special permits are required in two cases:  
 
(1) If the proponent intends to kill, capture or handle a native mammal or bird or to remove or 
damage such quantities of native plants that their local distribution or abundance would be 
significantly affected, or to harmfully interfere with native Antarctic fauna and flora 
(permit under sec. 17 (2) of the Act). Such a permit may only be granted for scientific 
purposes and will have to contain certain restrictions. All species of the genus 
Arctocephalus (fur seals) and Ommatophoca rossii (Ross seal) are accorded special 
protection.  
 
(2) If the proponent intends to enter, move within or fly over Specially Protected Areas within 
the meaning of Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol (permit under sec. 30 of the Act).  
 
If the proponent applies both for a general licence under sec. 3 et seq. and, simultaneously, for 
a special permit under secs. 17 (2) or 30 of the Act, the general licence granted will include 
such special permits if the application meets the respective requirements laid down in the act. 
 
 
 
 
 
Licences Under Sec. 3 et seq. of the Act 
 
Licensing Procedure 
 
The following account gives an overview of the licensing procedure under sec. 3 et seq. of the 
act. In each case the applicant is required to submit relevant information on his or her activity 
and the expected impacts on the environment. If the applicant does not expect any 
environmental impacts he or she must give a reason for this. The Federal Environmental 
Agency then classifies the activity according to the categories 
− less than minor or transitory impacts (category 1) 
− minor or transitory impacts (category 2) 
− more than minor or transitory impacts (category 3). 
 
Activities with less than minor or transitory impacts will be licensed without any additional 
environmental evaluation. The licence may specify conditions which the applicant will have 
to comply with. However, before the licensing decisions, other relevant German authorities 
will be asked for their opinion. Also, the Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar- und 
Meeresforschung may give its comments. In the case of category 1 activities, the applicant is 
entitled to obtain a licence, but this may contain special rules (e.g. to take precautionary 
measures). 
 
In the case of scientific activities, some special rules apply. Such activities will have to be 
notified to the Federal Environmental Agency. If the Agency does not reply within six weeks 
the activity may proceed as planned. If, on the other hand, the Agency finds that a scientific 
activity may have at least minor or transitory impacts the notification is seen as an application 
for a licence, and the procedure outlined below (initial environmental evaluation, 
comprehensive environmental evaluation) will follow. 
 
Initial Environmental Evaluation 
If an activity is seen as having at least minor or transitory impacts on the Antarctic 
environment, an Initial Environmental Evaluation is necessary. This will take place within the 
licensing procedure. The applicant will have to submit additional detailed information on the 
expected impacts as well as on possible alternatives. Again, other relevant German authorities 
and the Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung will be asked for comments. 
On the basis of this information and the comments the Federal Environmental Agency 
determines whether the activity will have  
– 
either minor or transitory impacts, 
– 
or more than minor or transitory impacts 
on the Antarctic environment. In the case of category 2 activities, the Federal Environmental 
Agency will grant the licence as requested, or subject to specific conditions. For category 3 
projects, on the other hand, it will require a comprehensive environmental evaluation (see 
below). In either case, it will have to give the reasons for its decision. 
 
In the case of scientific activities, an independent scientific committee set up by the Federal 
Ministries of Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety, the Federal Ministry for 
Education, Research, and the Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs, will also be asked for 
comments. These will be taken into account in the licensing decision. 
 
 
 
 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation 
If more than minor or transitory impacts are expected, a Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation will have to take place. This will also be carried out in the framework of the 
licensing procedure. It consists of the following steps:  
 
Scoping; Environmental Impact Study 
 
The applicant will have to draw up a detailed environmental impact study. Before he does so, 
the relevant details of the environmental evaluation such as methods, the geographic area to 
be examined, the relevant environmental features to be included etc. will be discussed and 
decided in a scoping process. In this process, other authorities and the public may also take 
part if the Federal Environmental Agency agrees with this.  
 
Review 
 
The environmental impact study will then be sent to the other relevant German authorities and 
the Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung for comments. In the case of 
scientific activities, the independent scientific committee mentioned above will be asked to 
give its comments as well. The environmental impact study will also be made available, at the 
premises of the Federal Environmental Agency, to the public for inspection during a period of 
ninety days. The public, too, may give its comments. This will be announced at least three 
weeks in advance in the Federal Gazette (Bundesanzeiger). After the ninety-day period, the 
comments will be discussed with the applicant and the comments’ authors at a hearing. 
Furthermore, the environmental impact study will be forwarded to all other Parties to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty who also may give their 
comments during ninety days, and to the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) 
established under Article 11 of the Protocol. A decision on the licence may only be taken if 
there was sufficient time for an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to consider the 
environmental impact study. This makes it necessary to forward the study to the CEP at least 
120 days in advance of such a Meeting. The Federal Environmental Agency will have to take 
the comments of the Meeting into account when deciding on the licence. However, if no 
Meeting takes place within a period of 15 months after the study has been forwarded to the 
CEP, or if during that period the deliberations within the Meeting have not been concluded, 
the Federal Environmental Agency may proceed with the licensing procedure. 
 
Comprehensive Statement of Environmental Impacts 
 
The Federal Environmental Agency then prepares a comprehensive statement of 
environmental impacts. This will be based on the applicant’s study, on the comments received 
in the review process, and possibly on additional information of the Federal Environmental 
Agency. 
 
Decision 
 
Finally, the Federal Environmental Agency takes its decision on the basis of the 
comprehensive statement. The agency has discretionary powers to grant the licence as applied 
for, to grant it subject to specific conditions, or to refuse it. The decision must be explained; in 
the explanation, the likely environmental impacts of the activity will have to be evaluated. If 
the decision deviates from comments of other authorities or of the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting, the reasons for this must be stated. 
 
 
 
 
 
Information of Participants on the Decision; Start of the Activity 
 
The Federal Environmental Agency will forward its decision together with the explanation 
and all relevant information to the Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty and to the CEP. A copy of the decision will also be available for public 
inspection at the Federal Environmental Agency. If the activity has been licensed, it may only 
proceed sixty days after the decision has been sent to the Parties to the Protocol. 
 
Licensing Requirements  
 
 
For all be issued if the activity in the Antarctic does not give cause to suspect any: categories 
of activities, the substantial licensing requirements are laid down in Art. 3, para. 4 of the Act 
as follows: 
 
(4) 
A permit may only 
 
1. 
adverse effects on climate or weather patterns; 
2. 
significant adverse effects on air or water quality; 
3. 
significant changes in the atmospheric, terrestrial, aquatic, glacial or marine 
environment; 
4. 
harmful changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of animal or 
plant species or their populations; 
5. 
further jeopardy to endangered species or populations; 
6. 
harm or significant jeopardy to areas of biological, scientific, historic or 
aesthetic significance or of a primeval nature; or 
7. 
other significantly detrimental effects on the environment or dependent and 
associated ecosystems. 
 
 
(2) 
Annual List of any Initial Environmental Evaluations prepared in 
Accordance with Annex I, Article 2, of the Protocol  
(Annex I, Article 6, lit. b, of the Protocol) 
During the period 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002, an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) was 
prepared, in accordance with Annex I, Article 2, of the Protocol of Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty, in four (4) licensing procedures. Two of these procedures concerned 
tourist cruises with three ships altogether (MV Vistamar; MV Hanseatic and MV Bremen), 
and two procedures concerned scientific activities. On the base of the IEEs, the licences were 
granted in four cases. There was no case, a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) 
was found necessary. 
 
 
(3) 
Significant Information Obtained, and any Action Taken in 
Consequence thereof, from Procedures Put in Place in Accordance 
with Annex I, Articles 2 (2) and 5, of the Protocol (Annex I, Article 6, 
lit. c, of the Protocol) 
 
 
 
 
During the period 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002, no significant information was obtained from 
the above-mentioned monitoring procedures. 
