
Information Paper Nr.
VI CEP Agenda point 4e
Presented by Argentina


PROGRESS ON THE ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION OF MARAMBIO STATION 

Based on an environmental analysis of the Marambio Station Area called “Environmental review of the Argentine Activities at Marambio Station” (Agraz et al, 1998) presented at CEP I 1998, and its 1999 update, presented  at CEP II, as IP 90, Argentina offers a new update of the activities undertaken during these years, basically those associated to the clean-up of historic wastes, whose main purpose has been to improve the environmental situation around Marambio Station. 

Background
The “Environmental review of the Argentine Activities at Marambio Station” (Agraz et al, op. cit.), based on the environmental problems identified therein, proposed a number of management measures, which were clustered in four thematic areas: Waste management, Fuel Handling, Sewage & Effluent control and Land Use. 
In particular, the most relevant proposals were focused on the implementation of a Clean-up program for historic wastes, the installation of an efficient fuel spill control system, the re-design of fuel storage sites, and the installation of adequate sewage treatment plants.    

Activities undertaken around Marambio Station
During the period 1999-2003, activities carried out to accomplish the above-mentioned management measures comprised:

a. Waste Management
Historic wastes
From 1999 till now, clean-up works have been carried out on the waste deposits which lie in the close proximity of the station. Until 2000, personnel has specifically been commissioned  to undertake such a program. Since then, such an activity became part of the routinely activities of the station staff. 
As a result of such clean-up activities (see map), out of the 38 deposits originally identified in the “Station Area” (Agraz et al, 1998), 19 have been completely removed. Regarding the remaining 19 deposits, waste classification, clustering and partial removal have been carried out on 13 deposits, while the remaining 6 deposits are still a pending activity for the future. Such clean up activities have been so far accounted for more than a 40% volume reduction of waste deposits at the “Station Area”.   
In addition, waste classification and clustering activities have been undertaken in the area called Laguna and Drum Valley, in order to facilitate its removal in the future. 

Wastes currently produced
During 1999-2003, the waste classification system used in Marambio Station had to be adjusted to what is established by the Argentine hazardous-waste legislation in force.  
Likewise, some measures tended to improve the existing waste treatment systems: for instance, it was decided that, from 2000 on, the biodegradable waste incinerator ceased to work. Currently, all biodegradable wastes are evacuated in 200 liter drums back to Argentina. Therefore, a likely source of gas emissions has been eliminated. Finally, a new drum-compacting system has been installed, so as to reduce, and hence facilitate, waste volume to be evacuated. 

b. Fuel Handling
A new platform for loading fuel drums was constructed. In addition, spherical valves have been installed in all fuel cisterns, and a new expansion-absorber system was added in all pipeline joints. Fuel pipelines, valves and filters were also replaced, using internationally-certified materials. In addition, a safer aircraft fuel supply system was installed. These activities have considerably contributed to decrease the risk of minor fuel spills. Additionally, anti-explosive electrical facilities were also installed in all places where fuel is manipulated, to reduce the risk of fire incidents.

c. Sewage and Emission Control
The old sewage treatment plan has been replaced in 2001 for a more efficient one, to which all sources of liquid effluents have been connected.  During the latest two summer seasons, all sewage pipelines connecting facilities with the Plant have also been replaced. Regarding emission control, the two freezing chambers in Marambio Station were re-converted, so as to reduce emissions affecting the Ozone layer.  

d. Land Use
The existing track system, and hence vehicle motion, around the station has been clearly delimitated, reducing negative effects (accelerated erosion and flooding), due to its overlap with drainage systems.  

Conclusions
Since the “Environmental review of the Argentine Activities at Marambio Station” (Agraz et al, op. cit.), was presented, Argentina has committed itself to gradually go forward in recovering the natural environment of Marambio Station. Although the program will still involve years of works, the undertaken activities are, until now, adjusted to the original schedule. The clean up of these sites represents a major logistical challenge for the Argentine Antarctic Program, and a significant step forward to restore a highly disturbed landscape in Antarctica.   
   
References
Environmental review of the Argentine Activities at Marambio Station. Agraz J.L., Sánchez R.A., Rinaldi C.A. and Acero J.M. 1998. Instituto Antártico Argentino. (Information Paper 49, Argentina, XXII ATCM)
Environmental review of the Argentine Activities at Marambio Station, Update 1999. Information Paper 90, CEP II. Presented by Argentina.

