








                                   XXVI ATCM – Madrid, 
                                        June, 9-20, 2003









  


STATEMENT OF THE DELEGATION OF ROMANIA











                                                                      Submitted by 
                                                                      ROMANIA























 STATEMENT OF THE DELEGATION OF ROMANIA



                 Ladies and Gentlemen,


                 On behalf of the Romanian delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to express my vivid gratitude to the Government of Spain for its splendid hospitality, as well its excellent preparation for this meeting. 
              Romania signed in 1971 the Antarctic Treaty as the 17th state. We remain fully committed to the Antarctic Treaty and we hope that this meeting will represent a new important step in the Antarctic Treaty system. 

              From the scientific point of view, our country has an old tradition in Antarctic research, as the Romanian scientist Emil Racoviţă was the very first biologist in the world that studied life in this continent. 
              Romania participation in Antarctica consisted, up to now, in the following activities: 
           - scientific research projects within the national research - development  programs;
           - participation in scientific expeditions along with the teams of the states members of the Antarctic Treaty, such as the Russian Federation, Argentina, Australia and China; 
- participation in the working scientific meetings within the Antarctic Treaty sessions; 
- projects jointly developed with member states of the Antarctic Treaty, such as Argentina, Australia, United Kingdom, New Zealand in the field of environmental protection in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.
             Romanian current Antarctic research are of a practical interest for the Romanian scientists specialized in chemistry, biology, biochemistry, environmental protection, geology, geography, engineering, medical science, contributing to a development of the scientific knowledge regarding the zones of the Antarctic Treaty system. 
                  Referring to our future research, we are pleased to mention the ratification by the Romanian Parliament of the Protocol of Madrid, and its annexes, the Cooperation Agreement in Antarctica between the Governments of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay and Romania and the cooperation started in 2002-2003 with China.

             Besides the scientific research reported on the occasion of previous meetings of the Antarctic Treaty, Romania is concerned with the environmental protection in Antarctica.  

              Pollution of the Antarctic environment became at present a problem recognized by the most countries in the World. The Antarctic Treaty Member States are concerned with the regulation of the man – nature relationships both in Antarctica and on an international scale.
              The environment has a planetary character and, consequently, solving of the various problems related to it, in particular those belonging to Antarctica, requires a wide international cooperation and the observance of the juristic norms adequate to this purpose .
              Despite all efforts made in the Antarctic Treaty system, by means of legislations and concrete actions on the spot, Antarctica remains a lonely area, more and more affected by the emerging dissequilibriums within the man – nature relationships.    
              Environment pollution in other areas of the Earth generates noxious effects on Antarctica and this can be considered a breach of certain social and ethic norms and a non-observance of the obligations assumed by those responsible for the pollution prevention.

            On the other hand, in our opinion, the concept of Antarctic nature protection promoted by the organisms of the Antarctic Treaty system, should not limit the access in Antarctica of scientists belonging to Antarctic Treaty member states, other than those already having research bases and stations. 

               The chemical pollution, the physical pollution such as the thermal and radioactive ones, are, because of their extent, problems with international implications. It largely depends on us, those that love and study Antarctica, the biological and esthetical pollution by landscape depreciation and the  noise pollution.    
   
               The Protocol of Madrid, including its Annexes I-V, stipulates the protection of the natural factors of the Antarctic environment, such as air, water, soil and subsoil, vegetation, terrestrial and aquatic fauna, nature and hystorical monuments. The Protocol also forbids resource exploitation.
              The environment protection in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean covers, in fact, all the human activity aspects within the man – nature relationship. It even covers those activities developing distructive and concerning features, such as poaching, so insistently practised. Hence, the meaning of the pollution term, Polluo-ere, which means to soil, to defile.        
          
                The anticipated results can be obtained following the cooperation of all of the member states of the Antarctic Treaty and of the other countries in the World, that try to save the exceptional objects and the great Antarctic values, not only for ourselves, but only for the generations to come.

               I would like to thank once again the Spain authorities for their hospitality and to wish you every success in this meeting.

                 
              





