ANTARCTIC TREATY           
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                       XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA   
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE               
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE            ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                       SEOUL          
                                       May 8-19, 1995  

XIX ATCM/WP 15 Rev.1                   
May 12, 1995                           
Original: English                      


                BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES  

                Agenda Item 11 a          

                (Submitted by the Netherlands)
XIX ATCM/WP...

BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES
(Agenda point 11.a)

The 18th ATCM emphasised the value of Best Available Techniques (BAT) for inspections. Paragraph 81 of the Final Report described it as follows: "The meeting considered that during inspections there would be advantage in attention being paid to the use of best available technologies".

The application of BAT is not only useful in that it provides a reference framework for inspections, but can also be used as a guideline when designing construction projects, such as the building of new stations or the renovation of existing ones, as well as for certain scientific activities, such as drilling in the ice core. The use of BAT can also be taken into account in the Environmental Impact Statements (IEEs and CEEs) required for these projects under the Environment Protocol.

A description of BAT can be based on the definition agreed on by the Paris Commission, the executive committee of the Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution from Land-Based Sources, to which Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the EU are the Contracting Parties.

On this basis, a definition of BAT is given in Appendix 1 to Paragraph 3 (b) (i) of Article 2 of the new OSPAR Convention (Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic). The Contracting Parties to this Convention are the same as above, with the addition of Finland and Switzerland. The definition is as follows:

1.   The use of the best available techniques shall emphasise the use of non-waste technology, if available.

2.   The term "best available techniques" means the latest stage of development (state of the art) of processes, of facilities or of methods of operation which indicate the practical suitability of a particular measure for limiting discharges, emissions and waste. In determining whether a set of processes, facilities and methods of operation constitute the best available techniques in general or individual cases, special consideration shall be given to:

     (a)    comparable processes, facilities or methods of operation which have recently been successfully tried out;

     (b)    technological advances and changes in scientific knowledge and understanding;

     (c)    the economic feasibility of such techniques;

     (d)    time limits for installation in both new and existing plants;

     (e)    the nature and volume of the discharges and emissions concerned.

3.   It therefore follows that what is "best available techniques" for a particular process will change with time in the light of technological advances, economic and social factors, as well as changes in scientific knowledge and understanding.

4.   If the reduction of discharges and emissions resulting from the use of best
available techniques does not lead to environmentally acceptable results, 
additional measures have to be applied.
5.    "Techniques" include both the technology used and the way in which the 
installation is designed, built, maintained, operated and dismantled.

To limit the negative effects of human activity as much as possible, the following action 
must be taken:

a.    a list should be drawn up of the techniques available, together with their 
characteristics, for certain clearly specified activities;
b.    these should be compared and evaluated to enable the best available techniques for 
each activity to be identified;
c.    the BATs must be modified on a regular basis to stay abreast of technological 
developments.

Clearly, before BATs can be defined and elaborated, the precautionary principle should 
be applied as far as possible, to ensure that the impact on the environment is kept to a 
minimum.

The following are examples of activities for which BAT could provide a reference 
framework:

*    waste water purification plants
*    waste incineration plants
*    drilling operations in ice
*    fuel storage
*    waste storage
*    energy generation for stations
DRAFT DECISION

The Representatives,

Deeply aware of Antarctica's vulnerability to human interference;

Determined to protect the Antarctic environment from harmful interference;

Desiring to implement the environmental principles laid down in article 3.2.c.iv of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and in article 1.2 of Annex III to the said Protocol;

Noting with interest the use of the concept of Best Available Technique (BAT) in other international instruments aimed at environmental protection;

Decide

1. to invite COMNAP to consider, in consultation with SCAR, the desirability and the feasibility, in particular the economic feasibility, of employing the concept of Best Available Technique for the protection of the Antarctic environment, and to recommend appropriate action to the next Consultative Meeting;

2. to include an examination of this matter in the agenda of the next Consultative Meeting.
