ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                          SEOUL
                          May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 11 Rev. 1
May 12, 1995
Original: English

NUCLEAR WASTE AND THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

Agenda Item 13 b

(Submitted by the Netherlands)
XIX ATCM/WP..

NUCLEAR WASTE AND THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA
(Agenda item 13.b)

Article V, paragraph 1 of the Antarctic Treaty states:

"Any nuclear explosions in Antarctica and the disposal there of radioactive waste material
shall be prohibited."

The second paragraph of the same Article states:

"In the event of the conclusion of international agreements concerning the use of nuclear
energy, including nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste material, to
which all of the Contracting Parties whose representatives are entitled to participate in the
meetings provided for under Article IX are parties, the rules established under such
agreements shall apply in Antarctica."

Clearly, there is a potential conflict between these paragraphs. This is not an imaginary
problem as preparations are currently underway for the negotiation of a nuclear waste
convention. The following is a quotation from a progress report on this matter by the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency:

"Resolution GC(XXXVII)/RES/6 on "Measures to Resolve International Radioactive
Waste Management Issues" adopted by the General Conference in September 1994 invited
the Board of Governors and the Director General to commence preparations for a
convention on the safety of radioactive waste management.

Pursuant to that resolution, and as agreed by the Board of Governors at its
December 1994 session, the Director General convened an open-ended meeting of experts
from Member States with the objective of holding preliminary discussions on basis
concepts and possible scope of the convention, and to examine working mechanisms and
procedures for its preparation."

The meeting was attended by 110 participants from 50 countries, 23 of which are ATCPs:
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China, Finland, France, Germany, India,
Italy, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Russia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, the UK, and the US. It "called for the setting up of an
open-ended working group of legal and technical experts to begin preparatory work on a
convention on the safety of radioactive waste management without delay; it suggested that
the group be convened early July 1995." In other words: negotiations will begin in July
1995.

It is obviously not impossible that this will, at some point, result in a convention which
meets the requirement contained in Article V.2 of the Antarctic Treaty: if all ATCPs are
parties to a treaty on the disposal of nuclear waste, the rules of this treaty shall apply in
Antarctica.
No such risk is involved in the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal. Article 4.6 explicitly states that:

"The Parties agree not to allow the export of hazardous wastes or other wastes for disposal within the area South of 60° South latitude,"

to which is added

"whether or not such wastes are subject to transboundary movement"

which takes care of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty.

However, Article 1.3 of the same Convention states that

"Wastes which, as a result of being radioactive, are subject to other international control systems, including international instruments, applying specifically to radioactive materials, are excluded from the scope of this Convention."

Clearly, now that a treaty on nuclear waste is going to be negotiated, it is essential that it should prohibit the disposal of nuclear waste in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

The Netherlands delegation hereby offers a draft Recommendation to that effect.
DRAFT RESOLUTION

The Representatives,

determined to uphold the provisions of Article V.1 of the Antarctic Treaty;

conscious of the provisions of Article V.2 of the Treaty;

recalling Recommendation VIII-12;

aware that Article 4.6 of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and other wastes prohibits the export of hazardous wastes or disposal within the area south of 60° South latitude, whether or not such wastes are subject to transboundary movement;

aware also that, according to Article 1.3 of the Basel Convention, wastes which, as a result of being radioactive, are subject to other international control systems, applying specifically to radioactive materials, are excluded from the scope of this Convention;

noting that in September 1994 the International Atomic Energy Agency's General Conference adopted a resolution inviting the Board of Governors and the Director General to commence preparations for a convention on the safety of radioactive waste management, and that in February 1995 preparatory discussions on such a convention were attended by participants from 50 countries, 23 of which are ATCPs;

concerned that, via the mechanism contained in Article V, paragraph 2 of the Antarctic Treaty, the outcome of such negotiations may contravene the provisions of Article V, paragraph 1;

Recommend to their Governments that

insofar as they will be involved in the negotiations of a nuclear waste convention they should have as a priority objective the inclusion of provisions prohibiting the transfer of nuclear waste to and the disposal of nuclear waste within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
