ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        DIXIÈME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979
WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 10                                    ANT/X/18
                                                   SEPTEMBER 19, 1979

EFFECTS OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL            ORIGINAL:  English
EXPEDITIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

Draft Statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant Provisions of 
the Antarctic Treaty, referred to 
the Tenth Consultative Meeting 
(Submitted by the Host Government)
ANT/X/18

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTED PRACTICES AND THE RELEVANT
PROVISIONS OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

INTRODUCTION

The following statement is intended for the guidance of all
those who visit the Antarctic.

The Antarctic Treaty was negotiated in Washington in 1959
by the states which had established scientific stations in the
Antarctic during the International Geophysical Year (1957-58)
in order to perpetuate the close scientific co-operation which
had marked that period.  It provides, inter alia, that the
Antarctic shall be used for peaceful purposes only and that any
measures of a military nature shall be prohibited; that there
shall be freedom of scientific investigation and that the results
of such investigation shall be made freely available; that
nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste in the
Antarctic is prohibited; that notification of an expedition to
the Antarctic shall be provided in advance; and that each of the
Antarctic Treaty Governments shall exert appropriate efforts to
the end that no one engages in any activity in Antarctica contrary
to the principles or purposes of the Antarctic Treaty.

RECOMMENDATIONS OF ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS

The Treaty requires that meetings shall be held from time to
time to consider and recommend measures in furtherance of its
principles and objectives.  Amongst these are measures of which all
those who enter the Antarctic Treaty Area, both those sponsored by
Governments and those not so sponsored, should be aware.  The
following notes indicate the nature of these measures and the
reader is referred to the Recommendations of successive Consultative
Meetings for the details.

PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

The ecosystem of the Antarctic Treaty Area is particularly
vulnerable to human interference and the Antarctic derives much of

/its
ANT/X/18                        - 2 -

its importance from its uncontaminated and undisturbed condition
and the effects it has on adjacent areas and the global environment.
For these reasons the Consultative Parties have recognised their
special responsibility for the protection of the environment and
the wise use of the Treaty Area.

CONSERVATION OF WILDLIFE

Wildlife in the Antarctic is in almost all cases tame and is
therefore peculiarly vulnerable to disturbance.  Both animals and
plants are living under extreme conditions and great care has to
be taken to avoid upsetting the natural ecological system.
Wildlife and plants are protected by five mechanisms under the
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

Protection of native fauna

The killing, wounding, capturing or molesting of any native
mammal or native bird is prohibited except in an emergency or in
accordance with a permit issued under the authority of a
Participating Government.

Harmful Interference

Every effort shall be made to minimise harmful interference
with the normal living conditions of any native mammal or bird.

Specially Protected Species

Two species of seal, Fur Seals and the Ross Seal have been
designated as Specially Protected Species and permits may only be
issued in relation to these species in accordance with certain
restrictive criteria.

Specially Protected Areas

Representative areas of biologically outstanding scientific
interest have been designated as Specially Protected Areas in order
to preserve their unique natural ecological system (see Annex I).
No person may enter such an Area except in accordance with a permit
issued under the authority of a Participating Government.  Such
permits may only be issued in accordance with certain restrictive
criteria.

/Introduction
- 3 -

Introduction of non-indigenous species, parasites
and diseases

No species of animal or plant not indigenous to the Antarctic
Treaty Area may be brought into the Area except in accordance
with a permit issued under the authority of a Participating
Government.

Pelagic Sealing

The Consultative Parties, having regard to the possibly
damaging ecological consequences that might arise from the
exploitation of Antarctic seals for commercial purposes, negotiated
the 1972 Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals.
This is an instrument separate from the Antarctic Treaty.

Waste Disposal

In addition to the measures for the conservation of Antarctic
wildlife outlined above, the Consultative Parties have prepared a
Code of Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions and Station Activities
including, inter alia, recommended procedures for waste disposal -
see Annex II.

Protection of Historic Monuments

Every effort should be made to prevent damage or destruction
to any historical remains or monuments.  The Consultative Parties
have listed a number of such monuments for special protection
(see Annex III).

FACILITATION OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Sites of Special Scientific Interest

There are many scientific investigations being carried out in
the Antarctic which could suffer from accidental interference.
For example, long term studies of the population dynamics of a
penguin colony may require that visitors be kept to an absolute
minimum;  intensive scientific work in one may require that a
nearby ecologically similar area be kept undisturbed and
uncontaminated for reference purposes or certain electromagnetically
"quiet" areas where sensitive instruments have been installed for
recording minute signals associated with upper atmosphere studies
may require that visits to the site should be kept to a minimum.

/For
ANT/X/18

- 4 -

For these and similar reasons the Consultative Parties have
designated certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest in the
Antarctic (see Annex IV).  Each site is subject to a management
plan designed to protect the particular scientific investigations
being undertaken.  Persons wishing to visit Sites of Special
Scientific Interest should, well in advance, consult any national
office responsible for the administration of a permanent Antarctic
scientific expedition or, if this is not possible, should consult
the station commander of the scientific station nearest the site
which it is intended to visit.

TOURISM AND EXPEDITIONS NOT SPONSORED BY AN
ANTARCTIC TREATY GOVERNMENT

An important feature of the Antarctic Treaty is that
co-operation under it is facilitated by the prior exchange of
information about planned activities.  The Treaty commitment
covers any expedition organised in or proceeding to the Antarctic
from the territory of any state which is a Contracting Party to
the Antarctic Treaty.  A consolidated list of the information to be
exchanged is attached at Annex V.

It is a traditional Antarctic principle that expeditions
render all assistance feasible in the event of an emergency.
There are a number of unoccupied huts and refuges in the Antarctic
which may be used by any expedition in an emergency, in which case
the authorities who maintain the hut or refuge should be informed
of what use has been made of it.

Special measures relating to tourist and other
non-scientific expeditions

The number of non-governmental expeditions to the Antarctic
is steadily increasing and there is a tendency for these
expeditions to concentrate on the more easily accessible parts
of the Antarctic.  Frequent visits to scientific stations or
undue dependence on the facilities of such stations can prejudice
their scientific work.  It is therefore required that the
organisers of a tourist or other non-scientific expedition should
furnish notice as soon as possible, through diplomatic channels,
to any other Government whose station the expedition plans to visit.
Any such Government may refuse to accept a visit or may lay down
conditions upon which it would grant permission including,
inter alia, that:

             /(i)
- 5 -

(i) reasonable assurance be given of compliance with 
the provision of the Antarctic Treaty, measures 
adopted under it and the conditions applicable 
at stations to be visited;

(ii) final arrangements to visit any station be made 
with that station between twenty-four and 
seventy-two hours in advance of the expected 
time of arrival;

(iii) all tourists and other visitors comply with any 
conditions or restrictions on their movements 
which the station commander may stipulate for 
their safety or to safeguard scientific programmes 
being undertaken at or near the station;

(iv) visitors must not enter Specially Protected Areas 
and must respect designated historic monuments;

(v) that tour organisers should report to the Governments 
whose stations they have visited, after completion 
of the tour, the name and nationality of the ship, 
separate cruise, the number of tourists accompanying 
each cruise and the places and dates at which 
landings were made in the Antarctic Treaty Area, 
with the number of persons landed on each occasion.

LIST OF ANNEXES

ANNEX I              - Specially Protected Areas
ANNEX II             - Extract from the Code of Conduct for Antarctic 
                       expeditions and station activities relating to 
                       waste disposal
ANNEX III            - List of Historic Monuments
ANNEX IV             - Sites of Special Scientific Interest
ANNEX V              - Standard format for the annual exchanges of 
                       information
- 6 -

GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS TO THE ANTARCTIC

Antarctica and its surrounding islands are one of the
few places in the world which are still relatively unchanged
by man's activities.  Scientists still know very little about
the ecological situation in the Antarctic.  At the present
early stage in research on these matters, some provisional
restrictions and precautions may seem unnecessarily harsh, but
preliminary studies indicate the need for great caution.

By following a few very simple requests, you can help
preserve this region for future generations to enjoy.

1.  Avoid disturbing wildlife any more than is necessary;
    especially do not:-
        walk on vegetation;
        touch or handle birds or seals;
        startle or chase any bird from its nest;
        wander indiscriminately through penguin or other bird
        colonies.

2.  Litter of all types must be kept to a minimum.  Retain all
    litter (film wrappers, tissue, food scraps, tins, lotion
    bottles, etc.) in a bag or pocket to be disposed of on
    board your ship.  Avoid throwing tin cans and other trash
    off the ship near land.

3.  Do not use sporting guns.

4.  Do not introduce plants or animals into the Antarctic.

5.  Do not collect eggs or fossils.

6.  Do not enter any of the Specially Protected Areas and
    avoid Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

7.  In the vicinity of scientific stations avoid interference
    with scientific work and do not enter unoccupied buildings
    or refuges except in an emergency.

8.  Do not paint names or grafitti on rocks or buildings.

9.  Take care of Antarctic historic monuments.

10. When ashore, keep together with your party.

*   *   *
