ANTARCTIC TREATY                
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING       

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE   

TRATADO ANTARTICO            
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA     

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979 
WASHINGTON, D.C.              

AGENDA ITEM 13                ANT/X/26
                              September 20, 1979
ORIGINAL:  English            

THE TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE CONCLUSION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

(Working Paper. Submitted by the Delegation of the United Kingdom)

1. One of the basic principles of the Antarctic Treaty is that:

"Freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica 
and cooperation toward that end, as applied during 
the International Geophysical Year, shall continue ..."

2. The system of cooperation and coordination of scientific programmes 
developed first under the Committee Special de l'Annee Geophysique 
Internationale and then under the Special (later Scientific) 
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has immeasurably advanced 
knowledge of the Antarctic. This, in turn, has provided the basis 
for the advice which Treaty governments have so frequently sought 
from SCAR. The annex to this paper indicates that almost every 
twenty years has depended, at one stage or another, on advice from 
SCAR.

3. SCAR has only one paid, but still part time, official and a secretary 
to transact its business. Thus a very large proportion of the work 
that SCAR has done for the Treaty has depended upon the devoted 
readiness of Antarctic scientists to contribute their expertise to 
the common purpose. Almost all these scientists are engaged in full 
time research or scientific administration and the demands made upon 
them by Treaty governments, through SCAR, comes as an additional load 
on top of their normal work.

4. It seems to the United Kingdom Delegation that we should not let this 
twentieth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty pass without paying 
tribute to the fundamental contributions the Antarctic scientific 
community have made to the furtherance of the principles and objectives 
of the Antarctic Treaty.
ANT/x/26                                  - 2 -

5. While to do this would be a pleasant task there is also another aspect of 
the relationship between the Treaty and SCAR which we believe should be 
examined at this time. It is that in the course of making the many 
requests to SCAR for advice and guidance, Treaty governments have only 
once (Recommendation VIII - 14) considered the financial burden which is 
placed on SCAR if it is adequately to fulfill the obligations which we 
here, in this forum, have placed on them.

6. In the early days of the Treaty this  burden could be more easily born. 
In recent years, however, the requests we have made have been of a 
more searching nature, have required more urgent responses from SCAR 
and have consequently involved SCAR in greater costs arranging for the 
necessary meetings.  SCAR has drawn to the attention of all its National 
Committees on Antarctic Research that its capacity to absorb these extra 
costs is not limitless.

7. The United Kingdom delegation is of the view that, while thanking SCAR 
and the Antarctic scientific community for all that they have done in 
the past, we should also, as a matter of some urgency, consider in 
consultation with our respective National Committees, the financial 
implications of the role we are expecting SCAR to play in relation to 
the Treaty both now and in the future.

8. In making this latter suggestion the United Kingdom delegation wishes to 
make clear that it is not committing the British Government to increasing 
its contribution to SCAR.  We expect that other delegations are likely to 
be in a similar position.  Subject to this reservation, however, the 
United Kingdom Delegation believes that it would be worthwhile to 
initiate consideration of this matter.
ANNEX

NOTES ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SCAR AND THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

The basic Recommendation relating to SCAR is contained in Recommendation 
I - VI:

"SCAR should be encouraged to continue this advisory work which 
has so effectively facilitated international cooperation in 
scientific investigations ..."

CONSERVATION OF WILD LIFE

III - VIII    The Agreed Measures for the conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
              Flora had "particular regard to the conservation principles 
              developed by SCAR" (attached to Rec. I - III) and the 
              completion of the four annexes (specially protected species, 
              specially protected areas, importation of animals and plants, 
              precautions to prevent accidental introduction of parasites 
              and diseases into the Treaty Area) followed advice from SCAR 
              (Recommendation III-X).

VI - 9        "They invite SCAR ... to assemble the information exchanged 
              under Article XII of the Agreed Measures ..., to arrange for 
              its publication and, ... to prepare reports from time to time 
              on the status of species.

VII - 2       "2. They invite SCAR ... to review ... the existing Specially 
              Protected Areas, and to make recommendations about:

              (a)    the desirability of retaining each Area;
              (b)    the desirability of re-defining the limits 
                     of each Area retained;
              (c)    creating such additional Areas as may be 
                     considered desirable;"  (Recommendation 
              VIII-2 terminated the designation of four 
              Areas).

ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

IV - 22       "Recognizing the initiative already taken by SCAR on matters 
              relating to pelagic sealing ... they encourage SCAR to 
              continue its interest in these matters ..." (SCAR produced a 
              draft convention which formed the basis for the Convention 
              for the conservation of Antarctic Seals - see Recs. V-7 and V-8.

VIII - 10     "4. They urge SCAR ... to continue its scientific work on these 
              matters and to consider convening, as soon as practicable, a 
              meeting to discuss current work and report on programmes for 
              the study and conservation of Antarctic marine living resources"
              (This led to BIOMASS).
ANT/x/26                                  - 2 -

SOUTHERN OCEAN

V - 3         "... they encourage SCAR ... to continue its interest in scientific 
              matters related to the Southern Ocean and to make available 
              scientific advice as appropriate to the IUC coordination group ..."

IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT

VI - 4        "They invite SCAR ...:

              (a)    to identify the types and assess the extent of human 
                     interference which has occurred in the Treaty Area 
                     as a result of man's activities;

              (b)    to propose measures which might be taken to minimize 
                     harmful interference;

              (c)    to consider and recommend scientific programmes which 
                     will detect and measure changes occurring in the 
                     Antarctic environment;"

VIII - 11     "Noting with appreciation the response of SCAR to 
              Recommendation VI-4;

              Recommend to their Governments that:

1.            To the greatest extent feasible they observe the code 
              of conduct ... within the Antarctic Treaty Area;

2.            ... they invite SCAR in with SCOPE OF ICSO to continue 
              its interest in the development of scientific 
              programmes for detecting and assessing changes 
              occurring in the Antarctic environment".  (See also 
              Rec. VIII - 13 which also refers to cooperation between 
              SCAR and SCOPE in the context of UNEP's interest in the 
              Antarctic.

VIII - 14     "3. They invite SCAR ... to:

              (i)    make an assessment ... of the possible impact on the 
                     environment and other ecosystems ... if mineral exploration 
                     and/or exploitation were to occur there.  If possible and 
                     appropriate, Governments may wish to assist their National 
                     Antarctic Committees in this undertaking by appropriate means;

              (ii)   continue to coordinate national geological and geophysical 
                     research programmes ... with the aim of obtaining fundamental 
                     scientific data on the geological structure of the Antarctic; ..."
- 3 -
ANT/X/26

(Paragraph (i) led, via the Special Preparatory Meeting held 
in Paris in 1976, to the preparation of the SCAR/E AMREA 
Report).

USE OF RADIO ISOTOPES

VI - 5     "... they invite SCAR to consider the uses of radio-isotopes 
           in Antarctic scientific investigations and to propose 
           comprehensive principles for their control ..."

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

VII - 3    "They invite SCAR, ... to consider this matter further and 
           make suggestions for the designation of Sites of Special 
           Scientific Interest ..."  (This led to the designation of 
           seven areas - see Rec VIII - 4.  SCAR is responsible for 
           initiating a review of Sites designation of which is to 
           lapse).

COOPERATION IN TRANSPORT

VIII - 7   "2. They request SCAR, ... to review the available transport 
           resources and the potential requirements with respect to a 
           cooperative air transport system ..."  (Rec. IX - 4 requested 
           SCAR to continue of the CATSA Subcommittee of the Working 
           Group on Logistics.

OTHER SUBJECTS

SCAR has also played significant roles in relation to Antarctic meteorology, 
telecommunications and logistics.

*   *   *
