ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING    DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ        TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                              CIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

                WASHINGTON, D.C.

ANT/X/22
September 20, 1979

AGENDA ITEM 9                                ORIGINAL:  Spanish

OBSERVATIONS MADE OF THE COASTAL ZONE OF THE STRAIT OF MAGELLAN, CHILE,
WHICH WAS AFFECTED BY THE OIL SPILL FROM THE VLCC METULA

Working Document Presented by the Delegation of Chile

INTRODUCTION

Although scientific information about the impact of hydrocarbon contamina-
tion of the marine aquatic environment is fairly well documented for temperate
and tropical areas, there is very little information about cold regions, particu-
larly Antarctica.  The lack of information is due in large part to the relative
isolation of the Antarctic ecosystem from major maritime traffic zones and hydro-
carbon production and consumption areas, which obviously results in a low inci-
dence of pollution incidents such as oil spills.  However, since the extreme
fragility of the ecosystem requires measures to protect it and to control any
future pollution resulting from activities related to Antarctic mineral resource
exploration and exploitation, it is useful to study and learn from any pollution
incident occurring under similar conditions.

In this context a visit was made to the area most seriously affected by the
oil spill from the VLCC Metula in the Strait of Magellan.  The results of this
visit are as follows:

BACKGROUND

On August 9, 1974 the VLCC Metula ran aground on the Bajo Satelite, a short
distance from the west mouth of the Primera Angostura, Strait of Magellan, Chile.
During the 48 days in which the tanker remained aground in that place, approxi-
mately 52,000 tons of light Arab oil were spilled into the marine environment.
The greater part of the oil spilled (75%) was deposited by the wind and currents
on the shores and in the estuaries of the Strait, covering approximately 75 miles
of coastline with an emulsion 2.5 - 10 cm. thick and 15 - 60 m. wide.
ANT/X/22

- 2 -

The spill from the VLCC Metula was interesting from the standpoint of a
scientific investigation of the effects of hydrocarbon  contamination in cold
regions because it was not treated with detergents or in any other artificial
manner.  Therefore the outcome of the oil spill over time was due entirely to
biological, chemical, and physical processes, especially in the protected areas.

Although this oil spill could have been investigated more intensively,
much information has already emerged, and it is to be hoped that this will be
published in papers of high scientific quality within the reasonably near future.

Within the Strait of Magellan the section most seriously affected by spilled
hydrocarbons (in the form of frothy emulsions) was the eastern entrance of
Puerto Espora, located on the Primera Angostura (52°30'S - 69°31'W).

During a brief visit to the site on August 26, 1979, visual observations
were made and photographs were taken mainly in this zone.  Additional limited
observations were also made on the beaches and tidal shelves of the Primera
Angostura.

RESULTS

Five years after the spill, the area examined (the eastern mouth of Puerto
Espora), a sea inlet or estuary with coves and fjords, was found to have a heavy
oil cover (as much as 15 cm. thick) in its most protected areas.  At first sight
the pollution of these places is not significantly different from that observed
during  a previous visit in April,  1976.

In addition to the presence of varying quantities of oil in the area, it is
possible to observe changes in the relief and structure of the estuary borders
and the effects on terrestrial and aquatic biota, mainly on phanerogamous plants.
They have not returned to their normal appearance, and the absence of avifauna
and marine invetebrate fauna (epi- or infauna) is evident.  In specific places
it was possible to observe the sometimes intensive development of algal coloni-
zers belonging to pioneer species or groups of species.  The bacterial decompo-
sition of the sulfurated components of the oil was evident at certain points
from the strong smell of hydrosulfuric acid.

On the beaches of Primera Angostura and the intertidal shelves adjacent to
Puerto Espora it was possible to observe extensive areas of the so-called
"Moussecrete", a sort of asphalt compound of oil and gravel 10 to 15 cm. thick.
This paving is fairly compact, and the action of five years of tides and currents
have had little effect on its structure and composition.  The development of popu-
lations of 2 or 3 species of algae, but no macroscopic invertebrates, bear wit-
ness to its stability.

In the higher sections of the beaches the bodies of sea birds were observed
which presumably had been killed by the oil at various times.

These are the results of direct observations made during the recent visit to
the site of the VLCC Metula oil spill.
- 3 -
ANT/X/22

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Although the observations recorded here refer summarily to a comparison 
between two visual experiences,  the first one two years, and the second one 
five years after the disaster, the following valid conclusions can be drawn 
from them from the viewpoint of the persistence of a  hydrocarbon spill in the 
subantarctic environment:

1.-  The persistence of the type of hydrocarbons spilled by the VLCC Metula 
in the environment of the Strait of Magellan is high, particularly in 
low-energy areas, and

2.-  A spill such as the one described in this subantarctic environment has 
a chronic effect on the biota, and its estimated duration is several 
decades.

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.-  It is recommended that the current levels of hydrocarbon contamination 
in Antarctica be determined (waters, sediments, and biological materials).

2.-  The existing information about the sources, outcomes, and effects of 
pollution by oil in the cold areas of the world should be evaluated in 
order to consider how it can be applied to the Antarctic environment.

3.-  Experimental investigations should be conducted of the possible effects 
of hydrocarbons on Antarctic organisms (bio-assays).

4.-  Experimental investigations should be conducted of the rate of biologi-
cal degradation (biodegradation) of hydrocarbons under Antarctic environ-
mental conditions.

5.-  It is urgent that an International Program for Pollution Research in 
Antarctica be organized on the basis of the document annexed to docu-
ment ANT (79) PM ET/4, June 25, 1979, presented by the Delegation of 
Argentina.

* * *
