ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 5                                  ANT/X/30/Rev. 1
                                                  October 1, 1979

                                                  ORIGINAL:  Russian

ECOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF THE MINERAL RESOURCES IN ANTARCTICA
DRAFT RECOMMENDATIONS SUBMITTED BY THE DELEGATION
OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

The Representatives,

Convinced of the need to preserve and further strengthen the international
regime established by the Antarctic Treaty, which has for 20 years guar-
anteed the use of Antarctica exclusively for peaceful purposes, and in
the interest of the development of international cooperation;

Noting that Antarctica is a vast region of the earth, with a unique and
extremely vulnerable environment which has not yet been sufficiently
studied;

Conscious of the responsibility to protect the Antarctic environment in
accordance with the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty, in
the face of the incrasing interest in problems of exploration and
exploitation of potential mineral resources in Antarctica;

Aware of the responsibilities of the Consultative Parties to ensure that
any activities in the Antarctic, including commercial exploration and
exploitation, should they occur, should not become the cause of inter-
national discord, endanger the unique Antarctic environment, disrupt
scientific investigations, or otherwise be contrary to the purposes or
principles of the Antarctic Treaty;

Expressing serious concern regarding the protection of the unique
Antarctic environment from undesirable and dangerous effects on the
Antarctic environment of possible activities involved in the exploration
and exploitation of the Antarctic mineral resources, should such
activities occur.

Conscious of the inadequacy of the existing knowledge for determining
possible ecological consequences, and the nature of the potential effect
on the environment in Antarctica of activities involved in exploration
and exploitation of the Antarctic mineral resources, should such
activities occur.
ANT/X/30/Rev. 1

- 2 -

Conscious of the special vulnerability of the Antarctic environment and 
of the fact that uncontrolled activities in exploration and exploitation 
of potential mineral resources in Antarctica, conducted without con-
sidering certain approved international rules, regulations and standards 
would have a catastrophic effect on the Antarctic environment, affect 
the ecological balance of the Antarctic region, the ecology of the 
Southern Ocean as well as the world oceans and of our whole planet;

Noting, in this connection, a need to conduct basic ecological studies in 
Antarctica;

Recommend to their governments that:

1. Approved international regulations, standards and rules relating 
to the protection of the Antarctic environment shall constitute 
an important part of a future international regime regulating 
activities of exploration and exploitation of mineral resources 
in Antarctica, should such activities be permitted.

2. Any activity involving exploration and exploitation of the 
Antarctic mineral resources which may be permitted after an 
approved international regime comes into force shall be con-
ducted in strict compliance with the regulations, standards 
and rules for the protection of the Antarctic environment which 
constitute the most important part of this regime and which 
have the purpose of not permitting any commercial activity in 
relation to mineral resources which would have a harmful effect 
on the Antarctic environment and violate the ecological balance 
in Antarctica.

3. They assist as soon as possible in developing and conducting 
special national and international research programs with the 
aim of revealing potential objects of the harmful effects of 
activities involved in exploration and exploitation, assessing 
the nature and scope of such effects, determining the most 
vunerable components of ecosystems and the most sensitive 
indicators of contamination.

4. They promote, along with special ecological investigations, 
and intensified development of Antarctic studies in biology, 
meteorology, physical oceanography and the physics of 
atmospheric phenomena, climatology, glaciology, hydro- and 
cryogeology, marine and engineering geology, and in other 
areas to provide initial factual data for ecological evalua-
tions and planning. Efficient and regular exchange of the 
information obtained and its availability to ecologists are 
of special importance, as different disciplines traditionally 
have preferential development in different countries.  They 
take measures to intensify those studies that are most 
efficient in promoting the solution of ecological problems. 
It is considered expedient to make special efforts to retrieve 
and process the data from the observations of previous years 
that are essential for this purpose.
ANT/X/30/Rev. 1

- 3 -

5. They ask SCAR to continue studies of the effects on the 
Antarctic environment of activities involved in exploration 
and exploitation of the Antarctic mineral resources, should 
such activities be permitted. They encourage SCAR, through 
their National Antarctic Committees, to define programs, 
taking account of the Experts Report (Washington, 1979), with 
the objectives of:

    a. retrieving and analyzing relevant information from past 
       observations and research programs;

    b. ensuring in relation to the needs for information 
       identified by the Experts Report that effective use 
       is made of existing programs;

    c. identifying and developing new programs that should 
       have priority, taking account of the length of time 
       required for results to become available.

*   *   *
