ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

ANT/X/41
September 28, 1979

ORIGINAL:  English

REPORT OF THE CHAIRMAN OF THE WORKING GROUP ON THE
EFFECTS OF TOURISTS AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
EXPEDITIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

1.  The Working Group on Tourism met from 19 - 21 September to discuss
Item 10 of the Agenda. It was recalled that the Ninth Consultative Meet-
ing referred matters pertaining to tourism for consideration at the Tenth
Consultative Meeting (see paragraph 12 of the Report of the Ninth Consul-
tative Meeting).

2.  Ricardo P. Quadri (Argentina) was elected Chairman of the Group.

3.  The Group reaffirmed the validity of previous Recommendations on
tourism (IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, and VIII-9), and noted that while it was
necessary to impose limitations on the activities of tourists in order
to protect the Antarctic environment and prevent the disruption of work
at Antarctic stations, responsible tourism in Antarctica should be en-
couraged.

4.  The Group received with appreciation a paper from the SCAR Working
Group on Logistics entitled "Tourist and Private Expeditions to the
Antarctic" (Annex A). In light of this paper, concern was expressed
that increasing numbers of tourists as well as tourist activities not
previously common in Antarctica could unduly tax the resources of Ant-
arctic stations.  It was recognized that it is the prerogative of
governments and station commanders to permit and regulate visits of
tourists to their stations in accordance with Recommendations IV-27 and
VI-7. The importance of communicating relevant information concerning
tourist activities to other Consultative Party governments was em-
phasized.

5.  Difficulties were reported concerning private non-commercial
expeditions, including voyages of small craft to the Antarctic, about
which little or no information is available to governments and which
ANT/X/41

- 2 -

are often found to be inadequately equipped for the rigors of the Antarctic
environment.  Although the view was expressed that little could be done to
prevent problems associated with such expeditions, it was recommended
that members of such expeditions should be encouraged to obtain adequate
insurance to cover possible losses in the Antarctic, and that governments
should obtain information about such expeditions intending to visit their
stations.

6.      An area of further discussion was the increase in commercial, tourist-
carrying overflights of Antarctica.  While delegates recognized that few
of these aircraft planned to land in the Antarctic, there was serious con-
cern that stations would be unable to mount adequate rescue efforts in
the event of a forced landing.  The possibility that low flights of such
aircraft could create an adverse impact upon the Antarctic environment,
expecially by disturbing populations of native birds, was also noted.  The
Group recommended that operators of commercial aircraft be informed of
some of the limitations and problems that might be created by the recent
level of overflights.

7.      It was suggested that, for several reasons, tours might benefit from
the experience of tour guides familiar with conditions in the Antarctic,
as well as the need for protection of the Antarctic environment and wild-
life.  The Group recommended that commercial tour operators be encouraged
to include such guides in their expeditions to the Antarctic.

8.      The Group completed work on two documents intended for distribution to
tourists, entitled "Statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant Pro-
visions of the Antarctic Treaty", and "Guidance for Visitors to the
Antarctic", drafted originally at the Ninth Consultative Meeting.  Both
documents were incorporated in a draft Recommendation (ANT/X/24) which in-.
cluded other recommendations to our Governments.

9.      There follows a list of documents tabled for consideration by the Group:

        ANT/X/8 (Chile)
        ANT/X/13:    Private Expeditions (U.K.)
        ANT/X/17:    Tourist Traffic and its Control (Poland)
        ANT/X/18:    Draft Statement of Accepted Practices (Host Government)
        ANT/X/19:    Recommendations from SCAR Working Group on Logistics
        ANT/X/24 and ANT/X/24 (Rev. 1):  Draft Recommendation

ATTACHMENTS:  1.      Annex A (ANT/X/19)
                 2.      Annex B (ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)

* * *
ATTACHMENT 1:  Annex A

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979
WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 10                                         ANT/X/19
                                                         September 19, 1979
                                                         ORIGINAL: English

TOURIST AND PRIVATE EXPEDITIONS TO THE ANTARCTIC

Recommendations from SCAR Working Group on Logistics

(The attached paper was prepared by the SCAR Working
Group on Logistics and is submitted by the New
Zealand Delegation at the Request of that Working
Group. It is not a New Zealand paper.)
ANT/X/19

- 2 -

Introduction

At the XVth SCAR Meeting held in Chamonix, France, in May 1978, the Logistics 
Working Group considered recent developments in tourist activity and private 
expeditions, known and possible future developments, the problems that had 
already occurred, and the difficulties likely to occur in the future.

Activities Reported

1. Tourist activities in the past have not been extensive, and those that 
have occurred have been organised by recognised tour operators who 
invariably consult with the appropriate countries. More recently 
however, there has been an increase in tourist activities, par-
ticularly by small groups of private individuals who are not well 
organised or equipped to undertake voyages to the Antarctic. Present 
practice is to discourage such expeditions, but this is resulting in 
unannounced arrivals to Antarctic Bases, which can cause disruption to 
base activities, particularly if the expedition is in distress.

2. The main increase in tourist activities has been in the Peninsula 
area of West Antarctica. In the case of tourist ships, the problems 
currently arising are fairly well under control; but if tourist 
activity continues to increase, it will require more concerted 
attention. Individual tour operators presently notify their govern-
ments of their proposed itineraries with details of ships, equipment 
and safety precautions. Visits to Antarctic bases are cleared with 
the National Antarctic organisation concerned, and rules of procedure 
are laid down. In some cases, it has been necessary to withhold per-
mission for tourist visits to bases because of the likelihood of 
disruption to scientific programmes. In other cases, the number of 
visits has been shared between tour operators. It is estimated 
there are about ten ships involved each year at stations in the 
Peninsula area.

3. The past ten years has seen a great increase in the number of small 
auxiliary-engine sailing vessels in the Peninsula area. Each summer 
several arrive unexpectedly and often call on Antarctic bases for 
assistance with water, fuel, food, repairs, etc. (These have been 
referred to as "lonely sailors.") There is also a continuing and 
increasing possibility of the need to mount search and rescue 
operations. In the 1977/78 season the vessel 'En Avant' from the 
U.K. bound for Smith Island, South Shetlands, left Rio and was 
not heard of again. Searches were made in the Antarctic by ships 
of several nations and by Argentine aircraft, but without success. 
In 1978 the yacht 'Damien II' with a crew of two, is wintering at 
Adelaide Island, some 60 Kilometres from the nearest occupied 
station. Clearly, in the event of any mishap the work of the 
station could be disrupted by the need to mount a rescue operation.

4. In addition to shipboard tourist activities there have been several 
private expeditions planned involving mountain climbing or polar 
travel. These cannot be regarded as scientific expeditions,
- 3 -

but unless they are properly equipped and supported there is a
potential for emergencies developing which could divert resources
from genuine scientific programmes.

In discussing some specific plans it became clear to the Group
that the organisers of such private expeditions were attempting
to enlist support by approaching several national Antarctic
operators saying that they had already had support from the others.

5.  In the case of East Antarctica the problems are not so acute because
only very limited tourist activity has taken place.  However, there
has been considerable interest shown in Australia and New Zealand
to develop some form of tourist access to East Antarctica.  In the
last two years aircraft have been chartered to over-fly the
Antarctic coastline between 1300E and 1700W, often as far south as
800S, starting from both Australia and New Zealand.  The number of
flights is increasing and in 1977/78 there were ten such flights.
These flights could pose problems in the future because the ICAO
air traffic control and flight information services are not extended
south of 600S. Clearly, an aircraft carrying 350 passengers which
is unable to land in the Antarctic, would require extensive search
and rescue facilities if any mishap occurred. Also, many of these
flights were, without prior notice, entering the usual flight path
taken by aircraft operating between New Zealand and McMurdo in
support of national Antarctic programmes.

6.  In 1978, for the first time, enquiries have been made by tour
operators to visit the Antarctic in areas south of Australia.
While no tours have yet been organised, the enquiries indicate
only be a matter of time before they are organised.

A small private expedition sailed to the Antarctic during 1977/78
from Australia and spent two months in Antarctic waters.  Regular
radio contact was maintained with Australian Antarctic stations.

Group's Recommendations

1.  The Group concluded that tourist activities will increase therefore
a need is emerging for the Treaty Nations to adopt a common policy
towards tourism in the future.

2.  Working Group Members should keep each other fully informed on all
approaches being received from planners of private expeditions so
as to avoid misunderstandings and difficulties through accepting
all statements made as being true.

3.  The Working Group considers that all over-flights must be identified
as "self-supported expeditions" and information of their routes and
timetable should be advised to the Treaty Nations in advance of any
flights taking place.
ANT/X/19

- 4 -

4.  Due to the likely increase in tourist activities in Antarctica,
the Working Group considers that, although the present situation
is not serious, it recommends that national Antarctic Operating
Organisations should urge their governments to treat any
Antarctic activity as an expedition and exchange information in
advance with other governments and their operating agencies.
Every effort should be made to ensure that expeditions are
properly equipped and supplied, and that adequate arrangements
are made for radio communications.

*   *   *
ATTACHMENT 2:  Annex B

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 10                                  ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)
                                                September 25, 1979
                                                ORIGINAL:  ENGLISH

EFFECTS OF TOURISTS AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
EXPEDITIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

The Representatives,

Recalling that Annex A to Recommendation VIII-9 was to be discussed at the
Ninth Consultative Meeting and that a draft text of a Statement of Accepted
Practices and the Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty was referred
from the Ninth to the Tenth Consultative Meeting;

Recognising that adventurous individuals organizing private, non-commercial
expeditions to Antarctica may contact other Consultative Parties, asking
for help or advice, without first approaching the government of the Con-
sultative Party in whose territory the expedition is being organized;

Recognising, also, that in considering responses to requests for help
from such expeditions, an important concern is the possibility that such
expeditions may, in cases of emergency, involve the offices administering
their Antarctic programs in financial or material loss;

Recognising that suitably qualified guides accompanying commercially
organized Antarctic tours would both benefit the tourists and help to
ensure that the conservation and environmental measures adopted by the
Consultative Parties were observed;

While reaffirming the traditional Antarctic principle that expeditions
render all assistance feasible in the event of an emergency request for
help, noted that commercial overflights of Antarctica are operating in
a particularly hazardous environment, where aircraft operation systems
normally available elsewhere in the world are at a minimum, and where
emergencies could arise beyond the capacity of permanent Antarctic
expeditions to respond adequately;
ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)                        - 2 -

Recommend to their governments that:

I

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTED PRACTICES AND THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE ANT-
ARCTIC TREATY

They insert the following statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant
Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty in Annex A to Recommendation VIII-9 for the
purposes set out in operative paragraph 1 of that Recommendation.

Introduction

The following statement is intended for the guidance of all those who visit the
Antarctic.

The Antarctic Treaty was negotiated in Washington in 1959 by the states which
had established scientific stations in the Antarctic during the International
Geophysical Year (1957-58) in order to perpetuate the close scientific co-
operation which had marked that period. It provides, inter alia, that the
Antarctic shall be used for peaceful purposes only and that any measures of a
military nature shall be prohibited; that there shall be freedom of scientific
investigation and that the results of such investigation shall be made freely
available; that nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste in
the Antarctic is prohibited; that notification of an expedition to the Ant-
arctic shall be provided in advance; and that each of the Antarctic Treaty
Governments shall exert appropriate efforts to the end that no one engages in
any activity in Antarctica contrary to the principles or purposes of the Ant-
arctic Treaty.

Recommendations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings

The Treaty requires that meetings shall be held from time to time to consider
and recommend measures in furtherance of its principles and objectives. Amongst
these are measures of which all those who enter the Antarctic Treaty Area, both
those sponsored by Governments and those not so sponsored, should be aware.
The following notes indicate the nature of these measures and the reader is
referred to the Recommendations of successive Consultative Meetings for the
details.

Protection of the Antarctic Environment

The ecosystem of the Antarctic Treaty Area is particularly vulnerable to human
interference and the Antarctic derives much of its importance from its uncon-
taminated and undisturbed condition and the effects it has on adjacent areas
and the global environment. For these reasons the Consultative Parties have
recognised their special responsibility for the protection of the environment
and the wise use of the Treaty Area.

Conservation of Wildlife

Wildlife in the Antarctic is in almost all cases tame and is therefore
peculiarly vulnerable to disturbance. Both animals and plants are living
under extreme conditions and great care has to be taken to avoid upsetting the
natural ecological system. Wildlife and plants are protected by five mechanisms
under the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
- 3 -

Protection of native fauna

The killing, wounding, capturing or molesting of any native mammal or
native mammal or native bird is prohibited except in an emergency or in
accordance with a permit issued under the authority of a Participating
Government.

Harmful Interference

Every effort shall be made to minimize harmful interference with the
normal living conditions of any native mammal or bird.

Specially Protected Species

Two species of seal, Fur Seals and the Ross Seal have been designated
as Specially Protected Species and permits may only be issued in relation
to these species in accordance with certain restrictive criteria.

Specially Protected Areas

Representative areas of biologically outstanding scientific interest have
been designated as Specially Protected Areas in order to preserve their
unique natural ecological system (see Annex I).  No person may enter such
an Area except in accordance with a permit issued under the authority of
a Participating Government.  Such permits may only be issued in accordance
with certain restrictive criteria.

Introduction of non-indigenous species, parasites and diseases

No species of animal or plant not indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty
Area may be brought into the Area except in accordance with a permit
issued under the authority of a Participating Government.

Pelagic Sealing

The Consultative Parties, having regard to the possibly damaging eco-
logical consequences that might arise from the exploitation of Antarctic
seals for commercial purposes, negotiated the 1972 Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals.  This is an instrument separate from the
Antarctic Treaty.

Waste Disposal

In addition to the measures for the conservation of Antarctic wildlife
outlined above, the Consultative Parties have prepared a Code of Conduct
for Antarctic Expeditions and Station Activities including, inter alia,
recommended procedures for waste disposal (see Annex II).

Protection of Historic Monuments

Every effort should be made to prevent damage or destruction to any
historical remains or monuments.  The Consultative Parties have listed a
number of such monuments for special protection (see Annex III).
ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)

- 4 -

Facilitation of Scientific Research

Sites of Special Scientific Interest

There are many scientific investigations being carried out in the Ant-
arctic which could suffer from accidental interference.  For example,
long term studies of the population dynamics of a penguin colony may
require that visitors be kept to an absolute minimum; intensive
scientific work in one may require that a nearby ecologically similar
area be kept undisturbed and uncontaminated for reference purposes or
certain electromagnetically "quiet" areas where sensitive instruments
have been installed for recording minute signals associated with upper
atmosphere studies may require that visits to the site should be kept
to a minimum.

For these and similar reasons the Consultative Parties have designated
certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest in the Antarctic (see Annex
IV).  Each site is subject to a management plan designed to protect the
particular scientific investigations being undertaken.  Persons wishing
to visit Sites of Special Scientific Interest should, well in advance,
consult any national office responsible for the administration of a
permanent Antarctic scientific expedition or, if this is not possible,
should consult the station commander of the scientific station nearest
the site which it is intended to visit.

Tourism and Expeditions Not Sponsored by an Antarctic Treaty Government

An important feature of the Antarctic Treaty is that cooperation under
it is facilitated by the prior exchange of information about planned
activities.  The Treaty commitment covers any expedition organised in
or proceeding to the Antarctic from the territory of any state which is
a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.  A consolidated list of
the information to be exchanged is attached at Annex V.

It is a traditional Antarctic principle that expeditions render all
assistance feasible in the event of an emergency.  There are a number
of unoccupied huts and refuges in the Antarctic which may be used by
any expedition in an emergency, in which case the authorities who
maintain the hut or refuge should be informed of what use has been
made of it.

Special measures relating to tourist and other non-scientific expeditions

The number of non-governmental expeditions to the Antarctic is steadily
increasing and there is a tendency for these expeditions to concentrate
on the more easily accessible parts of the Antarctic.  Frequent visits
to scientific stations or undue dependence on the facilities of such
stations can prejudice their scientific work.  It is therefore required
that the organizers of a tourist or other non-scientific expedition
should furnish notice as soon as possible, through diplomatic channels
to any other Government whose station the expedition plans to visit.
Any such Government may refuse to accept a visit to a station which it
maintains or may lay down conditions upon which it would grant permis-
sion including inter alia, that:
- 5 -

(i) reasonable assurance be given of compliance with the
provision of the Antarctic Treaty, measures adopted under
it and the conditions applicable at stations to be visited;

(ii) tour organizers should ensure that prior to the commence-
ment of the tour or expedition, procedures and systems for
adequate telecommunications have been confirmed with the
offices administering the Antarctic stations to be visited;

(iii) final arrangements to visit any station be made with that
station between twenty-four and seventy-two hours in
advance of the expected time of arrival;

(iv) all tourists and other visitors comply with any conditions
or restrictions on their movements which the station com-
mander may stipulate for their safety or to safeguard
scientific programmes being undertaken at or near the
station;

(v) visitors must not enter Specially Protected Areas and must
respect designated historic monuments;

(vi) tour organizers should report to the Governments whose
stations they have visited, after completion of the tour,
the name and nationality of the ship, the name of the
captain, the itinerary of each separate cruise, the number
of tourists accompanying each cruise and the places and
dates at which landings were made in the Antarctic Treaty
Area, with the number of persons landed on each occasion.

LIST OF ANNEXES

ANNEX I     Specially Protected Areas.  See Annex B to Recommendation III-
            VIII (Antarctic Treaty Handbook, pp. 2107-2120).

ANNEX II    Extract from the Code of Conduct for Antarctic expeditions and
            station activities relating to waste disposal. See Annex to
            Recommendation VIII-11, paragraph 1 (Antarctic Treaty Handbook,
            p. 1103).

ANNEX III   List of Historic Monuments.  See Annex to Recommendation VII-9 (Ant-
            arctic Treaty Handbook, pp. 1302-05).

ANNEX IV    Sites of Special Scientific Interest.  See Management Plans
            annexed to Recommendation VIII-4 (Antarctic Treaty Handbook,
            pp. 3103-17).

ANNEX V     Standard format for the annual exchanges of information.  See
            Annex to Recommendation VIII-6 (Antarctic Treaty Handbook, pp.
            5102-04).
- 6 -

GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS TO THE ANTARCTIC

Antarctica and its surrounding islands are one of the few places in 
the world which are still relatively unchanged by man's activities.
Scientists still know very little about the ecological situation in 
the Antarctic.  At the present early stage in research on these matters,
some provisional restrictions and precautions may seem unnecessarily 
harsh, but preliminary studies indicate the need for great caution.

By following a few very simple requests, you can help preserve this 
region for future generations to enjoy.

1.  Avoid disturbing wildlife any more than is necessary; 
    especially do not:-
    walk on vegetation;
    tough or handle birds or seals;
    startle or chase any bird from its nest;
    wander indiscriminately through penguin or other bird 
    colonies.

2.  Litter of all types must be kept to a minimum.  Retain all 
    litter (film wrappers, tissue, food scraps, tins, lotion 
    bottles, etc.) in a bag or pocket to be disposed of on 
    board your ship.  Avoid throwing tin cans and other trash 
    off the ship near land.

3.  Do not use sporting guns.

4.  Do not introduce plants or animals into the Antarctic.

5.  Do not collect eggs or fossils.

6.  Do not enter any of the Specially Protected Areas and 
    avoid Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

7.  In the vicinity of scientific stations avoid interference 
    with scientific work and do not enter unoccupied buildings 
    or refuges except in an emergency.

8.  Do not paint names or grafitti on rocks or buildings.

9.  Take care of Antarctic historic monuments.

10. When ashore, keep together with your party.
ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)

- 7 -

II

PRIVATE NON-COMMERCIAL EXPEDITIONS

If approached for help or advice by a private, non-commercial expedition intending to visit their stations they should request all relevant information about the expedition from the government of the Consultative Party in whose territory the expedition is being organized.

They urge private, non-commercial expeditions to carry adequate insurance cover against the risk of their incurring financial charges or material losses in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

III

TOUR GUIDES

To the extent practicable, they encourage commercial tour operators to carry tour guides with experience of Antarctic conditions, who are aware of the considerations which underlie the measures taken by Consultative Parties for the conservation of wildlife and protection of the Antarctic environment.

IV

COMMERCIAL OVERFLIGHTS IN ANTARCTICA

They notify commercial aircraft operators that the recent increase in tourist overflight activity:

(i)     exceeds existing capabilities for air traffic control, communications and search and rescue in the Antarctic;

(ii)    may interfere with normal operational flights in support of expeditions engaged in ongoing scientific programs in Antarctica;

(iii)   would exceed the capacity of their Antarctic operations to respond adequately in the event of an unplanned emergency landing.

* * *
