ANTARCTIC TREATY              
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
                                                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE              

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA              

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979              

WASHINGTON, D.C.              

AGENDA ITEM 7                                                
ANT/X/3              
September 14, 1979              

ORIGINAL:  English              

SCAR'S RESPONSE TO RECOMMENDATION IX-3              
IMPROVEMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC              

(Submitted by the Delegation of New Zealand on              
behalf of the Chairman of the Logistics Working              
Group of SCAR)
ANT/X/3

IMPROVEMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC

Summary

Treaty Governments have requested SCAR, through National
Committees, "to undertake a study of the most recent
applications of science and technology to the specific
problems of the Antarctic in the field of propagation of
radio waves'. The working group concluded that since the
SCAR Symposium on Technical and Scientific Problems
affecting Antarctic Telecommunications, Sandefjord, 1972,
there had been no significant increase in technology or
scientific knowledge which would improve communications
within the Antarctic. Members considered that there were
many problems associated with telecommunications generally
and that it was difficult to study only one aspect in
isolation. It was agreed that the working group had a
responsibility and therefore a continuing role to play in
ensuring that telecommunications in the Antarctic were
operated and maintained at the best possible standards.
The group agreed to the forming of a subcommittee with
terms of reference appropriate to this task.

Details of Discussions and Recommendations

Since the Sandefjord meeting on Antarctic telecommunications
in 1972, there has been no significant increase in technology
or scientific knowledge which would improve communications
within the Antarctic. The basic difficulty of high frequency
radio propagation in the region remains and is unlikely to
improve with the coming increase in sunspot number. The
1972 meeting made reference to the desirability of installing
an ionospheric scatter link between east and west Antarctica
but this has not yet been implemented. Certain technical
refinements were also recommended, such as the provision of
ARQ equipment and Lincompex, and some of this equipment is
being installed. Nevertheless, in spite of technical difficulties,
there is a regular interchange of information between Antarctic
stations, and between Antarctic stations and national centres.
Further technical refinements could be made by ensuring
compatibility of equipment and techniques, together with a
standardization of operating procedures.

Satellite technology offers the only possibility of real
technical improvements in the future, but at the present time
no communications satellite seems to be capable of handling
Antarctic communications. The cost of using existing commercial
geo-stationary satellites is prohibitive for normal use.
Australia is considering the feasibility of a domestic satellite;
if this proves viable special features, such as a spot beam
antenna for the Antarctic, might be incorporated. In the
meantime an investigation will be made into the cost-effectiveness
of using scientific satellites, such as TIROS, for the
transmission of meteorological data from the Antarctic to
national centres.
ANT/X/3                                         2.

The existing  communications network carries a large 
amount of traffic, some of which is meteorological data, and 
some for administrative purposes. There seems to be no 
serious problem with the administrative traffic, but at the 
Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting it was stated 
that only about 30 per cent of the Antarctic meteorological 
data was entering the Global Telecommunications System (GTS) 
network. It was subsequently found that the GTS network 
rejected any traffic delayed more than six hours and that 
although more than 80 per cent of meteorological data was 
being offered to the network, a considerable proportion was 
outside the six-hour limit. Under present circumstances there 
is no way of reducing the time delay unless a larger number of 
operators is employed at each station to ensure that the data 
are transmitted in time to be utilized in current analysis. 
Existing facilities could cope, however, if the cut-off time 
for receipt of meteorological data in the GTS could be extended 
to 24 hours.  The Working Group on Logistics endorsed a 
recommendation concerning this problem in agreement with a 
recommendation of a WMO meeting held in Singapore in February 
and March 1978. It is estimated that if the cut-off time were 
extended to 24 hours, more than 90 per cent of Antarctic 
meteorological data would be distributed on the GTS network.

In addition to this suggestion, a Subcommittee on 
Telecommunications was established by the Working Group on 
Logistics with the following terms of reference:

    to examine existing equipment and to recommend means 
of improving technical compatibility by standardization 
of such techniques as frequency shift modulation, 
telegraph speeds, selection of sidebands, frequencies, 
error correction systems, and by liaison with ships 
and aircraft;

    to examine existing operating procedures with a view 
to standardization and production of an operating 
manual for recommended use by Antarctic stations;

    to examine existing emergency procedures and to 
recommend means of improvement;

    to examine the cost/benefit of using satellites for 
the transmission of meteorological data from the 
Antarctic into the Global Telecommunications System 
and/or national centres;  and to identify the users 
of meteorological data and their requirements.
