ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

AGENDA ITEM 10                          ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)
                                         September 25, 1979

                                         ORIGINAL:  ENGLISH

EFFECTS OF TOURISTS AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
EXPEDITIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

The Representatives,

Recalling that Annex A to Recommendation VIII-9 was to be discussed at the
Ninth Consultative Meeting and that a draft text of a Statement of Accepted
Practices and the Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty was referred
from the Ninth to the Tenth Consultative Meeting;

Recognising that adventurous individuals organizing private, non-commercial
expeditions to Antarctica may contact other Consultative Parties, asking
for help or advice, without first approaching the government of the Con-
sultative Party in whose territory the expedition is being organized;

Recognising, also, that in considering responses to requests for help
from such expeditions, an important concern is the possibility that such
expeditions may, in cases of emergency, involve the offices administering
their Antarctic programs in financial or material loss;

Recognising that suitably qualified guides accompanying commercially
organized Antarctic tours would both benefit the tourists and help to
ensure that the conservation and environmental measures adopted by the
Consultative Parties were observed;

While reaffirming the traditional Antarctic principle that expeditions
render all assistance feasible in the event of an emergency request for
help, noted that commercial overflights of Antarctica are operating in
a particularly hazardous environment, where aircraft operation systems
normally available elsewhere in the world are at a minimum, and where
emergencies could arise beyond the capacity of permanent Antarctic
expeditions to respond adequately;
ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)                                      
                                                 - 2 -

Recommend to their governments that:

                                                 I

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTED PRACTICES AND THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE ANT-
ARCTIC TREATY

They insert the following statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant
Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty in Annex A to Recommendation VIII-9 for the
purposes set out in operative paragraph 1 of that Recommendation.

Introduction

The following statement is intended for the guidance of all those who visit the
Antarctic.

The Antarctic Treaty was negotiated in Washington in 1959 by the states which
had established scientific stations in the Antarctic during the International
Geophysical Year (1957-58) in order to perpetuate the close scientific co-
operation which had marked that period. It provides, inter alia, that the
Antarctic shall be used for peaceful purposes only and that any measures of a
military nature shall be prohibited; that there shall be freedom of scientific
investigation and that the results of such investigation shall be made freely
available; that nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste in
the Antarctic is prohibited; that notification of an expedition to the Ant-
arctic shall be provided in advance; and that each of the Antarctic Treaty
Governments shall exert appropriate efforts to the end that no one engages in
any activity in Antarctica contrary to the principles or purposes of the Ant-
arctic Treaty.

Recommendations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings

The Treaty requires that meetings shall be held from time to time to consider
and recommend measures in furtherance of its principles and objectives. Amongst
these are measures of which all those who enter the Antarctic Treaty Area, both
those sponsored by Governments and those not so sponsored, should be aware.
The following notes indicate the nature of these measures and the reader is
referred to the Recommendations of successive Consultative Meetings for the
details.

Protection of the Antarctic Environment

The ecosystem of the Antarctic Treaty Area is particularly vulnerable to human
interference and the Antarctic derives much of its importance from its uncon-
taminated and undisturbed condition and the effects it has on adjacent areas
and the global environment. For these reasons the Consultative Parties have
recognised their special responsibility for the protection of the environment
and the wise use of the Treaty Area.

Conservation of Wildlife

Wildlife in the Antarctic is in almost all cases tame and is therefore
peculiarly vulnerable to disturbance.  Both animals and plants are living
under extreme conditions and great care has to be taken to avoid upsetting the
natural ecological system.  Wildlife and plants are protected by five mechanisms
under the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)

- 3 -

Protection of native fauna

The killing, wounding, capturing or molesting of any native mammal or native mammal or native bird is prohibited except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued under the authority of a Participating Government.

Harmful Interference

Every effort shall be made to minimize harmful interference with the normal living conditions of any native mammal or bird.

Specially Protected Species

Two species of seal, Fur Seals and the Ross Seal have been designated as Specially Protected Species and permits may only be issued in relation to these species in accordance with certain restrictive criteria.

Specially Protected Areas

Representative areas of biologically outstanding scientific interest have been designated as Specially Protected Areas in order to preserve their unique natural ecological system (see Annex I). No person may enter such an Area except in accordance with a permit issued under the authority of a Participating Government. Such permits may only be issued in accordance with certain restrictive criteria.

Introduction of non-indigenous species, parasites and diseases

No species of animal or plant not indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty Area may be brought into the Area except in accordance with a permit issued under the authority of a Participating Government.

Pelagic Sealing

The Consultative Parties, having regard to the possibly damaging ecological consequences that might arise from the exploitation of Antarctic seals for commercial purposes, negotiated the 1972 Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals. This is an instrument separate from the Antarctic Treaty.

Waste Disposal

In addition to the measures for the conservation of Antarctic wildlife outlined above, the Consultative Parties have prepared a Code of Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions and Station Activities including, inter alia, recommended procedures for waste disposal (see Annex II).

Protection of Historic Monuments

Every effort should be made to prevent damage or destruction to any historical remains or monuments. The Consultative Parties have listed a number of such monuments for special protection (see Annex III).
ANT/X/24 (Rev. 2)
- 4 -

Facilitation of Scientific Research

Sites of Special Scientific Interest

There are many scientific investigations being carried out in the Ant-
arctic which could suffer from accidental interference.  For example,
long term studies of the population dynamics of a penguin colony may
require that visitors be kept to an absolute minimum; intensive
scientific work in one may require that a nearby ecologically similar
area be kept undisturbed and uncontaminated for reference purposes or
certain electromagnetically "quiet" areas where sensitive instruments
have been installed for recording minute signals associated with upper
atmosphere studies may require that visits to the site should be kept
to a minimum.

For these and similar reasons the Consultative Parties have designated
certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest in the Antarctic (see Annex
IV).  Each site is subject to a management plan designed to protect the
particular scientific investigations being undertaken.  Persons wishing
to visit Sites of Special Scientific Interest should, well in advance,
consult any national office responsible for the administration of a
permanent Antarctic scientific expedition or, if this is not possible,
should consult the station commander of the scientific station nearest
the site which it is intended to visit.

Tourism and Expeditions Not Sponsored by an Antarctic Treaty Government

An important feature of the Antarctic Treaty is that cooperation under
it is facilitated by the prior exchange of information about planned
activities.  The Treaty commitment covers any expedition organised in
or proceeding to the Antarctic from the territory of any state which is
a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.  A consolidated list of
the information to be exchanged is attached at Annex V.

It is a traditional Antarctic principle that expeditions render all
assistance feasible in the event of an emergency.  There are a number
of unoccupied huts and refuges in the Antarctic which may be used by
any expedition  in an emergency, in which case the authorities who
maintain the hut or refuge should be informed of what use has been
made of it.

Special measures relating to tourist and other non-scientific expeditions

The number of non-governmental expeditions to the Antarctic is steadily
increasing and there is a tendency for these expeditions to concentrate
on the more easily accessible parts of the Antarctic.  Frequent visits
to scientific stations or undue dependence on the facilities of such
stations can prejudice their scientific work.  It is therefore required
that the organizers of a tourist or other non-scientific expedition
should furnish notice as soon as possible, through diplomatic channels
to any other Government whose station the expedition plans to visit.
Any such Government may refuse to accept a visit to a station which it
maintains or may lay down conditions upon which it would grant permis-
sion including inter alia, that:
- 5 -

(i) reasonable assurance be given of compliance with the provision of the Antarctic Treaty, measures adopted under it and the conditions applicable at stations to be visited;

(ii) tour organizers should ensure that prior to the commencement of the tour or expedition, procedures and systems for adequate telecommunications have been confirmed with the offices administering the Antarctic stations to be visited;

(iii) final arrangements to visit any station be made with that station between twenty-four and seventy-two hours in advance of the expected time of arrival;

(iv) all tourists and other visitors comply with any conditions or restrictions on their movements which the station commander may stipulate for their safety or to safeguard scientific programmes being undertaken at or near the station;

(v) visitors must not enter Specially Protected Areas and must respect designated historic monuments;

(vi) tour organizers should report to the Governments whose stations they have visited, after completion of the tour, the name and nationality of the ship, the name of the captain, the itinerary of each separate cruise, the number of tourists accompanying each cruise and the dates and places at which landings were made in the Antarctic Treaty Area, with the number of persons landed on each occasion.

LIST OF ANNEXES

ANNEX I     Specially Protected Areas.  See Annex B to Recommendation III-VIII (Antarctic Treaty Handbook, pp. 2107-2120).

ANNEX II    Extract from the Code of Conduct for Antarctic expeditions and station activities relating to waste disposal. See Annex to Recommendation VIII-11, paragraph 1 (Antarctic Treaty Handbook, p. 1103).

ANNEX III   List of Historic Monuments.  See Annex to Recommendation VII-9 (Antarctic Treaty Handbook, pp. 1302-05).

ANNEX IV    Sites of Special Scientific Interest.  See Management Plans annexed to Recommendation VIII-4 (Antarctic Treaty Handbook, pp. 3103-17).

ANNEX V     Standard format for the annual exchanges of information.  See Annex to Recommendation VIII-6 (Antarctic Treaty Handbook, pp. 5102-04).
- 6 -

GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS TO THE ANTARCTIC

Antarctica and its surrounding islands are one of the few places in 
the world which are still relatively unchanged by man's activities.
Scientists still know very little about the ecological situation in 
the Antarctic.  At the present early stage in research on these matters,
some provisional restrictions and precautions may seem unnecessarily 
harsh, but preliminary studies indicate the need for great caution.

By following a few very simple requests, you can help preserve this 
region for future generations to enjoy.

1.  Avoid disturbing wildlife any more than is necessary;
    especially do not:-
    walk on vegetation;
    tough or handle birds or seals;
    startle or chase any bird from its nest;
    wander indiscriminately through penguin or other bird 
    colonies.

2.  Litter of all types must be kept to a minimum.  Retain all 
    litter (film wrappers, tissue, food scraps, tins, lotion 
    bottles, etc.) in a bag or pocket to be disposed of on 
    board your ship.  Avoid throwing tin cans and other trash 
    off the ship near land.

3.  Do not use sporting guns.

4.  Do not introduce plants or animals into the Antarctic.

5.  Do not collect eggs or fossils.

6.  Do not enter any of the Specially Protected Areas and 
    avoid Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

7.  In the vicinity of scientific stations avoid interference 
    with scientific work and do not enter unoccupied buildings 
    or refuges except in an emergency.

8.  Do not paint names or grafitti on rocks or buildings.

9.  Take care of Antarctic historic monuments.

10. When ashore, keep together with your party.
- 7 -

II

PRIVATE NON-COMMERCIAL EXPEDITIONS

If approached for help or advice by a private, non-commercial expedition intending to visit their stations they should request all relevant information about the expedition from the government of the Consultative Party in whose territory the expedition is being organized.

They urge private, non-commercial expeditions to carry adequate insurance cover against the risk of their incurring financial charges or material losses in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

III

TOUR GUIDES

To the extent practicable, they encourage commercial tour operators to carry tour guides with experience of Antarctic conditions, who are aware of the considerations which underlie the measures taken by Consultative Parties for the conservation of wildlife and protection of the Antarctic environment.

IV

COMMERCIAL OVERFLIGHTS IN ANTARCTICA

They notify commercial aircraft operators that the recent increase in tourist overflight activity:

    (i)     exceeds existing capabilities for air traffic control, 
            communications and search and rescue in the Antarctic;

   (ii)     may interfere with normal operational flights in support 
            of expeditions engaged in ongoing scientific programs in 
            Antarctica;

  (iii)     would exceed the capacity of their Antarctic operations 
            to respond adequately in the event of an unplanned 
            emergency landing.

* * *
