ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 10                                  ANT/X/8,
                                                September 17, 1979

                                                ORIGINAL:  Spanish

THE EFFECTS OF TOURISM AND
NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

WORKING DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY THE CHILEAN DELEGATION

In accordance with the provisions of point 1 of Recommendation VIII-9,Annex
"A" thereof must contain the "Declaration on Current Practices and Pertinent
Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty," which must be known and observed by all
persons entering the area of application of the Antarctic Treaty, whether
sponsored or not by their respective governments.

In this way, such persons will be required to adapt their activities to the
standards established from the application of the principles and purposes of
the Antarctic Treaty and of the recommendations adopted by its Consultative
Parties in order to prevent the gradual disturbance of the national ecologi-
cal systems, about which there is still insufficient knowledge.

It should be recalled here that in Article X of the Antarctic Treaty, the
Contracting Parties "undertake to exert appropriate efforts, consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations, to the end that no one engages in
any activity in Antarctica contrary to the principles or purposes of the
Treaty."

It is the opinion of the Chilean Delegation that the annex in question should
be made eminently practical and easy to understand, in view of the tourist
status of those for whom it is intended to serve as a guide during their stay
in Antarctica.

This annex could contain a brief statement of the basic principles set forth
in the Antarctic Treaty, such as the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes
only, the freedom of scientific investigation, the protection of the environ-
ment, the ban on nuclear explosions, the control over Antarctic expeditions,
and the commitment by the Consultative Parties to ensure that the principles
and purposes of the Treaty are observed by third parties.

The annex should make immediate reference to the responsibilities of the
organizers of tourist expeditions, as contained in the various recommenda-
tions, particularly those referred to in Rec. VIII-9, which require them to
disembark only in those areas and to visit those stations for which they
have received authorization.
ANT/X/8

- 2 -

Similarly, those in charge of the bases or stations could be given the 
authority to issue visitor's permits and to supervise the conduct of the 
tourists during their stay in order to prevent any damage to or interference 
in the investigations or work being carried out at such bases or stations, 
all in accordance with the recommendations on the subject.

This would be followed by a generic listing by subject, for quick reference, 
of the "do's and don'ts" of the tourist.

1. Protection of the environment

The Antarctic Treaty and the recommendations adopted by the Consultative 
Parties for the protection of the Antarctic environment and its ecosystems 
both express their fundamental concern for ensuring their stability and 
permanency.  This concern has resulted in the adoption of a series of stand-
ards of behavior for persons entering the treaty area.  They are prohibited 
from:

    a) Contaminating the environment with waste matter, residue, or the like;

    b) Introducing species, whether animal or plant, which are foreign to the 
environment;

    c) Leaving inscriptions or any type of signs in the Antarctic territory.

2. Conservation of flora and fauna

    a) As a general rule, it is forbidden to hunt, disturb, destroy, or cause 
damage of any kind to the indigenous plants and animals.

3. Specially protected areas

    a) Tourists are strictly forbidden to enter these areas.

4. Places of special scientific interest

In general, tourists are not permitted in these places without a 
special permit issued by the authority of a government which is a Consulta-
tive Party to the Treaty.

5. Historic monuments

The principle of preserving and protecting the historic monuments 
found in the Treaty area is set forth in Recommendation VI-14, and the 
monuments themselves are listed in Recommendation VII-9.  Consequently, 
tourists should refrain from any act which might in any way damage or cause 
injury to those sites already designated as monuments or to any which may be 
designated as such in the future.

6. New islands

The creation of new islands requires the Consultative Parties, in 
accordance with Recommendation VI-11, to adopt special protective measures
ANT/X/8

- 3 -

to prevent their contamination by human contact. Tourists should therefore 
refrain from disembarking on these islands.

Finally, this annex could also include the right of tourist expeditions to 
enjoy the traditional Antarctic principle of assistance in time of emergency, 
and authorization to use unoccupied shelters, both in accordance with Recom-
mendations I-9 and III-2 of the Consultative Parties.

* * *
