ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA


SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 8                                  ANT/X/16
                                               September 20, 1979

                                               ORIGINAL:  Spanish

USE OF REMOTE SENSING TECHNIQUES FOR IMPROVED UNDERSTANDING
AND PROTECTION OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES OF THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA

DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY THE DELEGATION OF CHILI TO THE TENTH
CONSULTATIVE MEETING OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

1. Introduction

This report points out various potential applications of remote sensing
techniques aimed at improved understanding and protection"of Antarctic
natural resources by reviewing the highlights of the Remote Sensing Program
initiated by Chile in the Antarctic Peninsula for this purpose (figure 1).

This technology is based on observation of the earth's surface from a
distance by means of photographs and images obtained at many levels
(satellites, aircraft, land) at different times (multitemporal) and on
different bands or regions of the electromagnetic spectrum (multispectral:
ultraviolet, visible, infra-red, microwave, etc.). This information is
supplemented by ground data in order to establish quantitative relations
for observed phenomena. These ground data may be collected by using con-
ventional methods or automated systems such as the Satellite Data Collec-
tion Systems '(DCS).

The use of remote sensing techniques in hard-to-reach isolated areas is
particularly successful since positive results can be achieved rapidly,
economically, and safely. The superiority of these techniques over con-
ventional systems has been proved in countless experiments conducted all
over the planet.

The remote sensing program initiated by Chile in 1977 is designed to
achieve improved understanding and protection of the natural resources
of the Antarctic Peninsula. This program is being carried out primarily
by the Chilean Antarctic Institute in cooperation with such other national
ANT/X/16

- 2 -

institutions as the University of Chile (School of Physical Sciences and 
Mathematics), the Aerophotogrammetric Service of the Chilean Air Force, 
Antarctic Units of the Chilean Army, Air Force, and Navy, as well as other 
entities.  This program is now operating at the three levels of observation 
used in remote sensing although initial emphasis has been placed on opening 
a network of automated sensing stations which send environmental informa- 
tion to Santiago via satellite.  From there these data will be sent to the 
President Frei Antarctic Regional Meteorological Center which will dis- 
tribute them to the Antarctic bases of its region and to other Antarctic 
regional centers.

It is hoped that in 1980 it will be possible to make increased use of images 
and photographs obtained from aircraft since by that time the landing con- 
ditions for aircraft at Chilean Antarctic bases will be substantially im- 
proved.  It is also hoped that increased use can be made of multispectral 
images taken by different satellites such as GOES (36,000 km altitude), NOAA, 
TIROS-N, Nimbus, and Landsat (900 km altitude).  These observations can be 
supplemented by detailed air observations in addition to ground data col- 
lected by DCS.  In the interim valuable experience is being acquired through 
projects conducted in continental Chile.  Multispectral photographs and 
Chilean Air Force are being supplemented by images obtained from satellites, 
in particular the Landsat satellite owing to its great resolution (approxi- 
mately 80 meters as compared to 1 km for GOES and NOAA satellite images).

The preliminary results achieved and the potential applications under con- 
sideration point to the advisability of extending the use of remote sensing 
techniques to the entire Antarctic as a valid means to achieve improved 
understanding and effectively protect Antarctic natural resources.

This report will next discuss background information about remote sensing 
techniques and then cover their potential applications in Antarctica, citing 
earlier Chilean experiments as examples.

2.  Background Information on Remote Sensing Techniques

As the name indicates, these techniques are designed to gather information 
at a distance from objects by means of devices known as remote sensors which 
can be mounted on satellites and aircraft or placed at ground level.  Their 
use is particularly effective in isolated and distant areas such as Antarctica. 
As shown in figure 2, there are three stages in the handling of information 
obtained with these techniques: (a) collection; (b) processing; (c) analysis 
or interpretation.

Information is collected by photo-optic or electro-optic remote sensors. 
In the former, information is registered directly on photographic film which 
is actually the sensing element.  These sensors originate photographs.  In 
the latter, the sensing element is one or more electronic detectors.  A prior 
process of electronic conversion is required to register the information.  It 
can be recorded on digital tape or on photographic filn:.  These sensors 
generate images.  According to the energy source used, the remote sensors 
can be passive or active.  Passive sensors pick up energy reflected or emitted
- 3 - 

ANT/X/16

by objects (energy from the sun).  Active sensors pick up energy reflected
by objects.  As a result they have their own source of energy, as in the
case of radar.  Normally satellites must be equipped with electro-optic
sensors since they send their information (images) to land by means of
codified electronic pulses.  The most commonly used remote sensors are:
(a) multispectral sweeper, a passive electro-optic sensor which obtains
several simultaneous images over a single area on different spectral bands;
(b) multi-band camera, a passive photo-optic sensor which achieves the same
objective; (c) thermal sweeper, a passive electro-optic sensor which picks
up energy emitted by objects in the region 3-5 μm or 8-12 μm corresponding to
distant or thermal infra-red, thus registering images with relative differences
of temperature; (d) airborne lateral sweep radar, an active electro-optic
sensor which works in the 3 cm zone, gathering images even under extremely
cloudy conditions; (e) many sensors, which gather information in the zone
of microwaves (passive and active), gamma radiation and other zones can be
mounted on airplanes or satellites.

In addition to the information contained in photographs and images, quantita-
tive environmental data must be collected at ground level.  In isolated,
hard-to-reach areas the most practical method is to use the DCS's which
make it possible to perform this work safely, continuously, reliably,
economically, and almost instantaneously (figure 3).  The DCS's are com-
posed of a network of autonomous sensing stations powered by batteries
charged with solar panels or wind generators called Data Collection Plat-
forms (DCP's).  The DCP's are installed at sites selected by researchers
and can normally operate with eight different environmental sensors of the
appropriate type.  The researcher selects the intervals for the reading and
transmission of data from the DCP to the satellite, although to a large ex-
tent these variables depend on the type of satellite used (polar, orbit or
geostationary).  The satellite retransmits the data from the DCP's to a
receiving station where this information is processed and distributed to
researchers in adequate computable formats.  The Chilean program is cur-
rently using Landsat (polar orbit) and GOES (geostationary) satellites to
collect information from DCP's installed in the Antarctic Peninsula.  The
Landsat satellites makes it possible to collect every 12 hours data from
readings taken every three or four hours.  The GOES satellite has a greater
capability and can collect data from the DCP's at any moment, although nor-
mally it does so every three hours, with readings taken every 15 minutes.
Annex A of the documentation presented by the Chilean Delegation in the
Telecommunications Section of the Tenth Consultative Meeting contains ample
information on these systems, preliminary results, and prospects of the
Chilean program underway in the Antarctic Peninsula.  It should be noted
that it is possible to work with fixed or mobile DCP's (ocean buoys and
atmospheric balloons).

After the information has been acquired, it must be processed and put in
adequate formats for interpretation by researchers.  Photographic or
digital processing of the collected information will be used, as appropriate.
ANT/X/16

- 4 -

During the data analysis or interpretation phase, the researcher will use 
analog (visual or photographic) and digital (automated or computerized) 
interpretation techniques. As a rule, analog techniques are more economi-
cal and easier to use but digital techniques give more complete and 
accurate information.

The following example can serve to illustrate these points.

Photograph 1 corresponds to an image obtained by a GOES satellite geo-
stationary at 75° W over the equator at an altitude of 36,000 km.  The 
image was obtained in the thermal infrared band and it therefore provides 
an excellent means to study atmospheric meteorological conditions when 
supplemented by a simultaneous image in the visible bank.  The space re-
solution of these images is very good in view of the observation altitude 
of nearly 1 km. These images can be obtained every 30 minutes, which makes 
them particularly appropriate for the study of very dynamic phenomena in the 
atmosphere. Photograph 2 corresponds to an image obtained by a NOAA 
satellite over the Antarctic Peninsula, also in the thermal infrared band. 
This polar satellite takes images every 12 hours, with a space resolution 
of 1 km. Photograph 3 corresponds to an image from the Landsat satellite 
over Santiago and its surroundings (altitude: 900 km).  These images have 
an excellent space resolution (approx. 80 m) and are therefore particularly 
suited to the study of natural resources.

Photographs 4a, 4b, and 4c show three observation bands of the Landsat 
satellite, as originally obtained. An analog composition of these bands 
gives the results shown in photographs 5a and 5b, where various resources 
appear according to the color combination chosen. A digital amplification 
of an image section provides the maximum amount of detail one can obtain 
from such images and enables one to identify such features as those shown 
on photographs 6a, 6b, 6c, and 6d. For greater detail one must resort to 
photographs and images obtained from aircraft. In this connection photo-
graph 7, which was taken with a multiband camera (with observation bands 
similar to those of the Landsat satellite), clearly shows the fog penetra-
tion capacity of close infrared and the great sensitivity to vegetation in 
that spectral band. Photograph 8 corresponds to an image obtained with a 
thermal sweeper over a part of Santiago. The change of temperature of the 
canal as it passes through an industrial area is visible, which demonstrates 
how useful this spectral band can be to study the pollution of Antarctic 
waters (through oil spills, for instance). Both photographs were taken by 
the Chilean Air Force (Aerophotogrammetric Service). Lastly, at the level 
of observation providing the greatest detail (pinpoint), one finds 
automated stations measuring environmental parameters in remote areas and 
transmitting their data to a central receiving station via satellite. 
Photographs 9a, 9b, 9c, and 9d come from one of the automated stations (DCP) 
installed by Chile in the Antarctic Peninsula, in this case on the coast of 
the Weddell Sea.
- 5 -
ANT/X/16

3. Some Important Applications Of Remote Sensing Techniques For The 
Study And Protection Of Antarctic National Resources

The Remote Sensing Program developed by Chile on the Antarctic Peninsula is 
multidisciplinary, that is, it is intended to support the various scientific 
programs developed by Chile in this region. Some applications which are 
under consideration are:

(a) Glaciology

The use of automatic sensor stations (DCP's) is very helpful in 
continuous, year-round collection of valuable quantitative 
information about the behavior of glaciers and Antarctic ice 
masses in general. NOAA satellite images make it possible to 
study ice changes continuously (images every 12 hours).  LANDSAT 
(every 18 days); photograph 10 shows an example taken over the South 
Ice Field, in southern continental Chile, in which sediment 
deposits carried by the glaciers to the surrounding lakes show 
up clearly. Highly detailed air observations with a multiband 
camera and a thermal sweeper provide important information about 
Antarctic ice.

(b) Environmental Contamination

The LANDSAT images make it possible to observe these phenomena in 
relatively clear detail. Photographs 11a and 11c show some 
examples. Nonetheless, with small-scale phenomena, it is necessary 
to use remote sensors mounted on aircraft, such as the multiband 
camera and thermal sweeper, and their effectiveness is shown in 
photograph 8. Phenomena such as oil spills in Antarctic waters can 
be easily studied. In the event that continuous measurement of 
certain parameters is required (e.g. dissolved oxygen, pH, etc.), 
the use of Satellite Data Collection Systems is indicated.

(c) Animal Resources

In general, detailed observations are required, as provided by remote 
sensors mounted on aircraft. The thermal sweeper makes it possible 
to quantify the number of individuals due to the high contrast in 
temperature between the individuals and their surrounding environment. 
Multispectral observations also provide important information about 
the characteristics of their habitats.  The LANDSAT satellite images 
make it possible to locate the areas where the animals live on a 
regional scale.  The use of DCP's to collect specific environmental 
parameters should not be overlooked.

(d) Plant Resources

The high sensitivity of near infra-red (0.7 - 0.8 μm and 0.8 - 1.1 μm) 
to the presence of plant life makes the use of the multiband camera 
particularly appropriate for detailed observation of algae and other
ANT/X/16

- 6 -

organisms. Recently the use of LANDSAT images have made it possible to 
locate, in a regional context, the areas of interest under study. 
Furthermore it is possible to measure specific parameters such as 
salinity, pH, temperatures at various depths, velocity and direction 
of ocean currents, etc. with the installation of DCP's. Surface 
variations in water temperature can also be observed in detail with 
a thermal sweeper mounted on an aircraft, which would also be of 
importance in studying animal resources.

In photographs 6c and 6d, as well as 11b, the capacity for distinguishing 
vegetation from the LANDSAT satellite can be seen. Of course an aerial 
multiband camera would make more accurate studies possible.

(e) Geothermal Activity

Any geothermal activity with surface manifestation can be studied by using 
remote sensors operating in the thermal infra-red band. In this respect, 
the LANDSAT satellite will make it possible to obtain high-resolution 
thermal images (200 meters approximately, by comparison with 3 or more km. 
by weather satellites). The thermal band of LANDSAT 3, currently in 
orbit, is not usable. Nonetheless it is hoped that it will be available 
on LANDSAT 4, which will be launched in 1980. More detailed observations 
are furnished by thermal sweepers mounted on aircraft. The use of 
multispectral images and photographs taken in the visible zone and near 
infra-red (LANDSAT images and multiband aerial camera) should not be 
overlooked, since in the near infra-red it is possible to perceive degrees 
of snow thaw ("wet" and "dry" snow), as shown on photograph 10b, a 
phenomenon directly related to geothermal activity. The use of DCP's to 
collect continuous and detailed information about volcanic parameters is 
very helpful for improved study of these phenomena, including the 
construction of models for predicting emergency situations, if necessary.

(f) Mineral Resources.

This technology is also of great use in this field. Although certainly 
observation is made more difficult by the permanent presence of ice, it 
is possible to make an accurate study of phenomena which are indirectly 
related to mineral resources (sediment movement, observation of exposed 
rock surfaces, thermal anomalies, etc.).

(g) Hydrography and Oceanography

Basically the use of satellite and aircraft thermal images makes it 
possible to observe and study thermal anomalies on the ocean surface. 
The use of DCP's to collect valuable related information with such 
parameters as velocity and direction of ocean currents, tides, wave 
altitude and period, ocean temperature, salinity, and meteorological 
parameters, etc., are of incalculable assistance. These DCP's can be 
fixed or mobile, as necessary.
ANT/X/16

- 7 -

(h) Meteorology

Meteorological conditions can be studied accurately with continuous observations by satellites such as the GOES (every 30 minutes for zones between 75°N and 75°S latitude approximately), NOAA (every 12 hours), Nimbus (every 12 hours). These meteorological images are obtained in the visible and thermal infra-red bands of the electro-magnetic spectrum. The use of DCP's for automatic collection of surface meteorological data (and atmospheric balloons, if necessary) yields particularly satisfactory results. Chile is deploying a network of DCP's throughout the entire Antarctic Peninsula in order to collect information from isolated sites throughout the year.

4. Conclusions

Remote sensing techniques are particularly suited for studying natural resources in isolated areas, making it possible to achieve short-term positive results in an economical and efficient manner.

The remote sensing program developed by Chile on the Antarctic Peninsula, intended for the study and conservation of natural resources in this Antarctic zone, shows promising preliminary results, and therefore the use of these techniques will be considerably intensified in the following years.

In view of the characteristics of this technology and the positive results of its use, it can be highly recommended for solving problems pertaining to improved understanding and conservation of natural resources throughout Antarctica.

*   *   *
- 8 -

FIGURE 1.  REMOTE SENSING PROGRAM DEVELOPED BY CHILE
          ON THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA

Consideration is being given to gathering data at three levels:

Satellite, aircraft, and land (the last by using Satellite Data
Collection Systems, DCSs).
DATA COLLECTION                  DATA PROCESSING                  DATA ANALYSIS

 
1 SATELLITES AND/OR AIRCRAFT     
  LOCAL LAND DATA (D.C.S.)        
                                 2 RECEIVING                      
                                   STATION                       
                                                         PHOTOS AND   
                                                         IMAGES       
                                 3 DATA                           
                                   PROCESSING                     
                                                         DIGITAL      
                                                         TAPES        
                                                        
                                                        4 MULTISPECTRAL 
                                                          DATA         
                                                          RETRIEVAL    
                                                          SYSTEM       
                                                         "IMAGEN 100" 
                                                         OR OTHER     
                                                         DEVICES      
                                                                      
                                                         MAPS BY      
                                                         SUBJECT      
                                                         MATTER       
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          

1 
10

DATA COLLECTION PLATFORM

SATELLITE
Reception
Modulation
Transmission

NOTE:  Some polar-orbiting or similar 
satellites can record DCS data 
(ex: TIROS-N) although usually 
the satellite acts like a real 
time-link.  In some cases. (ex: 
GOES, geostationary) it is pos-
sible to query the DCP at any 
time from the receiving station 
by satellite.

LAND ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
(precipitation, soil and air humidity
wave height, seismic and activity,
etc.)

(1) Data source:  any environmental parameter

(2) The sensors relay analog or digital input to the DCP

(3) The DCP puts the data from sensors into the correct 
format, codes it, and transmits it to the satellite

RECEIVING AND PROCESSING
STATION

Recording
Demodula-
tion and 
coding
Data
Processing

Clock

DCS DATA DISTRIBUTION TO USERS
(via telex, remote computational 
terminal, telephone, mail, etc.)

Computer
printout
Magnetic
tapes
Computer
cards

DCS FINAL OUTPUT

FIGURE 3.  CHART OF A SATELLITE DATA COLLECTION SYSTEM
- 11 -

PHOTOGRAPHS ARE AVAILABLE FROM THE DELEGATION OF CHILE

*   *   *
ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

ANNEX TO
ANT/X/16
September 24, 1979

ORIGINAL:  Spanish

ANNEX TO THE PHOTOGRAPHS IN DOCUMENT ANT/X/16, SUBMITTED BY
THE DELEGATION OF CHILE

PICTURE 1.  GOES SATELLITE IMAGE OVER SOUTH AMERICA.
Taken at an altitude of 36,000 kn., which can be done every
30 minutes in the visible spectral bands and the thermal
infra-red spectral bands (as in this case).

PICTURE 2.  NOAA SATELLITE IMAGE OVER THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA.
Taken from an altitude of approximately 1,000 km., which
can be done every 12 hours in the visible spectral bands and the
thermal infra-red bands (as in this case).

PICTURE 3.  LANDSAT SATELLITE IMAGE OVER SANTAIGO AND ITS ENVIRONS.
Taken from an altitude of approximately 900 km., which can be
done every 18 days, in various visible and near infra-red
spectral bands.  In this case, the scale is 1:1,000,000 and
the spectral band is MSS-5 or red (0.6-0.7 μm).

PICTURE 4.  LANDSAT IMAGE OVER SANTIAGO AND ENVIRONS
(scale approximately 1:3,500,000)

PICTURE 4a. MSS-4 or green band (0.5-0.6 μm).
PICTURE 4b. MSS-5 or red band (0.6-0.7 μm).
PICTURE 4c. MSS-7 or infra-red band (0.8-1.1 μm).

PICTURE 5a. COLOR ANALOG COMPOSITION FOR LANDSAT IMAGE OF PICTURES 4a, 4b,
and 4c.  The vegetation shows up in green tones.

PICTURE 5b. ANOTHER COLOR ANALOG COMPOSITION FOR THE SAME LANDSAT IMAGE
OF PICTURES 4a, 4b, and 4c.  The natural vegetation shows up in
pink tones, and the crops show up in dark red tones.

PICTURE 6.  DIGITAL OR ELECTRONIC ENLARGEMENT OF CERTAIN ZONES OF THE
SAME LANDSAT IMAGE.
- 2 -

PICTURE 6a. Santiago, with its center or zone of high density construction 
        shown in red (the maximum possible enlargement is shown in the 
        lower right panel).

PICTURE 6b. Santiago, showing a ring of medium density construction.

PICTURE 6c. Aconcagua River valley (The Andes) showing various crops.

PICTURE 6d. Aconcagua River valley (The Andes), showing other crops.

PICTURE 7.  MULTISPECTRAL AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN WITH A MULTIBAND CAMERA 
        ABOVE A PARK IN SANTIAGO (Aerophotogrammetry Service of the 
        Chilean Air Force).
        Altitude:  1,500 feet.
        Band 1:  blue (approximately 0.4-0.5 μm)
        Band 2:  green (approximately 0.5-0.6 μm)
        Band 3:  red (approximately 0.6-0.7 μm)
        Band 4:  infra-red (approximately 0.7-0.8 μm)
        Note the ability of Band 4 (infra-red) to penetrate smog and fog.

PICTURE 8a. THERMAL IMAGE OVER A SECTOR OF SANTIAGO TAKEN FROM AN AIRCRAFT 
        (Aerophotogrammetry Service of the Chilean Air Force).
        Altitude:  1,000 feet and 140 knots.
        The San Carlos canal (A) goes by an industrial plant and its 
        waters are polluted (B), as it flows into the Mapocho River.

PICTURE 8b. Enlargement of an area in the same image as 8a.

PICTURE 9.  INSTALLATION OF A METEOROLOGICAL DATA COLLECTION PLATFORM ON 
        THE WEDDELL SEACOAST  (January/February, 1979)

PICTURE 9a. ANTARCTIC LANDSCAPE SHOWING THE MOUNTAIN CHAIN WHICH SEPARATES 
        THE BELLINGHAUSEN AND WEDDELL SEACOASTS (from where the 
        picture was taken).

PICTURE 9b. Location of the DCP on the rocks of the Weddell Seacoast.

PICTURE 9c. DCP installation showing 2 solar panels (20 watts c/m), LANDSAT 
        antenna, and meteorological sensors.

PICTURE 9d. Detail of (A) LANDSAT antenna, (B) air temperature, (C) air 
        humidity, (D) solar radiation, (E) wind velocity and 
        direction.

PICTURE 10a ANALOG COMPOSITION OF LANDSAT IMAGE OVER A LARGE SOUTHERN 
        ICE FIELD, IN SOUTHERN CHILE
        The snow and ice are black, and the water with particles in 
        suspension (sediments) are shown in pink tones.
- 3 -

PICTURE 10b. ANALOG COMPOSITION OF LANDSAT IMAGE OVER A CHAIN OF 
VOLCANOS IN SOUTHERN CHILE (Villarica Lake)
The snow shows up black, and the melting snow and areas with 
damp soil show up in dark and light blue respectively.

PICTURE 11a. ANALOG COMPOSITION OF LANDSAT IMAGE OVER RAPEL DAM AND 
ENVIRONS NEAR SANTIAGO showing sediments in blue tones, 
coastal zones (sand) in bluish tones; medium altitude 
zones (precordilleran) in pink tones; crops in dark red and 
natural vegetation in coffee tones.

PICTURE 11b. ANOTHER ANALOG COMPOSITION OF THE SAME IMAGE, showing vegetation 
in green tones.

PICTURE 11c. LANDSAT IMAGE OVER GRAN CARRERA LAKE IN SOUTHERN CHILE 
(bordering on Argentina).  The presence of solid particles 
in the water (sediments) shows up proportionately in green 
tones.  The snow shows up black, and the dark green borders 
correspond to melting snow.

*   *   *
