ANTARCTIC TREATY                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                         DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 5                                      ANT/X/42
                                                         October 1, 1979

                                                         ORIGINAL: English

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH,
TECHNOLOGY AND THE PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT

(Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom Delegation)

1. Some papers submitted on this agenda item suggest that decisions as to whether
the environmental consequences of mineral activity are acceptable or not can be
based on the results of scientific research alone. Such papers appear to argue,
moreover, that it is not possible at this stage to make "scientifically based"
predictions of environmental impact and that, at some time in the future, in
the light of additional scientific data, it would be possible to make reliable
predictions.

2. It seems to the U.K. Delegation more proper to argue that:

    (i) A scientifically based impact prediction can be made at any time
        as long as it makes use of the relevant facts available at that
        time;

   (ii) A prediction of environmental impact is reliable to the extent that
        it makes clear the probable margins of error involved;

  (iii) The margins of error involved in any prediction will decrease as
        knowledge increases;

   (iv) The accuracy of an impact prediction will be greater insofar as:

        (a) the nature of the activity for which a prediction is required
            is more narrowly defined; and

        (b) the area for which a prediction is required is diminished.

(Thus a prediction which is intended to assess the possible impact
of any mineral-related activity anywhere in the Antarctic will
ANT/X/42.

- 2 -

have much larger margins of error than, for example, a prediction 
about the probable consequences of a tanker disaster at a given 
point in the Antarctic);

(v) Having made a prediction of the likely consequences of mineral 
activity, an answer to the question as to whether the risk of such 
consequences are environmentally acceptable or not depends on 
whether it is technologically possible to design such activities in 
a manner which reduces the environmental risks to an acceptable 
minimum.

3. It appears to follow from the above five points that:

    (i) Scientifically based predictions of impact can be made now;

   (ii) Further scientific investigations will reduce the margins of error;

  (iii) At any time in this process the question of environmental accepta-
          bility can properly be put; and that 

   (iv) A decision on environmental acceptability would involve weighing 
          the consequences of the activity itself and the risks of disastrous 
          failure against the capacity of the existing technology to avoid 
          irreversibly damaging consequences for the environment and to reduce 
          the risks of disastrous failure to a reasonable minimum.

4. Thus, in the view of the U.K. Delegation, the question of environmental 
acceptability of mineral activities depends not on scientific prediction alone 
but on encouraging a close and continuing interaction between the scientist on 
the one hand and the technologist/engineer on the other hand.

* * *
