ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA


SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979
WASHINGTON, D.C.

ANT/X/ 49
October 4, 1979
ORIGINAL: English

REPORT OF THE TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
CONTENTS

I.  Final Report

II.  Recommendations adopted at the Tenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

III.  Annexes

1.  Speeches and statement made at the Opening Session

2.  List of Participants

3.  Approval of Consultative Meeting Recommendations

4.  Message from the Consultative Meeting to Stations in Antarctica

5.  Report of the Working Group on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation: Legal and Political Aspects

6.  Report of the Group of Ecological, Technical and Other Related Experts on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation in Antarctica, Washington, June 29, 1979

7.  Final Report of the Third Antarctic Treaty Meeting on Telecommunications, Washington, D.C., September 11-15, 1978.
I

FINAL REPORT
of the
TENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

1. In accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty,
representatives of the Consultative Parties (Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, the Republic of South
Africa, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America) met
in Washington from 17 September to 5 October 1979 to consult together and
consider measures which might be taken to further the principles and
purposes of the Treaty and, where appropriate, make recommendations to
their Governments.

2. Mr. John D. Negroponte, Representative of the United States, acted as
Temporary Chairman of the Meeting pending the election of the Chairman.

3. The Meeting was formally opened by Mrs. Lucy Wilson Benson, Under
Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Technology.

4. Mr. Negroponte was then elected Chairman of the Tenth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. Mr. Carl Grip of the Department of State was
appointed Secretary General of the Meeting.
- 2 -

5. The Opening Session was held in public. Opening statements were delivered 
by the Heads of Delegation. (The opening statements, along with the opening 
address delivered by Under Secretary Benson, are attached at Annex I).

6. The Meeting adopted the following agenda:

(1) Opening of Meeting
(2) Election of Officers
(3) Opening Statements
(4) Adoption of Agenda

(5) Antarctic Resources:  The Question of Mineral Exploration and 
Exploitation

(6) Antarctic Marine Living Resources:  Review of Recommendation IX-2, 
Parts I and III

(7) Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica and the Collection 
and Distribution of Meteorological Data

(8) Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment, Including Review of 
Conservation Measures and Sites of Special Scientific Interest

(9) The Question of Oil Contamination of the Antarctic Marine 
Environment

(10) Effects of Tourism and Non-Government Expeditions in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area

(11) Activities in Antarctica by States that are not Consultative 
Parties Under the Antarctic Treaty

(12) Documents of the Consultative Meetings

(13) The Twentieth Anniversary of the Conclusion of the Antarctic Treaty

(14) Date and Place of Next Consultative Meeting

(15) Any Other Business

(16) Adoption of the Final Report

(17) Closing of Meeting
- 3 -

7. The Meeting considered in Plenary Session all the items on the Agenda 
and appointed six Working Groups, comprising members of all those 
Delegations wishing to participate, as well as a Drafting Committee, 
comprising members of Delegations representing the four Working languages, 
to assist it in reaching conclusions on certain items of the Agenda.  A 
Working Group on the Question of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation: 
Legal and Political Aspects (Agenda Item 5) was chaired by Mr. Norman A. 
Wulf of the United States.  A Working Group on the Question of Mineral 
Exploration and Exploitation: Scientific and Environmental Aspects 
(Agenda Item 5) was chaired by Dr. Robert H. Rutford of the United States. 
A Working Group on Telecommunications (Agenda Item 7) was chaired by 
Mr. Robert B. Thomson of New Zealand.  A Working Group on the Question 
of Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment (Agenda Item 8) was chaired 
by Dr. V. K. Zilanov of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.  A 
Working Group on the Question of Oil Contamination of the Antarctic 
Marine Environment (Agenda Item 9) was chaired by Professor Jean-Paul 
Bloch of France.  A Working Group on Tourism (Agenda Item 10) was chaired 
by Dr. Ricardo Pedro Quadri of Argentina.  The Drafting Committee was 
chaired by Mr. David Edwards of the United Kingdom.

8. The Meeting adopted unanimously the following Recommendations which 
are set forth in this report:

X-1:  Antarctic Mineral Resources

X-2:  Antarctic Marine Living Resources

X-3:  Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica
- 5 -

established in accordance with operative paragraph 3 of Recommendation IX-1
and which met 25 June to 29 June, 1979 in Washington.  The Report of the Group
of Experts is annexed to this Final Report (Annex 6).

The Working Group on the Question of Mineral Resource Exploration and Ex-
ploitation:  Scientific and Environmental Aspects prepared suggested paragraphs
for inclusion in the Recommendation on Antarctic Mineral Resources.  The Chair-
man of the Working Group summarized its activities for the Plenary on 4 October.

The suggested paragraphs prepared by the two Working Groups formed under Agenda
Item 5 (Antarctic Resources:  The Question of Mineral Exploration and Exploita-
tion) were submitted to Plenary on 4 October and combined into a single Recom-
mendation (Recommendation X-1).

In connection with the meetings to consider the matter of an international
regime for Antarctic mineral resources in all its aspects referred to in Recom-
mendation X-1, the Representatives welcomed the invitation issued by the Govern-
ment of _______________________ to hold such a meeting in mid-1980.

Marine Living Resources
10. (To be inserted)

Telecommunications

11. The Working Group on Telecommunications convened on 18 September and
completed its work on 21 September.  It had before it the Final Report of the
Third Antarctic Treaty Meeting on Telecommunications held in Washington, D.C.,
September 11-15, 1978 (Annex 7). The Group identified "areas of concern" which
included:

(a) the need for increasing the rate of flow of meteorological data to
data centers;

(b) making available weather information for use as a basis for operational
needs, including the likely increasing requirements of commercial ship
and aircraft operations;
- 6 -

(c) improving the means for exchanging data between West 
and East Antarctica;

(d) compatibility of equipment;

(e) the desirability of continuing the updating and exchange 
of information regarding telecommunication practices.

The Chairman of the Working Group presented a summary of its activities 
in Plenary on 26 September.  The draft Recommendation developed by the 
Working Group was presented in Plenary on 1 October.

Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment

12. The Working Group on Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment convened 
on 24 September and completed its work on 1 October.  The Working Group had 
before it the relevant sections of the Report of the Fifteenth Meeting of 
the Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research (SCAR) held in Chamonix, 
France, 22-27 May, 1978.

The Chairman of the Working Group presented a summary of its activities 
along with the draft Recommendations developed by the Working Group, to 
Plenary on 1 October.  The Working Group considered extension in the dates for 
expiry of designations of seven Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI's) 
and management plans for the two additional, proposed SSSI's:  the first 
including two small benthic habitats in Chile Bay, Greenwich Island; and the 
second including both terrestrial and marine areas in Admiralty Bay, King George 
Island.  It also considered questions concerning the collection of geological 
samples in Antarctica.

 
for footnot[?] :  An Comm[?] Meeting has un Type a d[?]gum[?] In g[?]ou[?] 
have q[?]en 'w[?]us he[?]e n w[?] j[?]n a led ref[?]nd 
to un his Final Repor[?].
- 7 -

Three draft recommendations were submitted to Plenary by the Working 
Group on 4 October.  These recommendations dealt with the extension of the 
designation of expiry dates of the seven existing SSSI's, the collection of 
geological samples and the management plan for covering terrestrial 
areas on the western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island. There 
was insufficient time for full consideration of concerns relating to 
the designation of SSSI's covering marine areas.  The Working Group 
felt that further discussion of the proposed management plans for the 
SSSI's for Chile Bay and the marine areas of Admiralty Bay should be-
undertaken prior to and during the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting.

Oil Contamination of the Antarctic Marine Environment

13. The Working Group on the Question of Oil Contamination of the Antarctic 
Marine Environment convened on 24 September and completed its work on 
1 October.  The Group had before it Section III of the Report of the 
Group of Ecological, Technological and Other Related Experts on Mineral 
Exploration and Exploitation in Antarctica (Annex 6), as well as other 
generally available material relating to the general subject of pollution 
of the marine environment by oil.  The Chairman of the Working Group 
presented a summary of its activities, along with the draft Recommendation 
developed by the Working Group, to Plenary on 4  October.

Tourism

14. The Working Group on Tourism convened on 19 September and completed 
its work on 21 September.  The Working Group had before it a paper from
- 8 -

the SCAR Working Group on Logistics entitled "Tourist and Private Expeditions 
to the Antarctic", a draft statement of accepted practices together with 
the relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, and a draft containing 
practical guidance for visitors to Antarctica for inclusion in Annex A 
of Recommendation VIII-9.  These materials had been forwarded to the 
Tenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting owing to lack of sufficient 
opportunity for their consideration at the Ninth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting.

The Chairman of the Working Group presented a summary of its activities 
to Plenary on 26 September.  The draft Recommendation developed by the Working 
Group was presented on 4 October.  The draft Recommendation included a "State-
ment of Accepted Practices and the Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty" 
and "Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic."

Activities in Antarctica by States that are not Consultative Parties 
Under the Antarctic Treaty

15. It was recognized that this agenda item included both the question of 
activities in Antarctica by States that have not acceded to the Antarctic 
Treaty, as well as the question of such activities by States which have 
acceded to the Treaty but are not Consultative Parties.  In light of the 
full discussion of this subject at the Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting, the Representatives did not consider it necessary to devote 
extended attention to Agenda Item 11.  The Representatives agreed that 
widened adherence to the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty, 
including through increased accession to the Treaty itself, is a desirable 
international objective.
- 9 -

Documents of the Consultative Meetings

16. The Representatives resumed discussion, begun at the Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, on the availability to the public of documents regarding Consultative Meetings. It was recognized that continuing efforts should be made to achieve the objective of ensuring the public availability of accurate and complete information on the work of Consultative Meetings.

The Twentieth Anniversary of the Conclusion of the Antarctic Treaty

17. The Representatives drew attention, both in their opening addresses and during the course of the Meeting, to the fact that the Tenth Consultative Meeting marked the twentieth anniversary of the conclusion of the Antarctic Treaty which was signed in Washington in 1959. They agreed that it was appropriate on this occasion for the Consultative Parties to commemorate the important achievements of the Antarctic Treaty system during its first two decades and to reaffirm their commitment to the Treaty and the Treaty system. In this regard, the Representatives also agreed that tribute should be paid to the accomplishments of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) in advancing knowledge of Antarctica through promotion of cooperation and coordination of scientific programs there. They further believed that the National Committees of SCAR should institute consideration of how SCAR can continue to respond effectively to requests directed to it by the Consultative Parties. This question was viewed as an appropriate topic for discussion at the Eleventh Consultative Meeting.
- 10 -

The Eleventh Consultative Meeting

18. The Representatives accepted with pleasure the invitation of the
Representative of Argentina to hold the Eleventh Consultative Meeting
in Buenos Aires in 1981.

Other Business

19. The United States Delegation submitted a document showing the status
of approvals by Governments of Recommendations adopted at Consultative
Meetings, as received and recorded by the United States Government as
depositary Government for the Antarctic Treaty, up to and including
14 September, 1977. The document is attached at Annex 3.

During the course of the Tenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting it was unanimously agreed that the greetings of all Representatives
be conveyed to the Antarctic Stations of the Consultative Parties.  The
text of the message is attached at Annex 4.

Representatives recalled that at the Ninth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting there was consideration of the periodicity and nature
of meetings within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty, including
discussion of whether holding of Special Consultative Meetings for ad hoc
purposes would be a response to the need expressed for more frequent
meetings of Consultative Parties.  The Representatives generally agreed that
the special meetings of Consultative Parties, including Special Consultative
Meetings, held in the past two years represented an adequate response to that
need and was a practice that could be followed in the future.

Afirmó la and for 25  New hds
J Rmln                                        Kil 24
II

RECOMMENDATIONS
ADOPTED AT THE
TENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING
III

ANNEXES
