ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIÈME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 5                                  ANT/X/32/ Corr. 1
                                                   September 25, 1979

                                                   ORIGINAL:  English

SCIENTIFIC ASPECTS OF MINERAL RESOURCES STUDIES
IN ANTARCTICA
(Submitted by the United States)

The delegates:

Recalling the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty, particularly
its dedication to cooperation, international harmony, peaceful purposes, and
environmental protection in the Antarctic;

Bearing in mind  the provisions of Article IV of the Treaty;

Aware of the responsibilities of the Consultative Parties to ensure that any
activities in the Antarctic, including commercial exploration and exploitation,
should they occur, should not become the cause of international discord, en-
danger the unique Antarctic environment, disrupt scientific investigations, or
otherwise be contrary to the purposes or principles of the Antarctic Treaty;

Conscious of international economic developments related to world mineral mar-
kets, particularly hydrocarbons, and the likelihood of increasing demand and
prices in the coming years;

Concerned  that such developments could lead to mineral resource activity in
the Antarctic and that such activity could harm the unique Antarctic environment
or lead to conflict among Treaty Parties and other nations;

Aware  that available information is insufficient to reliably assess the possible
environmental effects of mineral exploration and exploitation in the Antarctic,
and conscious of the need for research programs aimed at improving predictions
of the possible impact of hydrocarbon activities in Antarctica and for develop-
ment of monitoring programs that would detect changes in the Antarctic environ-
ment by mineral activities should they occur;

Aware also that available scientific information is insufficient to reliably
assess the nature and magnitude of mineral resources in the Antarctic;

Acknowledging that the prevention of damage to the environment is largely depend-
ent on the establishment of safeguards to prevent the introduction of pollutants
ANT/X/32/Corr. 1

- 2 -

and to protect areas of special significance, both terrestrial and marine; and
that the application of results from ongoing research in other areas, combined
with research specifically related to the impacts on the Antarctic environment
of exploration and exploitation activities will assist in the development of
measures for the prevention of damage to the Antarctic environment;

Noting that the Report of the Group of Ecological, Technological, and Other
Related Experts on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation in Antarctica
(Washington, 1979), calls attention to the need for sharply focused research
programs to provide the information necessary to determine whether mineral
exploration and exploitation would pose an unacceptable environmental risk in
the Antarctic;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They reaffirm the basic principles set forth in Recommendations
     VIII-14 and IX-1 of the Eighth and Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
     Meetings;

2. They take note of the Report of the Group of Ecological, Technological,
     and Other Related Experts on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation in
     Antarctica (Washington, 1979) annexed to the Report of the Tenth Consul-
     tative Meeting and give particular attention to the recommendations
     contained therein;

3. They, to the greatest extent possible, intensify scientific research
     related to the specific areas identified in paragraph 12 of that
     report (Washington, 1979) as particularly deserving attention; those
     areas being:

     a. Identification of the structure and dynamics of principal marine,
        acquatic, and terrestrial ecosystems that might be impacted by
        activities associated with mineral development.

     b. Identification of key components of the ecosystem and components
        that might be the most sensitive indicators of the effects of
        mineral resource development and especially of the impact of
        either catastrophic or gradual pollution of the Antarctic environ-
        ment.

     c. Identification of those areas in Antarctica where mineral explora-
        tion and exploitation activities are more likely to occur.

     d. Identification of areas of special ecological significance, and
        areas that might be particularly vulnerable to disturbance,
        taking account of the areas defined pursuant to the previous
        subparagraph.

4. They invite SCAR, through their National Committees, to define and
     coordinate the appropriate long range scientific programs called for
     in paragraphs 12 and 19 of the Experts' Report (Washington, 1979),
- 3 -

recognizing their responsibility to provide funds so that SCAR can 
provide an initial response to the invitation both quickly and effec-
tively, and can provide the sustained effort that will be required to 
coordinate the long term research program anticipated;

5. They give positive consideration to the provision of logistic support, 
personnel, and funds to carry out the appropriate scientific research 
programs.

*   *   *
