ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 5                                  ANT/X/47
                                                  October 4, 1979

                                                  ORIGINAL:  English

REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP ON
THE QUESTION OF ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCES
LEGAL AND POLITICAL ASPECTS

1. The Meeting of the Working Group on the Question of Antarctic Mineral
Resource Issues: Legal and Political Aspects met between 21 September and
October 4, 1979.

2. The Chairman of the Working Group was Norman A. Wulf (United States).

3. The discussion was informal and in large part reflected the preliminary views
of the individual representatives.

4. The discussions demonstrated the continuing validity of the four principles
identified in the Report of the Paris Special Preparatory Meeting and endorsed
in paragraph 4 of Recommendation IX-1 as follows:

    (i) the Consultative Parties will continue to play an active and
        responsible role in dealing with the question of the mineral
        resources of Antarctica;

   (ii) the Antarctic Treaty must be maintained in its entirety;

  (iii) protection of the unique Antarctic environment and of its dependent
        ecosystems should be a basic consideration;

   (iv) the Consultative Parties, in dealing with the question of mineral
        resources in Antarctica, should not prejudice the interests of
        all mankind in Antarctica.

5. In this connection, representatives were mindful of developments likely to
result from the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
ANT/X/47                  - 2 -

6. There was general agreement that the Consultative Parties should accelerate
their efforts to establish jointly a regime for Antarctic mineral resources.

7. The discussion of the various elements to be included in a regime were wide-
ranging. The representatives noted the regime to be created should be con-
sistent with the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty and the system
created under that Treaty including the objective that Antarctica not become the
scene or object of international discord.

8. Protection of the unique Antarctic environment was a major concern of the
Working Group.  In this connection, the Working Group noted the particular
importance of scientific aspects being dealt with by the Working Group on the
Question of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation:  Scientific and Environmental
Aspects.

9. There was an exchange of views on the differing positions on sovereignty in
Antarctica. While these differences are fundamental, all participants believed
that accommodation of these differences could be found, considering the positive
experience of nearly two decades under the Antarctic Treaty.  All believed that
an accommodation on mineral resource issues should be in keeping with this spirit
and should not alter the provisions of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty.

10. Based on these discussions, the Working Group prepared a draft Recommendation
which is annexed to this report.

*   *   *
ANNEX

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979
WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 5

DRAFT PARAGRAPHS SUBMITTED FOR INCLUSION IN A RECOMMENDATION
BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE WORKING GROUP ON THE QUESTION
OF MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION: LEGAL AND
POLITICAL ASPECTS

Convinced of the need to preserve and further strengthen the international
regime established in Antarctica by the Antarctic Treaty, which has for
nearly two decades guaranteed the use of Antarctica exclusively for peace-
ful purposes, and in the interest of the development of international co-
operation;

Aware of the responsibilities of the Consultative Parties to ensure that
any activities in Antarctica, including mineral exploration and exploita-
tion, should they occur, should be consistent with all the principles and
purposes of the Antarctic Treaty system, including its objectives that
activities in Antarctica should not become the cause of international dis-
cord, endanger the unique Antarctic environment, or disrupt scientific
investigations;

Concerned that unregulated mineral resource activities could significantly
harm the fragile Antarctic ecosystem;

Noting that decisions on possible mineral resource activities must take due
account of the unique ecological and scientific value of Antarctica and the
importance of Antarctica to the world environment;

Recognizing that available information is insufficient to reliably assess
the possible environmental effects of many activities in the area of ex-
ploration and exploitation of mineral resources in Antarctica, and conscious
of the need for developing research programs aimed at improving predictions
of the possible impact of such activities in Antarctica and for promoting
the development of monitoring programs aimed at detecting the impact of
such activities on the Antarctic environment should such activities occur;
- 2 -

Convinced that informed decision-making on questions of mineral resource 
activities will usually require the availability of information from such 
programs;

Recalling the provisions of Recommendations VIII-14 and IX-1;

Recognizing the necessity for progress towards the timely adoption of an 
agreed regime concerning Antarctic mineral resources;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.      They take note of the progress made toward the timely adoption of 
a regime for Antarctic mineral resources at the Tenth Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting and related meetings, and of the 
importance of this progress.

2.      They continue consultations proceeding from the provisions of 
Recommendation IX-1 and from the provisions of the present 
Recommendation.

        To this end, they should:

        (i)     Continue to develop a common understanding of the general 
purposes of the regime and to identify the specific elements 
of the regime needed to ensure achievement of those purposes;

        (ii)    Continue to give thorough examination to all of the elements 
necessary to ensure that the future regime will achieve its 
general purposes;

        (iii)   hold a meeting before the Eleventh Consultative Meeting, 
preferably in the first half of 1980, to consider a regime 
for Antarctic mineral resources in its ecological, political, 
technological, legal and other aspects; and

        (iv)    in this regard, make the best possible use of the reports 
of the two groups formed to consider the Agenda Item on 
Antarctic Mineral Resources at the Tenth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting, which are annexed to the Final Report of that 
Meeting.

3.      The agreed regime for Antarctic mineral resources should be based upon 
provisions of paragraphs 1, 3, 4, and 5 of Recommendation IX-1 and on 
such further principles, rules and arrangements as may be subsequently 
agreed.

4.      An agreed regime on Antarctic mineral resources should include inter 
alia means for:

        (i)     assessing the possible impact of mineral resource activities 
on the Antarctic environment in order to provide for informed 
decision-making;
- 3 -

(ii) determining whether mineral resource activities will be 
acceptable;

(iii) governing the ecological, technological, political, legal,
and economic aspects of those activities in cases where they 
would be determined acceptable; including:

      a) establishing, as an important part of the regime, rules 
relating to the protection of the Antarctic environment; and,

      b) requiring that mineral resource activities undertaken 
pursuant to the regime be undertaken in compliance with 
such rules.

5. The subject "Antarctic Resources--The Question of Mineral Exploration 
and Exploitation" be placed on the Agenda of the Eleventh Antarctic 
Treaty / Consultative Meeting.
