ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979
WASHINGTON, D.C.

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTACTIQUE
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

AGENDA ITEM 5                                          ANT/X/21
                                                         September 20, 1979
                                                         ORIGINAL:  ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE PREPARATORY MEETING ON THE
LEGAL AND POLITICAL ASPECTS OF
ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCE ISSUES
ANT(79)EPM LP/3(Rev.1)
July 6, 1979

REPORT OF THE PREPARATORY MEETING
ON THE LEGAL AND POLITICAL ASPECTS OF
ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCE ISSUES

1. The Meeting on the Legal and Political Aspects of Antarctic Mineral
Resource Issues was convened in accordance with Recommendation IX-1, opera-
tive paragraph 7.  The Meeting took place in Washington, D.C., between
July 2 and July 6, 1979.

2. The Chairman of the Meeting was Norman A. Wulf (United States).

3. The Meeting adopted the proposed agenda (Annex A).

4. Most of those taking part in the discussion believed that conclusion
of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
constitutes the most important objective currently before the Consultative
Parties and that consideration of a mineral resource regime should not de-
tract from this objective.  They also believed that continued progress on
the mineral resource issue could be undertaken without diminishing the
momentum toward the conclusion of the living resource negotiations.

5. With this in mind, the Meeting engaged in a general review of the
political and legal aspects of the mineral resource issues and considered
possible next steps for dealing with this question.  It was recognized from
the outset that the issues involved were quite complex and would require
more time than was available for detailed and comprehensive consideration.
At the same time, it was felt that initiation of this consideration could
contribute to the effective treatment of these matters in the future.

6. Of the documents produced at the Special Preparatory Meeting in Paris
during 1976 and the documents produced in connection with the Ninth Consul-
tative Meeting, those listed in Annex B were cited as particularly relevant
to consideration of the legal and political aspects of mineral resource
issues.  In addition, New Zealand placed before the Meeting an informal
paper on mineral exploration and exploitation (Annex C).
ANT(79)PM LP/3                                 - 2 -

7. The discussion established the continuing validity of the four principles identified in the Report of the Paris Special Preparatory Meeting and endorsed 
in paragraph 4 of Recommendation IX-1. Similarly, there was general emphasis 
placed upon the sensitivity of the issues dealt with by Article IV of the 
Antarctic Treaty and the question of mineral resource activities.  In this 
connection, attention was directed to paragraph 5 of Recommendation IX-1. 
Attention was also directed to the special importance attached to paragraph 8 
of Recommendation IX-1.

8. There was a general view that the regime should be a regime jointly 
established by the Consultative Parties.  In view of the fact that the 
issues involved in the development of an international regime are complex 
and would require extensive efforts, it was believed important that the Con-
sultative Parties develop a common understanding of the general purposes of 
the regime and then proceed to the identification of the specific elements 
of the regime needed to ensure achievement of those purposes.

9. There was support for the view that a major purpose of the regime would 
be to provide a means for determining whether mineral resource activities 
were acceptable and for governing such activities in case they were to prove 
acceptable. In this regard, emphasis was placed upon the necessity for en-
suring adequate protection of the Antarctic environment.

10. With respect to identification of the elements of a regime, the Meeting 
believed that the Report of the Paris Special Consultative Meeting was a use-
ful starting point but that further efforts at identifying the appropriate 
elements would be required.

11. The attention of the Meeting was directed to Recommendation IX-1 which 
called for "intensified consultation" among the Consultative Parties on 
Antarctic mineral resource questions.  In this connection, future consideration 
of the legal and political aspects of mineral resource issues should take place 
in a manner conducive to their deliberate and thorough examination by the 
Consultative Parties.

*   *   *
ANNEX A

AGENDA

PREPARATORY MEETING ON
THE LEGAL AND POLITICAL ASPECTS OF
ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCE ISSUES
             JULY 2-6, 1979
Washington, D.C.

A. Organization (Chairperson Selection)

B. Adoption of Meeting Agenda

C. Consideration of the terms of reference of the meeting (reference
Recommendation IX-1 of the Ninth Consultative Meeting)

D. Consideration of the general nature of an internationally agreed
mineral resource regime

E. Consideration of the elements which might be included in an inter-
nationally agreed mineral resource regime

F. Discussion of how the subject "Antarctic Resources--The Question
of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" might be considered at
the Tenth Meeting of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties

G. Consideration of a possible report to the Tenth Meeting of Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties

*   *   *
ANNEX B

RELEVANT PRIOR DOCUMENTS

Working Document Submitted by the Chairman - RPS-1, 28 June 1976*
Working Document Submitted by the Chairman - RPS-2, 28 June 1976*
Working Document Submitted by the Chairman - RPS-3, 28 June 1976*
Unofficial Document Submitted by the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics -             RPS-12, 28 June 1976
Working Paper Submitted by the 
United Kingdom -                           RPS-13, 28 June 1976
Informal Working Paper Submitted by 
New Zealand -                              RPS-14, 28 June 1976
Working Paper Submitted by France -        ANT/IX/3, 14 September 1977
Working Paper Submitted by the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics -             ANT/IX/56, 27 September 1977

* * *

*   These three documents are also included in the documentation of the Ninth
Consultative Meeting as ANT/IX/40, 23 September 1977.
ANNEX C

INFORMAL PAPER ON MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION

(Submitted by the Delegation of New Zealand)

The attached paper is an informal document.  It does not contain any proposals.  Rather, it is a survey of the developments that have taken place in the consideration of Antarctic mineral resources  and the legal and political problems that remain to be resolved.
-1-
ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INTERNATIONAL REGIME
ON THE EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION OF
MINERAL RESOURCES IN ANTARCTICA

Introduction

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties at their Ninth Meeting in London
in 1977 agreed, in Recommendation IX-1 paragraph 7, to intensify negotiations
on the establishment of an international regime on the Exploration and Ex-
ploitation of Mineral Resources in Antarctica.

Background

2. In 1959, with the adoption of the Antarctic Treaty, the principal political
issues in Antarctica at that time were settled. An accommodation was struck
between the states which claim territorial rights in Antarctica and the states
which do not recognise these claims. It was agreed that all of Antarctica
would be open for scientific research; that no party would introduce military
forces into Antarctica and that no nuclear weapons would be stored or used
there. It was also agreed in Article IV that none of these provisions would
constitute a renunciation or diminution of territorial sovereignty or prejudice
the position of any party.

3. The Treaty did not provide for freedom of access for any purpose other
than scientific research. It neither permits nor prohibits the exploration
for or exploitation of mineral resources, although Article VIII (5) does re-
quire advance notification of all expeditions to Antarctica. The question of
mineral resources was first raised at the Sixth Consultative Meeting in Tokyo
in 1970, almost ten years ago. Consultative Parties saw that, in the absence
of any provision in the Treaty, this question had potential for a serious
dispute between the claimant states and any non-claimant state seeking to
unilaterally explore for or exploit resources in areas of Antarctica which
are regarded as subject to national jurisdiction.

4. This situation led Consultative Parties to consider at Wellington in 1972
and adopt in Oslo in 1975 at the Eighth Consultative Meeting and to renew in
London in 1977 a form of restraint on exploration and exploitation while they
studied the relevant environmental and technological considerations and began
work on devising an accommodation that would achieve in the field of mineral
resources a settlement of the competing economic interests of claimants and
non-claimants.

Living Resources Convention

5. Although it has not yet been completed, the draft Convention on the con-
servation of the Antarctic Marine Living Resources contains elements that could
also be applied to the mineral resources question. There are, however, two
significant aspects of the subject matter of the living resources Convention
which should be highlighted. First the convention is a Conservation regime.
It does not deal with the utilisation of living resources. The Final Report
of the Ninth Consultative meeting states in paragraph 10 that the regime
would "exclude catch allocation and other economic regulation of harvesting".
-2-

Secondly the Convention provides for the conservation of a renewable resource.
The fundamental objective of the regime is to ensure that the resource  is not
depleted below sustainable levels.  The Convention leaves aside for subsequent
consideration by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties the question of com-
peting interests in the utilisation of living resources in various areas of
Antarctica.

Principles Agreed at Ninth Consultative Meeting

6.  In 1977 in Recommendation IX-1 the London Consultative Meeting adopted
a number of principles.  On procedure it was agreed that Consultative Parties
would continue to play an "active and responsible role" on this question, that
further consideration should be given to the environmental implications of re-
source activities and that "pending the timely adoption" of an agreed regime,
restraint would continue to be observed.

7.  As to the substantive content of the regime it was agreed that:

    (a) the protection of the unique Antarctic Environment should be a basic
consideration;

    (b) the interests of all mankind in Antarctica should not be prejudiced;

    (c) the Antarctic Treaty should be maintained in its entirety; and

    (d) the principles embodied in Article IV of the Treaty should be safe-
guarded in their application to the new regime and Article IV
itself should not be affected by the regime.

Considerations of Timing

8.  The Report of the Group of Experts on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation,
which met in London in 1977 under the Chairmanship of Dr. Holdgate indicates
in paragraph 25 that the mining of minerals on land in the Antarctic is not
likely in the foreseeable future.  On the other hand exploitation of hydro-
carbons offshore was thought by some delegations to be possible within five to
ten years.  Moreover the Group indicated (para 82) that the necessary techniques
for exploration were already at hand.

9.  Rapidly rising oil prices suggest that the pressures and incentives to
embark upon exploration and subsequent exploitation have increased significantly
since 1977.

10. Also of significance are the various interests of groups (including Inter-
national Organisations, Private Groups and States) outside the Treaty system
who have greatly increased their attention to this issue.  These interests range
from a concern strictly about the environment to insistence upon a share in re-
sources.  The need for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to move swiftly
and to make proper provision to ensure the acceptability of a minerals regime
to the international community at large has never been more urgent.
Contents of a possible minerals regime

11. Reflecting the general principles which have already been agreed, the basic 
features of a minerals regime might be contained in a convention which, like the 
Living Resources Convention, would maintain intact the Antarctic Treaty (in-
cluding the very important Article IV).  Such a Convention might also contain 
appropriate links with the Antarctic Treaty following the precedent of the 
Living Resources Convention.  Its substantive provisions might include:

(a) a commitment that the environment should be protected;

(b) agreement that certain extremely sensitive areas (e.g. breeding 
grounds) should be specially protected from exploitation;

(c) establishment of a regulatory body to approve and monitor ex-
ploitation activity from an environmental viewpoint;

(d) establishment of an agreed set of anti-pollution guidelines;

(e) provision governing the relationship between the regime and the 
International Seabed Authority to be established by the Law of the 
Sea Conference;

(f) provision for possible revenue or resource sharing arrangements 
with the international community; and

(g) provisions on dispute settlement.

However, the most important element in the regime will be the balance struck 
between the states which assert territorial sovereignty in Antarctica and those 
states which do not recognize claims to sovereignty.  Clearly the position of 
all parties will need to be safeguarded.  Thus a solution based solely on either:

(a) sovereignty (with exploitation under the jurisdiction of a claimant 
and the position of other states protected by a non-prejudice clause);
or

(b) non-recognition of sovereignty (with exploitation on a free access 
basis with only a simple non-prejudice clause and no economic return 
for the claimant state) will not be acceptable.  It is essential to 
devise a system under which the claimant states can obtain a portion 
of the economic return (royalties and/or a share of the actual re-
source).  On the other hand it will also be essential to ensure 
that the system devised does not amount to a recognition of the 
claims.

12. Unlike the Living Resources Convention, a mineral resources regime must 
necessarily deal inter alia with the question of the utilization of the resource.  
Moreover, unlike living resources, mineral resources are non-renewable.  It is 
therefore not possible for the claimant state to contemplate the establishment 
of a simple environmental protection regime (paralleling the conservation regime 
for living resources) which would sanction the exploitation of non-renewable 
resources in the absence of an overall settlement of the fundamental issue.
4

Alternative Approaches to Resources Question

13. It would seem possible that at least two approaches to this issue could be 
developed:

(a)  a Mineral Resources Convention could provide for access  to defined 
areas considered potentially exploitable, pursuant to an authoriza-
tion by a Committee or Commission composed of each of the Consulta-
tive Parties.  This regulatory body would be responsible for moni-
toring environmental safeguards and for imposing environmental 
protection measures.  The Convention might provide in terms similar 
to Article IV of the Living Resources Convention that Article IV of 
the Antarctic Treaty is unaffected and that the mineral resources 
regime and exploration and exploitation activities do not prejudice 
the position of either claimants or non-claimants.  It might then 
provide in simple terms for a payment of a percentage of revenue 
and/or resource to the state or states in whose claimed territory 
or continental shelf the exploitation was to take place.

(b)  Alternatively, a Mineral Resources Convention in addition to the 
provisions on Regulatory Machinery and Article IV of the Antarctic 
Treaty, might adopt a less direct approach to the question of shared 
benefits.  It could proceed on the basis of a bilateral (or side) 
arrangement between the claimant state in whose sector exploitation 
was proposed and the exploiting entity.  An intending prospector 
would have to make satisfactory private arrangements with the 
relevant claimant state regarding revenues and a share in the re-
source or his proposal would not receive support from the claimant 
state at the international level.  The system would be predicated 
on the consensus decision-making process upon which the Treaty 
meetings operate and which is also provided for in the Antarctic 
Living Resources Convention.  Such a system would carefully avoid 
including  in the text any wording which might be thought tanta-
mount to the recognition of the claims.

*     *     *
