ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 8                                  ANT/X/27
                                               September 21, 1979

                                               ORIGINAL:  Spanish

NATURAL RISK CHART AND DEVELOPMENT
OF AN ALARM SYSTEM IN ANTARCTICA

(Draft recommendation presented by Chile)

The Representatives:

Bearing in mind the critical need to alleviate the repercussions that human
activities may have on the Antarctic environment, and considering that in
recent years there has been a significant increase in such activities,
particularly in the establishment of new bases, the installation of large
tanks to store fuel close to the coastal areas, etc.;

Remembering that the Antarctic Continent and neighboring islands, because of
their geological characteristics and evolution, are, like other areas of the
earth, vulnerable to the effects of natural disasters such as seismic shocks,
volcanic eruptions, Tsunamis, avalanches and storms, and that such natural
disasters may have catastrophic effects on the structures, installations and
fuel depots; and

Considering the recommendations of point II C of the Report of the Group of
Experts in London; the Report of SCAR/EAMREA; (the Bellagio Report) and the
Report of the Group of Experts in Washington, as regards developing measures
to avoid harm to the Antarctic environment and the rehabilitation thereof;

Recommend to their Governments that they consider:

a.  The drafting of a natural risk chart indicating the most critical areas
    vulnerable to volcanic or seismic disasters, Tsunamis, avalanches, etc..

b.  Implementing a system to warn of expected Tsunamis or volcanic eruptions.

c.  Intensifying the network of seismological stations and volcanic observatories
    connected to data transmission systems via satellite.
ANT/X/27                  - 2 -

d. Transmitting the data on a regular basis to the world centers or data banks
   such as the International Tsunami Information Center, World Data Centers A
   and B for Solid Earth Geophysics for dissemination.

e. Publishing periodically in the SCAR bulletin information originating in
   Antarctica.

f. Drafting a code of standards which will take into account safety coefficients
   for possible natural risks. These standards should be met when engineering
   works are constructed in critical areas as specified in the natural risk chart.

*   *   *
ANNEX

INFORMATION DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY THE DELEGATION OF CHILE

With respect to the subject under discussion, some of the principal areas
of greatest natural risk in Antarctica should be borne in mind:

Volcanic Risks --  Cenozoic and more recent volcanic activity has been
principally along the western coastal area of Antarctica and in the
sub-Antarctic oceanic islands.  The most important areas are:  The South
Sandwich Islands, the South Shetland Islands, the Straits of Bransfield;
the Antarctic Pass and part of the Prince Gustav Channel; the northern
sector of the Palmer Peninsula, Marie  Byrd Land, Ross Island in the vicin-
ity of McMurdo, and the islands and coastal region of Victoria Land.  (See
map of Volcanic Provinces.)

Seismic Risks -- The region of the Arch of Scotia and the Antarctic
Penninsula, Trans Antarctic Mountains and the Area of the Ross Sea, and
the Dorsal oceanic areas surrounding Antarctica.

Tsunami Risks -- The Antarctic sea coast in general, and the western or
Pacific sector in particula, is most likely to be affected by Tsunamis.
Existing statistics indicate that the most severe Tsunamis in the history
of the area have been generated in the Pacific Ocean, caused by the violent
earthquakes originating from contacts of circum-Pacific plates or by vio-
lent volcanic eruptions.  (See map of propagation of Tsunamis.)

Because Chile has always been subject to earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
and Tsunamis, and because it is aware that western Antarctica has tectonic-
volcanic characteristics similar to those of the Pacific coast of South America,
it maintains a Class I seismological station at O'Higgins Base, in the northern
region of the Antarctic Peninsula; the station has been in operation since 1960.

On Deception Island we maintained a vulcanological station in operation
from 1962 to December 1967, on which date it was destroyed  by a volcanic erup-
tion.

Chile has now put into effect a system of data collection platforms which
will be expanded during the coming season with thermal sensors which allow the
detection of possible eruptions along the active volcanic line (Deception,
Penguin, and Bridgemen Islands) in the Strait of Bransfield.

*   *   *
