ANTARCTIC TREATY                                        TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                              DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                       DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEMS 5 and 9                                     ANT/X/20
                                                         September 20, 1979
                                                         ORIGINAL:  ENGLISH

THE REPORT OF THE GROUP OF
ECOLOGICAL TECHNOLOGICAL AND OTHER RELATED EXPERTS
ON MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION IN ANTARCTICA
ANT(79)PM ET/7(Rev.2)
June 29, 1979

THE REPORT OF THE GROUP OF
ECOLOGICAL TECHNOLOGICAL AND OTHER RELATED EXPERTS
ON MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION IN ANTARCTICA

The Group of Experts was established in accordance with Recommendation
-1, operative paragraph 3. The Group met in Washington, D.C., between 25 and 29
ne 1979, "with a view to developing scientific programs aimed at:

"(i)  improving predictions of the impact of possible technologies for
mineral exploration and exploitation in the Antarctic, as outlined
in Section IIB of the Report of the Group of Experts, and in
Section 5 of the SCAR/EAMREA Group Report;

"(ii) developing measures for the prevention of damage to the environ-
ment or for its rehabilitation, in accordance with Section IIC of
the Report of the Group of Experts."

The Group at its first session elected Dr. Robert Rutford (United States) as
s Chairman.

The Group adopted the revised agenda  (Annex A).

1.  Outline of Scientific Programs on Environmental Impacts

It was the understanding of the Group that the unique Antarctic ecosystem is
osely related to neighboring ecosystems and that gross perturbation in one area
F the Antarctic may have effects, however attenuated, both in the Antarctic and
h other areas.  The Group recognized that a better understanding of the Antarctic
cosystem as a whole was an important objective.  The Group of Experts considered
hat the purpose of the scientific programs with which it was concerned was to
obtain information critical to decisions concerning the possibility of the explora-
tion for and exploitation of mineral resources in Antarctica, should these activities
occur.
ANT (79)PM ET/7 (Rev. 2)                        - 2 -

5.    The Group agreed that scientific, technological, and economic factors indi-
cate little likelihood of the commercial exploitation of Antarctic mineral re-
sources other than offshore hydrocarbons in the foreseeable future.  Accordingly,
scientific programs to deal with the impacts of mineral activity should be con-
cerned primarily with that resource.

6.    The Group considered that the Report of the Group of Experts to the IXth
Consultative Meeting and the SCAR/EAMREA report identified information needs and
gaps in knowledge that are little changed since those reports were presented.
The Group noted that the question of geologic hazards is referred to in the
Report by the Group of Experts to the IXth in other sections but is not specifi-
cally cited in Section IIIB.  No major technologic advances were noted that would
negate or alter the areas of concern identified in those reports.

7.    The Group, noting the three stages of mineral resource activity identified in
paragraph 32 of the Report of the Group of Experts of the IXth Consultative Meet-
ing, considered the kinds of environmental risks and impacts directly associated
with each of these stag:

      a.    Stage one, basic exploration was considered to involve negligible
            environmental risks except possibly those which might be associated
            with the operations of ships in Antarctic waters;

      b.    The second and third stages, exploratory drilling and full scale exploita-
            tion, involve greater environmental risks.

It was noted that the impacts from many of these activities might be more drastic,
in the Antarctic because of the severe environmental conditions, and strict regu-
lation would be necessary were these activities to occur.

8.    The Group suggested that basic and baseline information on the Antarctic
environment is required in order to predict, mitigate, and monitor possible im-
pacts resulting from mineral resource exploration and exploitation, should such
activities occur.

9.    It is possible that there is available, as a result of the research activi-
ties of the various nations during the past years, considerable information that
through compilation and analysis, might satisfy part of this information require-
ment as well as more clearly identify those areas where further information is
required.  The Group acknowledged the admonition of the previous Group of Experts
that it would be quite impossible to measure all of the environmental variables or
describe all Antarctic ecosystems  in detail.  The selection of key factors is
critical to these studies.

10.   Ongoing and planned research activities (inter alia, BIOMASS, ISOS, POLEX) that will concentrate on the Antarctic marine and coastal ecosystems should take
account of the requirements for information outlined in this report in order to
avoid unnecessary duplication of effort.
- 3 -                                 ANT (79)PM ET/7(Rev. 2)

11. In attempting to fulfill the mandate set forth in the first part of its           
terms of reference, the Group agreed that more time and expertise than was avail-
able at the meeting would be necessary for the preparation of detailed research 
proposals.  In this connection, however, the Group concluded that in relation to   
the possible exploitation of hydrocarbons (see para. 5) it would be more cost       
effective to contribute towards an improved understanding of the Antarctic eco-   
system hy means of sharply focussed programs primarily devoted to the marine       
environment.

12. The Group also concluded that the following four specific areas were par-
ticularly deserving of attention:

    a.  Identification of the structure and dynamics of principal marine,          
        acquatic, and terrestrial ecosystems that might be impacted by               
        activities associated with mineral development.                              

    b.  Identification of key components of the ecosystem and components           
        that might be the most sensitive indicators of the effects of                
        mineral resource development and especially of the impact of either         
        catastrophic or gradual pollution of the Antarctic environment.             

    c.  Identification of those areas in Antarctica where mineral explora-          
        tion and exploitation activities are more likely to occur.                   

    d.  Identification of areas of special ecological significance, and            
        areas that might be particularly vulnerable to disturbance, taking           
        account of the a:eas defined pursuant to the previous subparagraph.         

13. In the light of these conclusions,the Group felt that it could take a signifi-
cant step towards the developen' on the "subjects needing attention" set out in paragraph 69 of 
the Report of the Group of Experts: in order to distinguish between the various 
sources from which relevant information might be derived, viz.:

    a.  information that may already exist but which needs to be                   
        retrieved and appropriately analyzed;                                        

    b.  information that is or might be expected to be available                   
        without the initiation of new research programs;                             

    c.  information that requires the initiation of new research                   
        programs or additional work on lines already underway in                     
        national programs and programs coordinated by SCAR; and                      

    d.  information that requires the initiation of new or addi-                  
        tional research when prospective regions have been identi-                   
        fied with greater precision than has been done at present.                   

14. The approach adopted was to consider each of the major "subjects needing       
attention" and to tabulate them in four colunns (see Table on following page.)      
The Group did not attempt to differentiate between programs that would be         
undertaken by governments and programs that could be undertaken in the course    
of exploration and exploitation, should this occur.
TABLE. SUGGESTED FRAMEWORK FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF RESEARCH PROGRAMS AIMED AT IMPROVING PREDICTIONS 
OF THE POSSIBLE IMPACT OF HYDROCARBON EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION IN THE ANTARCTIC.

                                                 I                                 |              II                                 |                                 III                                  |                                 IV                                  
Information retrievable from 
analysis of past observations 
and research programs            | Information obtainable from 
existing or planned research 
programs                         | Basic information requiring new or 
additional research that is not 
obtainable from ongoing programs or 
analysis of past work             | Information requiring new or additional research 
when prospective regions have been identified
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                
                                 Physical Oceanography                       |                                                                      | Marine geological, geophysical and 
geochemical research on a regional 
basis                                       | Definition in relevant detail of the physical 
oceanographic environment: 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                          (i) Water movements (currents and tides) 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                          (ii) Sea surface state (waves and over-icing) 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                         (iii) Floating ice regime (pack ice and icebergs) 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                         Sea bottom studies: 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                          (i) Morphology/bathymetry 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                         (ii) Sediment dynamics 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                         (iii) Stability 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                         (iv) Evidence of iceberg scour (including 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                          age assessments) 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                         Regional meteorology
                                 Antarctic climatology                       |                                                                      | Influence of pack ice on the struc-
                                                                                 |                                                                      | ture and dynamics of marine 
Definition of the structure of 
those types of marine ecosys-
tems, within the Antarctic 
ecosystem as a whole, likely 
to be affected by hydrocarbon 
exploration and exploitation.    | Further definition of the 
structure of those types of 
communities and ecosystems 
likely to be affected by 
hydrocarbon exploration and 
exploitation; improved gen-
eral understanding of popu-
lation, community and 
ecosystem dynamics in 
pelagic and local inshore 
areas.                           |                                                                      | Characterization of regional biota and definition 
of areas of special biological significance.
                                 Atmosphere and ice cap 
pollutant levels.                | Determination of baseline levels 
of hydrocarbon contamination in 
representative components of the 
marine ecosystem (including birds 
and mammals).                    |                                                                      | Determination of baseline levels of hydrocarbons 
                                                                                 |                                                                      | in the water column and bottom sediments.
                                                                      | First and second order effects of 
various kinds and concentrations of 
hydrocarbons and other pollutants 
on key components of the marine 
ecosystems.                      |                                                                      | 
                                                                      | The fate of various hydrocarbons 
under Antarctic environmental 
conditions (biodegradation, biologi-
cal uptake and physical dispersal). |                                                                      | 
                                                                      | Design of monitoring programs based 
on indicator species sensitive to 
environmental pollution.         |                                                                      | 
                                                                                 |                                                                      | 
                                                                                 |                                                                      | 
                                                                                 |                                                                      | 
                                                                                 |                                                                      | 
                                                                                 |                                                                      | 
                                                                                 |                                                                      |
ANTI(79)PM ET/7(Rev.2)                                                                                                                                                                      
4                                                                                                                                                                                       
-1 
-1
- 5 -
ANT(79)PM ET/7(Rev.2)

15. While the Group was conscious that a great deal of relevant information 
could have been listed in columns I and II, it was taken as being self-evident 
that new or additional research would take account of relevant earlier work 
and of information that might be expected to become available from national 
programs and programs coordinated under the auspices of SCAR. Absence of an 
entry into columns I and II was not to be interpreted to imply irrelevance. 
It was to be taken, rather, that an entry implies either that a special con-
tribution towards an improved understanding in that field could be made by 
analysis of past observations and research programs or that a special effort 
should be made to bear in mind the relevance of results derived from existing 
programs.

16. In drawing up the table the Group had in mind additional purposes which 
might not be immediately apparent. These were:

    a. to help in arriving at an appreciation of the sequential 
       component in research that would need to be incorporated 
       in any integrated research plan (e.g., broad-scale marine 
       geological and geophysical research would be needed before 
       prospective regions could be identified; knowledge of the 
       biological significance of pack ice would be needed before 
       characterization of regional biota could be of relevance 
       in defining certain areas of special biological significance);

    b. to begin to distinguish between those requirements that were 
       oriented towards a better understanding of dynamic processes 
       in the Antarctic and others that were oriented towards a 
       better understanding of particular regions.

17. The Group recognized that this tabulation could be considerably refined 
by bringing to bear on it additional relevant scientific and technological 
expertise, including the discipline of systems analysis.

18. Bearing in mind that the tabulation represented only a framework within 
which appropriate research programs might be developed, the Group believed 
that the detailed development of research programs might best be remitted to 
SCAR which would profitably involve its Working Groups, Groups of Specialists 
and other expert opinion (see Section 5 of the SCAR/EAMREA Group Report).  It 
was also noted that this consideration was in accord with the advice given in 
para. 68 of the Report of the Group of Experts to the Ninth Consultative 
Meeting.
ANT(79)PM ET/7(Rev.2)                                 - 6 -

19. The Group, noting the need for the development of research programs aimed 
at improving predictions of the possible impact of hydrocarbon exploration and 
exploitation in Antarctica, proposed that the Representatives at the Tenth 
Consultative Meeting should recommend to their governments that they encourage 
SCAR, through their National Antarctic Committees, to define programs, taking 
account of the report of this meeting, with the objectives of:

    a. retrieving and analyzing relevant information from past observations 
       and research programs;

    b. ensuring in relation to the needs for information identified by the 
       Group that effective use is made of existing programs;

    c. identifying and developing new programs that should have priority, 
       taking account of the length of time required for results to become 
       available.

20. The Group was conscious that SCAR had already indicated that costs would 
be involved in responding to initiatives on this subject, and it was agreed to 
draw this to the attention of the Consultative Parties prior to the Tenth Con-
sultative Meeting.

II. Outline of Scientific Programs on Prevention and Rehabilitation

21. The Group of Experts considered Section IIC of the London Report as an excel-
lent summary of the possible ways that pollutants might be introduced into the 
Antarctic environment by mineral resource exploration and exploitation.  They 
acknowledge that the prevention of damage to the environment is largely dependent 
on the establishment of safeguards to prevent the introduction of pollutants and 
to protect areas of special significance, both terrestrial and marine.  The problem 
of prevention of such damage is not restricted to the Antarctic although the unique 
environmental conditions found there require the development of special safe-
guards.  The application of results from ongoing scientific and technological re-
search in other areas, combined with research specifically related to the impacts 
of the Antarctic environment on exploration and exploitation activities, will assist 
in the development of measures for the prevention of damage to the Antarctic 
environment.

22. The development of Science programs related to the restoration and/or 
rehabilitation of damage resulting from mineral resource activities will depend 
on the acquisition of an understanding of the Antarctic ecosystem and an assess-
ment of the possible impacts on that ecosystem.  It was deemed premature by the 
Group to attempt to outline scientific programs dealing with these matters at 
this time.  Further consideration should be given to these subjects at a later 
time by the Consultative Parties.

III. Oil Contamination of the Antarctic Marine Environment

23. As suggested by Recommendation IX-6, reports were submitted by Japan (Annex B) 
(ANT(79)PM ET/2 dated June 22, 1979) and by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
(Annex C)(ANT(79)PM ET/6 dated June 26, 1979) on oil contamination of the Antarctic 
marine environment.  In addition, Argentina submitted a suggestion for the study 
of pollution in the Antarctic (Annex D)(ANT(79)PM ET/4, Rev.1 dated June 28, 1979). 
These documents are annexed to this report.
- 7 -                                 ANT(79)PM ET/7(REV.1)

24. The Group particularly noted the following pathways of man-made oil 
contamination identified in the Japanese report:

a. from scientific stations in the Antarctic;

b. from ships supporting scientific stations, conducting fishing 
operations or engaging in marine scientific research in 
Antarctic waters;

c. from water masses contaminated elsewhere and carried by natural 
forces into the Antarctic;

d. from possible future petroleum exploration and exploitation in 
Antarctica.

25. The Group particularly noted the following from the Soviet Report:

"From 1974 to 1978, as part of the Soviet Polar Experiment Southern Group 
Program, ships of the Soviet Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute 
(AANII) selected samples and examined them for petroleum product content at 
161 points in the Southern Ocean, the Drake Straits, the Scotia Sea, along a 
line from Africa to Antarctica (20° east longtitude), and along a line from 
Antarctica to Australia (132° east longitude). At the end of each trip the 
samples were delivered to the AANII, where they were examined by infrared 
spectrophotometry.

"The results showed that the petroleum product level in the samples taken 
at the indicated points in the Southern Ocean was in most cases less than 
0.03 mg/liter. Some of the concentrations fell within the 0.03-0.08 mg/liter 
range, which approaches the sensitivity limit of the method (0.03 mg/liter).

"Most of the values for petroleum product content which were in excess of 
0.03 mg/liter were for the frontal zone of the Scotia Sea, where there is a 
high level of biological activity. It is possible that the increase in the 
level of substances identified as petroleum products is due in some degree 
to hydrocarbons of biogenic origin.

"No oil films or patches were observed visually from aboard ship.

"Thus, the results show that in the areas inspected, the Southern Ocean 
is virtually free of contamination by petroleum products."
ANT(79)PM ET/7(Rev.2)                                  - 8 -

26. The Group noted with interest the data presented in the Soviet Report
concerning the low levels of hydrocarbons detected in the areas where ob-
servations were made. The Group urged the Consultative Parties and others
operating ships or conducting activities that might introduce oil into the
environment to continue their efforts to reduce possible oil contamination.

27. The determination of baseline levels of contamination of the Antarctic
marine environment by oil has been included as a part of the suggested
scientific programs aimed at improving the prediction of the impacts of
possible mineral exploration and exploitation in the Antarctic.

28. The Group noted that up to now the most significant introduction of oil
into the Antarctic marine environment appeared to be from the operation of
ships. They further noted that both national and international groups were
conducting research on oil contamination of marine areas by ships, and on
means for its reduction, and that some of this research would be applicable
to the Antarctic environment.  They also noted that current research on the
effects of oil in the Arctic marine environment resulting from offshore oil
development would be useful in appraising effects of such activity in the
Antarctic, should it occur.  The results of these programs should be taken
into account before similar programs are drawn up for the Antarctic.

29. There was inadequate time to consider the Argentine and Japanese sug-
gestions for the study of pollution in the Antarctic. The Group suggests
that the Tenth Consultative Meeting direct the attention of SCAR to these
proposals and to the other documents submitted to the Group as listed below:

-- ANT(79)PM ET/3, June 25, 1979, by Poland (Annex E).

-- ANT(79)PM ET/5, June 25, 1979, by Poland (Annex F).

-- ANT(79)PM ET/8, June 27, 1979, by Poland (Annex G).

*   *   *
ANNEX A

ANT(79)PM ET/1 ADOPTED
June 25, 1979

AGENDA

MEETING OF ECOLOGICAL, TECHNOLOGICAL AND
OTHER RELATED EXPERTS ON MINERAL
EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION IN ANTARCTICA
      June 25-29, 1979
      Washington, D.C.

A.  Organization

B.  Adoption of Meeting Agenda

C.  Consideration of the Terms of Reference of the Group of Experts Meeting
    (reference Report of the Ninth Consultative Meeting)

D.  Consideration of any documents or working papers that may be presented
    by members of the Group of Experts

E.  Development of an outline of scientific programs aimed at improving
    predictions of the impact of possible technologies for mineral
    exploration and exploitation in the Antarctic (reference Section II.B.
    of the Report of the Group of Experts, Annex 5 of the Report of the
    Ninth Consultative Meeting, and Section 5 of the SCAR/EAMREA Group
    Report)

F.  Development of an outline of scientific programs aimed at developing
    measures for the prevention of damage to the environment or for its
    rehabilitation (reference Section II.C. of the Report of the Group
    of Experts, Annex 5 of the Report of the Ninth Consultative Meeting)

G.  Receive report and further consider the matter of oil contamination of the
    Antarctic marine environment (Ref: Recommendation IX-6)

H.  Preparation of Statement to the Tenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

* * *
ANNEX B

ANT(79)PM ET/2
June 22, 1979

REPORT WITH REFERENCE TO RECOMMENDATION IX-6
(OIL CONTAMINATION OF THE ANTARCTIC MARINE ENVIRONMENT)
OF THE NINTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
(SUBMITTED BY THE DELEGATION OF JAPAN)

The following are the results of study of the oil contamination of the
antarctic marine environment by concerned agencies of the Japanese government.

1.  Concerning the pathways by which oil may reach the Antarctic Ocean (in
relation to Recommendation IX-6, Paragraph 1):

    (1) Possible causes of oil contamination in the Antarctic
    marine environment

        The main causes of oil contamination in the Antarctic marine
environment are thought to be as stated below.  It is remarked, however,
that oils are also produced by living organisms which inhabit the
Antarctic.  These animal and vegetable oils would better be dis-
tinguised from mineral oils of subterranean origin, so that they
have been omitted from this study in view of the need to focus atten-
tion primarily on the discharge of petroleum aromatic hydrocarbons,
which form the oil content of petroleum origin, rather than on aliphatic
hydrocarbons of biological origin.

    a. Oil contamination from scientific stations in the
    Antarctic

        Discharge of oil due to mishandling during operations and
disposal of waste oil used at the scientific stations (light
oil, kerosene, gasoline, etc.).

    b. Oil contamination produced during transport operations for
    support of scientific stations, fishing operations, and ship
    movements for marine observations
ANT(79)PM ET/2                                 - 2 -

Mainly due to discharge of oil contained in cooling water,
etc., from ships' engines; negligence in operations; rupture
of tanks, pipes, etc.; and shipwrecks.

c. Oil contamination resulting from movement of contaminated
water masses, etc., from mid-latitude regions

Oil discharged or disposed of at a certain rate during its
use in industrial and densely populated areas in mid-latitude
regions, where human activities are concentrated, and also oil
discharged from oiltankers in those regions are carried into the
Antarctic marine environment by water circulation and atmospheric
movements.

d. Oil contamination likely to result from future petroleum
exploration and exploitation on the Antarctic continent and
in the surrounding seas

Discharge of oil resulting from drilling operations in oil
fields on the Antarctic continent and the surrounding seabed and
from accidents, etc., occurring during these operations.

(2) Pathways by which oil reaches the Antartic marine environment

a. Oil contamination from scientific stations

Most of the scientific stations have their headquarters on the
coast of the continent or on adjoining islands. Therefore, except
in the case of stations situated further inland, any release of
oil can be expected to reach the marine environment in the vicinity
of the station relatively quickly, via ice-free areas around the
coast or the islands. Since the decomposition of oil in the
Antarctic is slow due to the low temperature, dispersion of oil
contamination is influenced by the snow conditions, topography
and geology between the point of discharge at the station and the
adjacent sea, and by movements of seawater and sea ice due to tidal
currents and wind on reaching the sea. Under Recommendation VIII-11,
certain measures have been implemented with regard to the disposal
of wastes from the scientific stations, including the disposal of
lubricating oil.

b. Oil contamination from ships

This poses the greatest threat as a source of oil pollution
of the Antarctic marine environment. Since the number of vessels
traveling in Antarctic waters is inevitably expected to rise with
the increasing activity related to Antarctic observations and
resources, there will be increasing risk of oil contamination due
to discharge of bilge and ballast water and to shipwrecks and other
accidents.
- 3 -                                  ANT(79)PM ET/2

If the resulting oil contamination is assumed to occur along 
the shipping routes, it can be expected to move away from these 
areas carried by currents such as the Antarctic circumpolar cur-
rent, or by the wind.  Further, if oil contamination spreads in 
the vicinity of pack ice region, serious damage to living organ-
isms can be expected when the wind and currents are weak, since 
the oil will remain stationary over a long period.

c. Oil contamination from mid-latitude regions

    While there has been little oil contamination occurring in 
the Antarctic marine environment itself, it is possible that 
water contaminated by oil discharges from urban and industrial 
regions at mid-latitude regions and from oil tankers will reach 
the Antarctic seas through dispersion by wind and currents.

d. Oil contamination due to mineral resource exploration and 
   exploitation

    In the event of petroleum exploration and exploitation being 
carried out on land or on the offshore seabed of the continental 
coast, oil contamination can be expected to reach the marine en-
vironment from the exploration and exploitation sites by the same 
pathway as discussed in (2) a. above.  In the case of drilling in 
seabed oil fields, there is a risk of greater damage due to direct 
flows of oil into the sea.

2. Concerning an effective program for the determination of baseline levels 
of contamination of the Antarctic marine environment by oil (in relation to 
Recommendation IX-6, Paragraph 3):

    (1) Studies considered relatively practicable

        a. Use of the supply ships supporting scientific stations 
           to conduct 

           (i) Sampling of seawater for analysis of oil content

          (ii) Visual observation of oil slicks

        b. Comparison with data from other sea areas

    (2) Studies meriting future consideration

        a. Sea areas to be covered by monitoring

           (i) Sea areas adjacent to scientific stations in the 
               Antarctic

          (ii) In the event of future exploitation of seabed oil fields, 
               etc., the sea areas surrounding the exploitation site
ANT(79)PM ET/2                                  - 4 -

(iii)    The Antarctic Ocean

(iv)    Areas of the Indian, Atlantic and Pacific Oceans,
         etc., contiguous with the Antarctic Ocean (sea areas
         of the Southern Hemisphere).

b.  Items to be monitored

    To be selected as appropriate for each sea area from the
following

    (i)     Tar balls

    (ii)    Visual observation of oil slicks

    (iii)   Dissolved and dispersed oil in seawater.

c.  Monitoring methods

    (i)     Coastal surveys from land

            Surveys of the coastal areas in the vicinity of stations
would be conducted using snow cars, light aircraft, etc. They would
consist mainly of visual observation of tar balls and oil slicks.

    (ii)    Aerial and satellite surveys

            For surveys of extensive sea areas, aerial remote sensing
technology would be employed in the study of oil slicks.

    (iii)   Surveys from vessels

            In addition to sampling by the supply ships supporting
the scientific stations and by oceangraphic observation vessels,
vessels engaged in future exploration and exploitation of Antarctic
resources, fishing vessels, etc., would be requested to cooperate
in collecting data by visual observation of oil slicks.

d.  Principles of implementation of monitoring

    Monitoring would be conducted on the basis of the principles of
implementation of the Marine Pollution Monitoring Pilot Project
(MAPMOPP) of the Integrated Global Ocean Station System (IGOSS).

e.  Use of monitoring results

    The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) would be requested
to study methods of collecting and using the data obtained in the
Antarctic Ocean.
- 5 -              ANT(79)PM ET/2

f. Organization for implementation of monitoring

As for the monitoring items, methods, principles of implementation,
etc., the MAPMOPP instituted under the IGOSS program which is being
jointly promoted by IOC and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
would probably serve as a model.  It is desirable that the Consultative
Parties cooperate with appropriate organization to promote these
activities.

*   *   *
ANNEX C

ANT (79)PM ET/6
June 26, 1979

ON THE STATE OF POLLUTION IN THE ANTARCTIC REGION
SUBMITTED BY THE DELEGATION OF THE UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

The rapid development of industrial production in recent years has con-
fronted mankind with the threat of exhaustion of the earth's resources and
contamination of the biosphere with the products resulting from the activities
of human society. The adverse consequences of contaminating man's natural
environment are now becoming apparent not only on a regional but also a global
scale.

Consequently, the development of programs for monitoring and reducing the
harmful effects of pollution on the environment is at present a most urgent
problem.

In this regard a special role is played by the Antarctic, a vast region
of the earth with unique and exceptionally vulnerable natural systems (ecosystems)
that are probably the only ones on earth to remain relatively untouched and to
have suffered relatively little (as yet) from contamination of the atmosphere,
land, and ocean.

The Antarctic is a suitable region of the earth in which to study, first,
the background state of the biosphere as a whole, and second, the local con-
tamination resulting from the ever-increasing activities of man in the Antarctic
itself.

The Antarctic, or its separate ecosystems, can serve as a model for a
general theory of the development of life under extreme conditions and for various
problems in the field of ecology as well.  Antarctic ecosystems can serve as
natural scientific laboratories for the study of the habitat.  And, finally,
the Antarctic can become a huge laboratory for monitoring the state of the
environment and studying its contamination.
ANT(79)PM ET/6                                  - 2 -

Your attention is invited to several preliminary results of the research
on the state of individual components of the natural environment performed over
the past few years by Soviet Antarctic expeditions.

During the last few years the contamination of the atmosphere and the
evaluation of its possible effects on fluctuations in the earth's climate have
become the subject of greatly increased interest.  Many distinguishing features
of the composition and circulation of the atmosphere over the polar regions and
the remoteness of these regions from centers of human activity give them a special
role in a system for global monitoring of the environment.  As we know, the
southern hemisphere, and especially the Antarctic region, are less affected at
present by anthropogenic factors than the northern hemisphere, where most industrial
production is concentrated.

One effective way to study the composition of the atmosphere is to use
spectral methods, which make it possible to determine the total amount of
impurities in a column of atmosphere based on the weakening of the sun's rays.
In 1958, at the Mirny Station in Antarctica, regular measurements of total ozone
content were begun and have continued with brief interruptions to the present
time.  During the past few years regular measurements of total ozone content
have also been made at the Vostok Station.

During the 23d SAE (Soviet Antarctic Expedition) personnel of the IFA
(Institute of Atmospheric Physics) of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the
AANII (Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute) in Molodezhnaya
carried out experiments to investigate gases present in small amounts in the
Antarctic atmosphere and also the transparency of an entire layer of the atmo-
sphere in the infrared part of the spectrum.  For the first time the spectral
method was used to measure the content, throughout an entire layer of Antarctic
atmosphere, of such impurities as carbon monoxide (CO), methane (CH,), and
nitrous oxide (N2O).  During the 24th SAE a group was formed at the Mirny
Station to monitor the state of the environment and to measure total ozone
content, atmospheric opacity,  and the amount of carbonic acid gas in the
surface layer of the atmosphere.  During the 24th SAE measurements were made
in Antarctic coastal waters of the total carbon dioxide (CO2) gas content in a
column of atmosphere.

The main results of these studies are as follows:

1. Many years of measurements of the ozone content at Mirny have made it
possible to establish the distinctive characteristics of a periodic increase in
total ozone content in the spring. This kind of change is most pronounced in
early spring and is evident until completion of the spring warming of the strato-
sphere over this region. The absolute maximum of total ozone content in spring
here is 585x10-3cm and the absolute minimum is 180x10-3cm.  The variations in
total ozone content over Antarctica are closely related to atmospheric circula-
tion.  A combined analysis of data on total ozone content and from separate
- 3 -                 ANT(79)PM ET/6

releases of ozone probes, which make it possible to determine the ozone con-
centration at different levels, showed that in the Antarctic troposphere the
amount of ozone present constitutes 2-5% of the total amount in the atmosphere.
As in other regions of the globe, most of the ozone is concentrated in the
layer of the stratosphere between the 100 and 50 mb levels.

2. The carbon monoxide content in a vertical column of Antarctic atmosphere
during the period of observation has a tendency to be lower in January (up to
0.03x10^{-3}cm) than in March and April (up to 0.05x10^{-3}cm).  It is interesting to
note that in the middle latitudes of the northern hemisphere the summer minimum
of CO (0.07x10^{-3}cm) is greater  than the maximum levels in Antarctica.

3. No regular variations were found in either total methane (CH_{4}) content
and its surface concentration or total nitrous oxide (N_{2}O) content in the Antarctic
atmosphere during the period of observation.  The amounts of these gases were
found to be 1.28x10^{-3} cm for total methane content and 1.32 ppm for surface methane
concentration. The data on N_{2}O for the Antarctic proved to be close to those
obtained in the northern hemisphere by various authors.  Total CH_{4} content and
surface concentration are lower in Antarctica than in the northern hemisphere.

4. Study of the weakening of radiation at different wavelengths reveals a
very low aerosol content in the Antarctic atmosphere.

5. The Schupp B_{500} power factor, one of the criteria recommended by the
WMO for measuring atmospheric opacity, averaged 0.025 in regular observations
in Antarctica. This figure agrees with that obtained during intermittent obser-
vations made earlier at the Mirny and Plato stations, an indication of the stability
over time of Antarctic aerosol opacity during the past ten years.

6. The apparatus and methodology used for making measurements in Antarctica
are completely suitable for making measurements under difficult conditions.

7. Similar research will be continued in Antarctica in order to evaluate
the trend in the level of possible changes in basic indicators of pollution and
also to make a more detailed analysis of space-time variations.

Prior to 1974 practically no study was made of pollution in the Southern
Ocean in areas away from heavily traveled shipping lanes because of the inade-
quacy of the methods used to select and process samples.  After reliable methods
were developed, systematic study and monitoring began of pollution of the Southern
Ocean by petroleum and petroleum products, which are among the most common con-
taminants found at sea.

From 1974 to 1978, as part of the POLEX-Southern Group program, ships of
the AANII selected samples and examined them for petroleum product content at
161 points in the Southern Ocean, the Drake Straits, the Scotia Sea, along a
ANT(79)PM ET/6                                  - 4 -

line from Africa to Antarctica (20o east longitude), and along a line from
Antarctica to Australia (132o east longitude).  At the end of each trip the
samples were delivered to the AANII, where they were examined by infrared
spectrophotometry.

The results showed that the petroleum product level in the samples taken
at the indicated points in the Southern Ocean was in most cases less than
0.03 mg/liter.  Some of the concentrations fell within the 0.03-0.08 mg/liter
range, which approaches the sensitivity limit of the method (0.03 mg/liter).

Most of the values for petroleum product content which were in excess of
0.03 mg/liter were for the frontal zone of the Scotia Sea, where there is a
high level of biological activity.  It is possible that the increase in the
level of substances identified as petroleum products is due to some degree
to hydrocarbons of biogenic origin.

No oil films or patches were observed visually from aboard ship.

Thus, the results show that in the areas inspected, the Southern Ocean
is virtually free of contamination by petroleum products.

Despite the low level of contamination of natural systems on the Antarctic
continent, in areas around scientific stations, bases, and outlying camps local
anthropogenic contamination may have adverse effects on some local ecosystems,
especially if these effects are of long duration.

All activities of Soviet Antarctic expeditions are carried out in keeping
with the decisions and recommendations of the Antarctic Treaty consultative
conferences.

Inspections performed by medical and biological personnel at Soviet
Antarctic stations have shown that lately a great deal of work has been done
to improve living conditions and sanitation in residential and working quarters
at the stations.

Problems of solid and liquid waste disposal are being satisfactorily handled
at most stations.  For example, all stations now burn solid wastes and garbage
that do not contain harmful substances and dispose of housecleaning waste water
and sewage in special tanks containing disinfectants.

Certain as yet unresolved problems involving subsequent purification,
utilization, and removal of wastes at a number of stations (Novolazarevskaya
and Bellingshausen) will be solved in the next few years.

Naturally this is only the start of a great deal of work that needs to be
done to make a comprehensive study of the state of the Antarctic environment
within the framework of a "Global System for Monitoring the Environment".
- 5 -                                 ANT(79)PM ET/6

Now, during the 24th SAE, a baseline background station has already 
started work in the vicinity of the Mirny observatory. In addition to 
studying long-term trends in the change in concentrations of contaminants 
and the transparency and aerosol opacity of the Antarctic atmosphere, it 
has undertaken to "monitor the past" by measuring the background levels of 
contaminants in different layers of the Antarctic ice cover.

In the future it will apparently be advisable to undertake a compre-
hensive study of local and global anthropogenic contaminants in this region 
in stations especially set aside for this purpose (land and marine ecosystems).

Next year, during the 25th SAE, plans have been made to use AANII research 
vessels and one of the Antarctic stations to study total CO2 content in the 
atmosphere (Mirny) and technogenic pollution of the environment by toxic sub-
stances, including carcinogens (Mirny, Molodezhnaya).

It goes without saying that the problem of carrying out a comprehensive 
study of the state of the environment and of "protecting" the natural environ-
ment of such an enormous region can only be solved through the close cooperation 
of many countries of the world.

In our opinion, every effort must be made to encourage the creation 
(within the framework of national programs) of comprehensive stations for 
monitoring the state of the environment and the establishment of a system 
for simulating the effect of contaminants and other harmful substances on 
various ecosystems (biogeocenoses), and to encourage as well the comprehensive 
study of various cenoses.

Naturally, all of this should be done using uniform and similar methods. 
Apparently it is necessary to recommend criteria for selecting the most important 
pollutants and related environmental factors to be monitored in the Antarctic 
and to recommend a list of the most important pollutants and related environ-
mental factors in this region of the globe.

It is necessary to continue the comprehensive study of the structure and 
dynamics of Antarctic ecosystems, biogeocenoses, groups, species, and so forth. 
It is also necessary to conduct studies to determine the sensitivity of various 
Antarctic ecosystems, as well as the "key species" to various forms of infrac-
tions such as irrational use of resources, pollution, and so forth. It is 
necessary to obtain more accurate information on marine ecosystems, as well as 
the species that need special protection, and to create the conditions for 
effectively protecting them.

It is extremely necessary to develop uniform criteria, mandatory for all 
parties to the Treaty, limiting the impact on the natural environment of the 
Antarctic. These problems should form the basis for international scientific 
cooperation on the Antarctic.

Only such an approach can, in our opinion, solve the complex problems 
involved in studying and "optimizing" the natural environment of the south 
polar region.

*   *   *
ANNEX D

ANT (79) PM ET/4/Rev. 1
June 28, 1979

GROUP OF TECHNOLOGICAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND RELATED EXPERTS
ON ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCES
SUBMITTED BY THE DELEGATION OF ARGENTINA

Suggestion for the Study of Pollution in the Antarctic

Introduction:  Recognizing the need to evaluate the current state of the
pollution of the Antarctic, and its nature and scale in the future, it is clear
that there is an urgent need to establish a program of the appropriate basic
studies for detecting discharges and human acts that may endanger the delicate
Antarctic ecosystem;

Recognizing as well the need for SCAR to coordinate the studies and all mat-
ters relating to sampling techniques, methods of analysis and interpretation and
evaluation of data:

In the formulation of a study of pollution in the Antarctic the following
points should be considered:

1)  Parameters to be evaluated:

      a)  Petroleum hydrocarbons in sea water, in marine sediments and at differ-
          ent trophic levels.

      b)  Trace metals, both in water and in sediments and at different trophic
          levels.

      c)  Halogenated hydrocarbons (DDT, PCB's, etc.) from the same sample units.
          These parameters will be evaluated to ascertain the horizontal distri-
          bution and, if possible, in the whole water column to the bottom.

2)  For evaluation of the data in point 1), it is also necessary to know:

      a)  Position, date and time of the sample.

      b)  Oceanographic data such as temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen,
          penetration of radiant energy, nutrients, phytoplanktonic pigments,
          primary production, etc.

      c)  Supplementary meteorological information.
ANT (79) PM ET/4/Rev. 1                 - 2 -

3) Areas of study:

The Study covers those Antarctic regions whose features make them most
susceptible to being affected by the discharge or transport of pollutants,
e.g.:

a) Areas of high primary production.

b) Areas of heaviest maritime traffic.

c) Areas where ice may automatically act as an agent of concentration.

d) Areas close to sites of intensive scientific exploration.

e) Areas in the vicinity of fixed, permanent or temporary stations.

4) Means of sample procurement:

Given present known concentrations and the enormous difficulties that
must be overcome in order to make an adequate sampling, some of the
platforms mentioned below should be available:

a) Oceanographic research ships.

b) Fishing boats, auxiliary vessels or vessels in transit through the
area.

c) Aircraft.

5) Analysis of samples:

To facilitate comparison of the data obtained, given the specific fea-
tures of the techniques to be used, the recommendations are:

a) For evaluation of petroleum hydrocarbons:

     Fluorescence spectrophotometry.

     Gas-phase chromatography.

b) For evaluation of trace metals:

     Neutronic activation analysis.

     Nuclear absorption spectrophotometry.

c) For evaluation of chlorinated hydrocarbons:

     Gas-phase chromatography.
- 3 -                                 ANT (79) PM ET/4/Rev. 1

The following reference materials are mentioned as a guide for the prepara-
tion and evaluation of samples:

Manuals and Guides No. 7, UNESCO, 1976
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
World Meteorological Organization
"Guide to Operational Procedures for the IGOSS Pilot Project on Marine
Pollution (Petroleum) Monitoring"

"Baseline Studies of Pollutants in the Marine Environment and Research
Recommendations"
Deliberations of the International Decade of Ocean Exploration (IDOE) Base-
line Conference, May 24-26, 1972.

"Marine Pollution Monitoring:  Strategies for a National Program"
Deliberations of a workshop held at Santa Catalina Marine Biological Labora-
tory of the University of Southern California, October 25-28, 1972.

"The Health of the Oceans" by Edward D. Goldberg, Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, La Jolla, California.  Paris:  UNESCO Press, 1976.

*   *   *
ANNEX E

ANT(79)PM ET/3
June 25, 1979

THE ROLE OF NEAR-SHORE RESEARCH IN ANTARCTIC

SUBMITTED BY S. RAKUSA-SUSZCZEWSKI
DELEGATE OF POLAND

In modern oceanology increasingly greater attention is being paid to the
coastal regions.  Most of the processes decisive for oceanic production take place
in the immediate vicinity of land.

Shelf waters of both Americas and Africa give more than 50% of world fisheries.
It is difficult to express this by numbers, at the present stage of our knowledge
about Antarctic ecosystems.  A similar situation may be expected in the Southern
Ocean.  Spatial distribution, patchiness, more or less periodical concentration of
all organisms with a very high biomassof the food web is characteristic for this
ecosystem.  This occurs mainly in the inshore areas.  Particularly abundant growth
of phytoplankton may be observed at the lee side of islands, above the elevations
of the bottom.  In the same places great concentrations of krill in swarms may be
observed. Coastal regions are places of spawning, and feeding of fish most of which
are nonmigratory and demersal species. We have observed that the biomass of larval
and juvenile stages of fish is about 5% of total krill biomas in swarms.  The
biomass of krill in swarms may approach 30 kg/m3 and on the average it is about 2
kg/m3 .  On the other hand, the mean biomass of zooplankton in the open waters of
the Southern Ocean is estimated to be 50-60 mg/m3. Appreciable quantities of birds,
seals and whales concentrate in the near shore areas to feed on krill.  It is
known that  the presence of a large number of birds and whales is a good indicator
of the presence of krill swarm.  For the ecologists the aggregation of the repre-
sentatives of all trophic levels in a relatively small space creates a number of
consequences which we do not appreciate fully yet.

A different situation exists in waters of the open ocean.  Many species of
fishes, birds and seals connected by their breeding places with the inshore areas
are absent from the web of trophic relations.  There has to be an equilibrium be-
tween the numbers of consumers and the amount of available food, as well as between
the distance of the breeding sites and feeding areas.  Since birds and seals get
their food from the ocean, there is an intensive accumulation of organic matter of
sea origin on land and fertilization in the areas of rookeries and breeding sites.
ANT(79)PM ET/3                                 - 2 -


My aim is to call attention to the significannce of investigations in the near-shore 
area and the necessity of long-term biological observations important especially 
for the understanding of the changes and trends occurring in this part of the Ant-
arctic ecosystem.  The area of the Antarctic Ocean South from the Antarctic Conver-
gence may be divided zoogeographically and phytogeographically into provinces, 
regions and subregions.  In the Antarctic ecosystem there is a natural division both 
longitudinal and latitudinal. This area differs, not only in the environmental 
conditions but also in the composition of species entering into food chains.  This 
provides another evidence for the conception of patchy distribution of biomass and 
trophic relations in the Antarctic.  As we know, shelves of the Antarctic continent 
and of some islands are potential regions for mineral exploitation, gas and oil 
especially.  For example EAMREA-report 1977 gave some calculations showing that a 
spill of oil covering say 300 km2 at the average density of about 50 tons of krill 
per km2 may put at risk about 15000 tons of krill. It is 0,00015% of the assumed 
Antarctica, but at the same time we are worrying about the "Area of Special Protec-
tion" with the surface area of 1 : 500,000 of all Antarctic ecosystem.  Is it con-
sequential?  Let me give you another example.

Region of Admiralty Bay, King George S. Shetland is a place of our complex 
investigations.  Accordingly our proposition for the Xth Treaty Meeting is also a 
place recommended as a Site of Special Scientific Interest.  I don't believe that 
in the near future we can start exploitation of oil or gas in Admiralty Bay, but 
it is more likely that another unlucky disaster like the sinking of a ship may 
happen.

Do you remember what happened to "Lindblad Explorer" some years ago?  Besides 
tourists and Polish population at Arctowski station what else would be at risk in 
this case?  This area of Admiralty Bay is 131 km2.  Last summer we have noted in 
this region 23,661 pairs of Adeli penguins, 10,550 pairs of P. antarctica, 3117 
pairs of P. papua, so all together 74,656 specimens of penguins will be at risk. 
All these penguins ate 50,181 tons of krill per day in December and transported on 
to the land about 6,348 tons of dry weight of faeces per day.  We have in Admiralty 
Bay 600-960 elephant seals, about 110 Weddell seals, and 220 fur seal, 25 species 
of fish were recorded in water of Admiralty Bay, one more than in the Scotia Sea 
because one new species of Raja was described by our ichtiologist as the Raja 
rakusai.

Hitherto we have no exact data on krill stock in this region, but it is clear 
that standing stock in this place is too low for the maintainance of all penguins, 
seals and fishes.  They must get food off Admiralty Bay.  Admiralty Bay as a part 
of inshore ecosystem is not self-supporting in its geogr?cal boundaries in 
summer season.  I think, that some of the presented data, together with the earlier 
comments are sufficiently convincing for the appreciation of the significance of 
neritic zone investigations for the understanding of the wh?le Antarctic ecosystem.

The IXth Treaty Consultative Meeting suggestion about gas and oil drilling 
moratorium is fully in accordance with our conviction about the negative influence 
of this on the inshore part of the Antarctic ecosystem.
- 3 -
ANT(79)PM ET/3

Fig. 1 shows conceptual model of major trophic relations conditioning the cir-
culation of matter and energy flow in the inshore and off-shore parts of the 
Antarctic ecosystem.
- 4 -
ANT(79)PM ET/3


LAND                   INSHORE      AREA         O P E N    W A T E R S
  WIND                     
  ENERGY                     
         LAND                              
         COMMU-                             
         NITIES                           
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
                  PHYTO-                  C C E A N                  PHYTO-
                  PLANKTON                                              PLANKTON
                       |                          |                       |
                       |                          |                       |
                       V                          |                       V
                  KRILL                       CURRENT                 KRILL
                                                      TRANSPORT                
                       |                          |                       |
                       |                          |                       |
                  ---------------------          |                  ---------
                  |         |          |         |                  |       |
                  |         |          |         |                  |       |
                  V         V          V         |                  V       V
               FISHES     BIRDS       SEALS      |               FISHES   BIRDS   SEALS
                  |         |          |         |                  |       |       |
                  |         |          |         |                  |       |       |
                  V         V          V         |                  V       V       V
              WHALES     CEPHALO     ZOO         |              WHALES   CEPHALO   
                  |         |        BENTOS      |                  |       |       
                  |         |          |         |                  |       |       
                  |         |          |         |                  |       |       
                  ---------------------         |                  ---------
                             |                    |                         |
                             |                    |                         |
                             V                    |                         V
                        DECOMPOSITION             |                    DECOMPOSITION
                             |                    |                         |
                             |                    |                         |
                             V                    |                         V
                        NUTRIENTS                 UPWELLING              NUTRIENTS
                             |                    |                         |
                             -----------------------------------------------
                                                      CURRENT TRANSPORT
ANNEX F

ANT (79)PM ET/5
June 25, 1979

POLISH PROPOSAL FOR AN ANTARCTIC GEOPHYSICAL GEOTRAVERSE
DRAKE PASSAGE - ANTARCTIC PENINSULA GEOTRAVERSE
SUBMITTED BY PROFESSOR K. BIRKENMAJER
DELEGATION OF POLAND

Outline of the program for geophysical marine expedition to South Shetland 
Islands, West Antarctica, in 1979/80.

Organizers:  Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Geophysics (Warsaw)

Vessel:  O.R.P. "Kopernik", 1600 BRT.

Area:  Between Antarctic Peninsula and Drake Passage, including Bransfield 
Strait and the shelf area surrounding South Shetland Islands.  Based on 
H. Arctowski Station, Admiralty Bay, King George Island (South Shetland Islands).
Area of investigations about 150 x 500 km.

Scientific Tasks:

(1)  Geophysical measurements (seismic, magnetic) on geotraverses 
across shelf, continental slope and rise and oceanic botto.., with particular 
stress upon tectonically active areas such as Bransfield Rift and Bridgeman 
Island - Penguin Island - Deception Island volcanic zone;

(2)  An attempt at constructing geodynamic models for this part 
of West Antarctica.

Methods:  Reflection seismology (air-gun system) down to 3-5 thousand 
meters on shelf geotraverses, altogether 1500-2000 km of profiling:

(1)  Shallow refraction seismology (air-gun system) along short 
profiles 50-60 km long each, altogether ca 500 km;

(2)  Magnetic profiling along seismic profiles.

The above methods are harmless to Antarctic marine environment and are 
generally approved techniques for investigation of shallow parts of the Earth's 
crust.
ANT(79)PM ET/5                        - 2 -

(3) It is also considered a program of deep refraction-seismic 
sounding for recognition of structure of Earth's crust and the Upper Mantle,
and the depth of Moho.  This would be done on point geotraverses 150-300 km
long.  This method needs some shooting in open ocean outside shelf area to
obtain good results.  It is necessary to use small explosives of 25-50 kg of
dynamite.  A special technical project is being elaborated and will be con-
sulted with SCAR.

It should be noted that such technique using small explosives has been
used with good results by the same scientific team of ORP "Kopernik" and
Institute of Geophysics of the Polish Academy of Sciences in a joint Polish-
American-Norwegian project (Polish Academy of Sciences - St. Louis University -
University of Bergen) for deep seismic sounding of the shelf and shelf-margin
area of Svalbard (Spitsbergen) in the Arctic, and proved to be of minimum
negative impact on polar biota.

Further Proposals: The Drake Passage-Antarctic Peninsula Geotraverse
could be a starting point for similar geotraverses of other shelf and shelf-
margin areas of Antarctica done on international cooperation basis.  An
informal working group could be established to delineate and supervise such
programs.

*   *   *
ANNEX G

ANT(79)PM ET/8
June 27, 1979

SOME PROBLEMS IN ANTARCTIC ECOSYSTEM PROTECTION
SUBMITTED BY K. BIRKENMAJER
AND S. RAKUSA-SUSZCZEWSKI
DELEGATES OF POLAND

International programs coordnated by SCAR should be elaborated and carried out to determine zones and areas of necessary protection of major ecologic elements of Antarctic ecosystem (in relation to Recommendation IX-1, IX Consultative Meeting, London 1977, Report of the Group of Experts on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation).

As an example, we would like to stress the need for closer investigation of the following elements of Antarctic ecosystem:

(1)    Location and problem of stability of larger krill accumulations with respect to oceanographic, climatic and other parameters, as a basic element of Antarctic ecosystem;

(2)    Location and problem of stability of principal breeding grounds of penguins and other birds, and determination of feeding grounds of larger bird colonies at the time of breeding;

(3)    Location and problem of stability of main breeding grounds of pinnipeds, such as Sea Elephant (Mirounga leonina) and Kerguelen Fur Seal (Arctocephalus gazella), and determination of feeding grounds of larger colonies at the time of breeding.

The research should be directed towards determination of minimum, maximum and optimum zones and areas of necessary protection of such breeding-and-feeding grounds.

It is suggested that such breeding-and-feeding grounds determined as the result of special investigations should be registered by SCAR as Antarctic Breeding and Feeding Grounds (ABFG) which would include breeding grounds on land and/or ice and related feeding grounds at sea.

Recommendations should be elaborated as to the types of activity allowed in the ABFG's. It is believed that no exploratory drilling (phase 2) and no
ANT(79)PM ET/8                                  - 2 -

full-scale exploitation (phase 3) of minerals either at sea or on land should be
allowed in the areas designated and registered as ABFG, and that the basic explora-
tion (phase 1) within the ABFG's should be kept at minimum.

*   *   *
