ANTARCTIC TREATY                
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
                                                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                
                                                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA                
                                                
SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979                
                                                
WASHINGTON, D.C.                
                                                
ANT/X/33                
September 25, 1979                
                                                
AGENDA ITEM 5                
ORIGINAL:     Russian                
                                                
SCIENTIFIC AND ECOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF THE                
MINERAL RESOURCES IN ANTARCTICA                
                                                
(Draft Recommendation Submitted by the Delegation of the                
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)                
                                                
The Representatives,                
                                                
Noting that Antarctica is a vast region of the earth, with a unique and                
extremely vulnerable environment which has not yet been sufficiently                
studied;                
                                                
Expressing serious concern regarding the protection of the unique                
Antarctic environment from undesirable and dangerous effects on the                
Antarctic enyironment of possible activities involved in the explora-                
tion and exploitation of the Antarctic mineral resources, should such                
activities be permitted;                
                                                
Taking into consideration the report of the Group of Experts on the                
ecological and technological aspects of exploration and exploitation                
of the Antarctic mineral resources, prepared at the Washington meeting                
of the groups of experts on June 25-29, 1979;                
                                                
Noting the useful character of the work carried out by the experts;                
                                                
Conscious of the inadequacy of the existing knowledge for determining                
possible ecological consequences, and the nature of the potential                
effect on the environment in Antarctica of activities involved in                
exploration and exploitation of the Antarctic mineral resources,                
should such activities be permitted;                
                                                
Noting, in this connection, a need to conduct basic ecological                
studies in Antarctica;                



```
ANT/X/33                                 - 2 -

RECOMMEND to their Governments that:

1. They assist as soon as possible in developing and conducting special
   national and international research programs with the aim of
   revealing potential objects of the harmful effects of
   activities involved in exploration and exploitation, assessing
   the nature and scope of such effects, determining the most
   vulnerable components of ecosystems and the most sensitive
   indicators of contamination.

2. They promote, along with special ecological investigations, an
   intensified development of Antarctic studies in biology,
   meteorology, physical oceanography and the physics of
   atmospheric phenomena, climatology, glaciology, hydro- and
   cryogeology, marine and engineering geology, and in other areas
   to provide initial factual data for ecological evaluations and
   planning.  Efficient and regular exchange of the information
   obtained and its availability to ecologists are of special
   importance, as different disciplines traditionally have
   preferential development in different countries;

3. They take measures to intensify those studies that are most
   efficient in promoting the solution of ecological problems.
   It is considered expedient to make special efforts to retrieve
   and process the data from the observations of previous years
   that are essential for this purpose.

4. They ask SCAR to continue studies of the effects on the Antarctic
   environment of activities involved in exploration and exploitation
   of the Antarctic mineral resources, should such activities be
   permitted.

*   *   *

 

 

. 
. 
.
