ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979

WASHINGTON, D.C.

AGENDA ITEM 10

TOURIST AND PRIVATE EXPEDITIONS TO THE ANTARCTIC

Recommendations from SCAR Working Group on Logistics

(The attached paper was prepared by the SCAR Working Group on Logistics and is submitted by the New
Zealand Delegation at the Request of that Working Group.  It is not a New Zealand paper.)

ANT/X/19
September 19, 1979
ORIGINAL: English
ANT/X/19

- 2 -

Introduction

At the XVth SCAR Meeting held in Chamonix, France, in May 1978, the Logistics Working Group considered recent developments in tourist activity and private expeditions, known and possible future developments, the problems that had already occurred, and the difficulties likely to occur in the future.

Activities Reported

1. Tourist activities in the past have not been extensive, and those that have occurred have been organised by recognised tour operators who invariably consult with the appropriate countries. More recently however, there has been an increase in tourist activities, particularly by small groups of private individuals who are not well organised or equipped to undertake voyages to the Antarctic. Present practice is to discourage such expeditions, but this is resulting in unannounced arrivals to Antarctic Bases, which can cause disruption to base activities, particularly if the expedition is in distress.

2. The main increase in tourist activities has been in the Peninsula area of West Antarctica. In the case of tourist ships, the problems currently arising are fairly well under control; but if tourist activity continues to increase, it will require more concerted attention. Individual tour operators presently notify their govern- ments of their proposed itineraries with details of ships, equipment and safety precautions. Visits to Antarctic bases are cleared with the National Antarctic organisation concerned, and rules of procedure are laid down. In some cases, it has been necessary to withhold permission for tourist visits to bases because of the likelihood of disruption to scientific programmes. In other cases, the number of visits has been shared between tour operators. It is estimated there are about ten ships involved each year at stations in the Peninsula area.

3. The past ten years has seen a great increase in the number of small auxiliary-engine sailing vessels in the Peninsula area. Each summer several arrive unexpectedly and often call on Antarctic bases for assistance with water, fuel, food, repairs, etc. (These have been referred to as "lonely sailors.") There is also a continuing and increasing possibility of the need to mount search and rescue operations. In the 1977/78 season the vessel 'En Avant' from the U.K. bound for Smith Island, South Shetlands, left Rio and was not heard of again. Searches were made in the Antarctic by ships of several nations and by Argentine aircraft, but without success. In 1978 the yacht 'Damien II' with a crew of two, is wintering at Adelaide Island, some 60 Kilometres from the nearest occupied station. Clearly, in the event of any mishap the work of the station could be disrupted by the need to mount a rescue operation.

4. In addition to shipboard tourist activities there have been several private expeditions planned involving mountain climbing or polar travel. These cannot be regarded as scientific expeditions,
- 3 -

but unless they are properly equipped and supported there is a 
potential for emergencies developing which could divert resources 
from genuine scientific programmes.

In discussing some specific plans it became clear to the Group 
that the organisers of such private expeditions were attempting 
to enlist support by approaching several national Antarctic 
operators saying that they had already had support from the others.

5. In the case of East Antarctica the problems are not so acute because 
only very limited tourist activity has taken place. However, there 
has been considerable interest shown in Australia and New Zealand 
to develop some form of tourist access to East Antarctica.  In the 
last two years aircraft have been chartered to over-fly the 
Antarctic coastline between 130°E and 170°W, often as far south as 
80°S, starting from both Australia and New Zealand.  The number of 
flights is increasing and in 1977/78 there were ten such flights. 
These flights could pose problems in the future because the ICAO 
air traffic control and flight information services are not extended 
south of 60°S.  Clearly, an aircraft carrying 350 passengers which 
is unable to land in the Antarctic, would require extensive search 
and rescue facilities if any mishap occurred.  Also, many of these 
flights were, without prior notice, entering the usual flight path 
taken by aircraft operating between New Zealand and McMurdo in 
support of national Antarctic programmes.

6. In 1978, for the first time, enquiries have been made by tour 
operators to visit the Antarctic in areas south of Australia. 
While no tours have yet been organised, the enquiries indicate 
the extent of public demand for such tours and therefore it can 
only be a matter of time before they are organised.

A small private expedition sailed to the Antarctic during 1977/78 
from Australia and spent two months in Antarctic waters.  Regular 
radio contact was maintained with Australian Antarctic stations.

Group's Recommendations

1. The Group concluded that tourist activities will increase therefore 
a need is emerging for the Treaty Nations to adopt a common policy 
towards tourism in the future.

2. Working Group Members should keep each other fully informed on all 
approaches being received from planners of private expeditions so 
as to avoid misunderstandings and difficulties through accepting 
all statements made as being true.

3. The Working Group considers that all over-flights must be identified 
as "self-supported expeditions" and information of their routes and 
timetable should be advised to the Treaty Nations in advance of any 
flights taking place.
ANT/X/19

- 4 -

4. Due to the likely increase in tourist activities in Antarctica,
the Working Group considers that, although the present situation
is not serious, it recommends that national Antarctic Operating
Organisations should urge their governments to treat any
Antarctic activity as an expedition and exchange information in
advance with other governments and their operating agencies.
Every effort should be made to ensure that expeditions are
properly equipped and supplied, and that adequate arrangements
are made for radio communications.

* * *
