ANTARCTIC TREATY
TENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕСЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
DIXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
DECIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SEPTEMBER 17 - OCTOBER 5, 1979
WASHINGTON, D.C.

ANT/X/50
October 4, 1979

PERSONAL REPORT OF THE CHAIRMAN OF THE WORKING GROUP
ON THE QUESTION OF MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION:
LEGAL AND POLITICAL ASPECTS

This report by the Chairman of the Working Group On The Question of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation:  Legal and Political Aspects (Agenda Item 5) at the Tenth Consultative Meeting is a personal effort to summarize the exchange of views which took place.  It is the hope of the Chairman that it may aid in future consideration of these issues.  In considering this report, it should also be borne in mind that the exchange of views was informal, often reflecting the personal views of the representatives. The discussions were structured to identify the range of relevant issues rather than to reach agreement on any item.

In the paragraphs which follow, I have tried to summarize what I believe is or may be common ground among the participants, as well as to identify particular elements of difficulty which were noted.  The report is structured using subject headings which correspond to an outline prepared by the Chair which was used to facilitate the exchange of views.  That outline is attached. This report was not reviewed by the Working Group.

The predominant view of the Working Group was that the Consultative Parties should accelerate their efforts to create jointly a regime for the exploration and exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources.  The regime would be established by consensus among the Consultative Parties.  This regime would determine whether Antarctic mineral resources could be developed in an acceptable manner and would regulate such activities should development be determined to be acceptable.

In discussing the regime, two themes were predominant -- the positions of the Consultative Parties with respect to those matters dealt with in Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty would be unaffected by the regime, and that the Antarctic environment should be protected.
ANT/X/50                                  - 2 -

Doubts were expressed whether the regime need deal with all mineral resource 
issues, i.e., those aspects of exploration short of exploratory drilling.
In support of this view, it was pointed out that the Reports of the Group 
of Experts on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation (London, 1977) and of 
the Preparatory Meeting of Ecological, Technological and Other Related 
Experts on Mineral Resources Exploration and Exploitation (Washington, 1979)
noted that the first stages of exploration were generally considered 
environmentally benign and could begin at any time with available technology.
There was general support of the need for a legal and political accommodation 
on these first stages of exploration. In this connection, participants 
noted that the existence of commercially exploitable minerals in Antarctica 
had not been determined. However, the conduct of preliminary exploration 
activities would create political strains among the Consultative Parties. 
Therefore, they had adopted the policy that exploration and exploitation 
not be undertaken while they sought to create a regime to deal with such 
activities.

In developing the regime, an accommodation would have to be found between 
those claiming national sovereignty in Antarctica and those who make no 
such claims nor recognize the claims made by others. Reaching such an 
accommodation will require that all participants be able to identify 
advantages unavailable without a regime. This accommodation should be 
sought in developing the various elements of the regime rather than 
through an attempt to renegotiate Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. 
The regime to be developed, therefore, would need to be consistent with 
the principles and purpose of the Antarctic Treaty.

Area of Application

There was general agreement that offshore areas were most likely to be the 
first and perhaps only areas of mineral resource development; however, a 
number of participants believed that the regime should deal with both on- 
shore and off-shore areas. This belief was related to both the need for 
environmental protection as well as to the accomodations necessary to 
take account of the provisions of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. 
The discussions noted that a regime was necessary for both the claimed 
areas in Antarctica and the unclaimed area to ensure protection of the 
Antarctic environment. Consideration was given to the regime which would 
apply to the deep seabed south of 60 degrees South latitude.  It was 
recognized that these two regimes and their possible relationship bears 
directly upon matters dealt with by Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. 
The participants noted the desirability of developing a relationship with 
the future International Seabed Authority.

Attention was directed to the fact that some islands south of 60 degrees 
South latitude have continental margins extending north of 60 degrees 
South latitude while other islands north of this latitude have continental 
margins which extend south.
- 3 -
ANT/X/50

Activities to be Covered

There was a general view that any future regime would deal with hydrocarbon 
resources.  Not all delegations spoke to the issue of whether the regime 
should also deal with other minerals.  A number of delegations were of the 
view that the regime should cover all mineral resource activities, both 
to assure environmental protection and to establish an acceptable legal 
framework with respect to Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty.  Others 
noted, however, that offshore hydrocarbons were the most likely mineral 
resource to be of any foreseeable commercial interest, should 
commercially exploitable deposits exist, and that the principle emphasis of 
the regime should be on offshore hydrocarbons.

Similarly, many participants said it would be unacceptable to develop a 
regime limited to exploratory stages only, but it would be possible to 
envision the establishment of a regime that spelled out in detail all 
aspects of the earlier stages of mineral development while covering 
later stages in less detail.  In the view of these participants, however, 
a basic accommodation on all stages would be necessary at the outset.

Note was made of the findings of the London and Washington Group of Experts 
that exploration short of exploratory drilling was generally considered 
environmentally benign.  Such exploration, however, did raise legal and 
political difficulties.  Accordingly, this was one of the purposes of 
the policy of restraint presently exercised by the Consultative Parties 
while progress was being made toward the timely establishment of a regime.

Discussion of this item gave rise to an exchange of views on the difference 
between scientific research and exploration.  Given the similarities of 
these activities, many participants believed that the availability and 
free exchange of data was the only basis for making the distinction 
between scientific research and exploration.  In this regard, some 
participants noted their view that only scientific investigation on the 
continent and the continental shelf was expressly permitted under the 
Antarctic Treaty, and under the Treaty results of such research shall be 
exchanged and made freely available.  Others were of the view that the 
only limitation on exploration throughout the Antarctic Treaty area is 
set forth in paragraph 8 of Recommendation IX-1.

Environmental Protection

The participants agreed that a general purpose of the regime would be to 
assure the protection of the Antarctic environment from adverse effects 
resulting from mineral resource activities were they to occur.  This 
necessitated formulation of environmental criteria and standards based 
on scientific data against which mineral resource activities would be 
judged.  Many participants also believed that the regime should provide a
ANT/X/50

- 4 -

means of determining the sufficiency of environmental data.  Thus, some
participants believed that before mineral resource activities should be
permitted under a regime, a determination would be made both as to the
sufficiency of environmental information on which to base a decision,
as well as the conclusions to be drawn from such information.

Another aspect of environmental protection under the regime would be to
provide for the identification and protection of special areas of
environmental vulnerability and ecological importance.

The participants noted that the Working Group on Scientific and Environmental
Aspects were directing their attention to the creation of scientific programs
to obtain needed information.  They also noted the inter-relationship between
the legal and political aspects and the scientific and ecological aspects was
itself a legal and political issue which would have to be dealt with on the
creation of a regime.

Participation

While not all participants spoke to the issue, the general view was that the
regime should be open to participation by other States in accordance with
certain criteria. Among the criteria suggested were compliance with the
Antarctic Treaty and Agreed Recommendations, as well as with the requirements
set forth in the regime.

There was also a general view that the interest of all mankind would need to
be recognized in the regime. Some participants believed this was applicable
to economic benefits generated from mineral resource activities in Antarctica,
if any. In this connection, it was pointed out that very little is known of
the potential economic benefits that might be generated.

One tentative suggestion for benefit sharing was that the benefits from
exploitation be reinvested in scientific research in Antarctica.

It was noted that the regime might be established in a way which would allow
a variety of legal relationships to be utilized for participation in
Antarctic mineral resource activities, e.g., private companies, state
companies, private consortia, public consortia.

Institutional Mechanisms

Discussion of this item was very preliminary. Nonetheless, a basic approach
suggested was a regime with one or more institutional mechanisms.  It was
noted that there was a significant difference in the nature of expertise
required for the day-to-day management and decision-making and in the nature
of expertise required for dealing with the broader legal and political issues
with which a regime would contend. Furthermore, decisions regarding environ-
mental standards and the environmental acceptability of certain mineral
resource activities might require another body of expertise.
- 5 -                                 ANT/X/50

It was suggested that the regime might identify the various stages in the 
mineral resource development process.  Different criteria might be 
established in the regime for these different stages.

There was insufficient discussion on how various decisions of the 
institutional mechanism might be implemented.

With respect to decision-making on mineral resource activities, participants 
from states claiming territorial sovereignty in Antarctica were of the view 
that such decisions were within their sole competence when mineral resource 
activities were undertaken in areas they claim.  Participants from states 
which do not recognize or claim territorial sovereignty in Antarctica 
believed that they were equally entitled to independently make such 
decisions for their nationals since they recognize no claim to sovereignty 
in Antarctica.  Nonetheless, all participants who spoke to this question 
expressed the view that these were their starting points and that they 
were willing to create jointly a regime to govern mineral resource activities.

Terms and Conditions for Mineral Resource Activities

It was recognized that a great deal of specificity would be required in the 
regime in order to deal with such issues such as licenses, tenure, liability, 
etc.  However, participants were of the general view that it was too 
early in the discussion to go into these aspects in detail.  In particular, 
there was a view that it was premature to discuss these matters until 
there was a clearer understanding of some of the basic accomodations 
necessary to establish a regime.  Once there is a clearer understanding, 
it was believed that many of the specific questions relating to terms and 
conditions could be dealt with more easily.

On liability, there was a general view that a form of strict or absolute 
liability should be created and that compulsory insurance should be 
required; however, further thought needed to be given to this point.

Relationship with the Antarctic Treaty

All participants agreed that the regime to be created should be compatible 
with the Antarctic Treaty and not require its amendment.  Some suggested 
that the Consultative Parties pursue an exercise parallel to that being 
followed for living resources leading to a separate treaty.  Others 
suggested a regime could be established within the Antarctic Treaty system, 
but they indicated a willingness to also consider concluding a separate treaty 
were it to prove necessary.  It was also noted that a regime might be established 
based upon more than one legal instrument.
ANT/X/50                                  - 6 -

Relationship with Other International Bodies

There was a common view that the new regime must be coordinated with other 
international bodies such as the International Seabed Authority, IMCO and 
the Antarctic Marine Living Resource Commission.  The exact nature of 
that coordination needs further definition.

In the preparation of this report certain items may have been omitted for 
which I must take all responsibility.

Submitted by the Chairman
October 4, 1979

Norman A. Wulf
- 7 -

ANT/X/50

CHAIRMAN'S OUTLINE

I.  Area of Application

II.  Activities to be Covered
- hydrocarbons only or all minerals
- exploration only or exploration, exploratory drilling, and exploitation

III.  Environmental Protection
- formulation of environmental standard and determination of sufficiency of environmental data for entire area
- formulation of environmental standard and determination of sufficiency of environmental data for specific activities
- identification of areas of environmental vulnerability and ecological importance

IV.  Participation
- in mineral resource activities
- in decision-making
- in benefit sharing

V.  Institutional Mechanisms
ANT/X/50                                  - 8 -

VI. Terms and Conditions for Mineral Resource
        Activities
- licensing
- tenure
- enforcement and monitoring
- liability

VII. Relationship with Antarctic Treaty

VIII. Relationship with Other International Organizations

*   *   *
