ANT/XII/INF 14
27 September 1983

RULES_OF_PROCEDURES
(Draft paragraphs for inclusion in the Final Report)
RULES_OF_PROCEDURES
(Draft paragraph for inclusion in Final Report)

Draft Rules of Procedure incorporating the necessary 
amendments were prepared by the Meeting, and will be referred to 
Governments for their consideration on the clear understanding 
that this would not affect the right of Special Consultative 
Meetings which are also held pursuant to Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty to adopt their own Rules of Procedure. 
Consultative Parties which have not indicated their views by 1 
February 1984 will be taken to have accepted the text: if any 
government requests that the matter be discussed further, the 
Australian Government will either pursue the matter through 
diplomatic channels or will refer the draft Rules of Procedure 
to the preparatory meeting for the XIIIth Consultative Meeting.
DRAFT_REVISED_RULES_OF_PROCEDURE

1.      Meetings held pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty shall be known as Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings. Contracting Parties entitled to participate in those 
Meeetings shall be referred to as "Consultative Parties"; other 
Contracting Parties invited to attend those Meetings shall be 
referred to as "non-Consultative Parties".

Representation

2.      Each Consultative Party shall be represented by a 
delegation composed of a Representative and such Alternate 
Representatives, Advisers and other persons as each state may 
deem necessary. Each non-Consultative Party which has been 
invited to attend a Consultative Meeting shall be represented by 
a delegation composed of a Representative and such other persons 
as it may deem necessary, within such numerical limit as may 
from time to time be determined by the host government in 
consultation with the Consultative Parties. The names of 
members of delegations shall be communicated to the host 
government prior to the opening of the Meeting.

3.      The order of precedence of the delegations shall be in 
accordance with the alphabet in the language of the host 
government, all delegations of non-Consultative Parties 
following after those of Consultative Parties.

Officers

4.      A representative of the host government shall be the 
Temporary Chairman of the Meeting and shall preside until the 
Meeting elects a Chairman.

1
5.     At its inaugural session, a Chairman from one of the 
Consultative Parties shall be elected. The other 
representatives of Consultative Parties shall serve as 
Vice-Chairmen of the Meeting in order of precedence.  The 
Chairman normally shall preside at all plenary sessions.  If he 
is absent from any session or part thereof, the Vice-Chairmen, 
rotating on the basis of the order of precedence as established 
by Rule 3, shall preside during each such session.

Secretariat

6.     The Secretary shall be appointed by the Meeting on the 
proposal of the Chairman.  The Secretary shall be responsible 
for providing secretarial services, and shall carry out such 
other tasks as the Meeting may require or direct.

Sessions

7.     The opening plenary session shall be held in public, 
other sessions shall be held in private, unless the Meeting 
shall determine otherwise.

Committees_and_Working_Groups

8.     The Meeting, to facilitate its work, may establish such 
committees as it may deem necessary for the performance of its 
functions, defining their terms of reference.

9.     The committees shall operate under the Rules of Procedure 
of the Meeting, except where they are inapplicable.

2
10. Working groups may be established by the Meeting or its 
committees.

Conduct of Business

11. A quorum shall be constituted by two-thirds of the 
representatives of Consultative Parties participating in the 
Meeting.

12. The Chairman shall exercise the powers of his office in 
accordance with customary practice. He shall see to the 
observance of the rules of procedure and the maintenance of 
proper order. The Chairman, in the exercise of his functions, 
remains under the authority of the Meeting.

13. Subject to Rule 26, no representative may address the 
Meeting without having previously obtained the permission of the 
Chairman and the Chairman shall call upon speakers in the order 
in which they signify their desire to speak. The Chairman may 
call a speaker to order if his remarks are not relevant to the 
subject under discussion.

14. During the discussion of any matter, a representative of 
a Consultative Party may rise to a point of order and the point 
of order shall be decided immediately by the Chairman in 
accordance with the rules of procedure. A representative of a 
Consultative Party may appeal against the ruling of the 
Chairman: The appeal shall be put to a vote immediately, and 
the Chairman's ruling shall stand unless over-ruled by a 
majority of the representatives of Consultative Parties present

3
and voting.  A representative of a Consultative Party rising to
a point of order shall not speak on the substance of the matter
under discussion.

15.  The Meeting may limit the time to be allotted to each
speaker, and the number of times he may speak on any subject.
When debate is thus limited and a representative has spoken his
allotted time, the Chairman shall call him to order without
delay.

16.  During the discussion of any matter, a representative of
a Consultative Party may move the adjournment of the debate on
the item under discussion.  In addition to the proposer of the
motion, representatives of two Consultative Parties may speak in
favour of, and two against, the motion, after which the motion
shall be put to the vote immediately.  The Chairman may limit
the time to be allowed to speakers under this rule.

17.  A representative of a Consultative Party may at any time
move the closure of the debate on the item under discussion,
whether or not any other representative has signified his wish
to speak.  Permission to speak on the closure of the debate
shall be accorded only to representatives of two Consultative
Parties opposing the closure, after which the motion shall be
put to the vote immediately.  If the Meeting is in favour of the
closure, the Chairman shall declare the closure of the debate.
The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers under
this rule. (This rule shall not apply to debate in committees.)

18.  During the discussion of any matter, a representative of
a Consultative Party may move the suspension or the adjournment
of the Meeting. Such motions shall not be debated, but shall be 
put to the vote immediately. The Chairman may limit the time to 
be allowed to the speaker moving the suspension or adjournment 
of the Meeting.

19. Subject to rule 14, the following motions shall have 
precedence in the following order over all other proposals or 
motions before the Meeting:

    (a) to suspend the Meeting;
    (b) to adjourn the Meeting;
    (c) to adjourn the debate on the item under discussion;
    (d) for the closure of the debate on the item under 
discussion.

20. Decisions of the Meeting on all matters of procedure 
shall be taken by a majority of the representatives of 
Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting, each of whom 
shall have one vote.

Languages

21. English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the 
official languages of the Meeting.

22. Any representative may speak in a language other than the 
official languages. However, in such cases he shall provide for 
interpretation into one of the official languages.

5
Recommendations_and_Final_Report

23.     The recommendations formulated by the Meeting shall be 
approved by the representatives of all Consultative Parties 
present and shall be set forth in the final report.

24.     The final report shall also contain a brief account of 
the proceedings of the Meeting.  It will be approved by a 
majority of the representatives of Consultative Parties present 
and shall be transmitted by the Secretary of the Meeting to 
governments of all Consultative and non-Consultative Parties, 
for their consideration.

Non-Consultative_Parties

25.     Representatives of Contracting Parties, if invited to 
attend a Consultative Meeting, may be present at:

        (a) all plenary sessions of the Meeting, and

        (b) all formal Committees or Working Groups, comprising all 
Consultative Parties, unless a representative of a 
Consultative Party requests otherwise in any particular 
case.

26.     The relevant Chairman may invite a representative of a 
non-Consultative Party to address the Meeting, Committee or 
Working Group which he is attending, unless a representative of 
a Consultative Party requests otherwise.  The Chairman shall at 
any time give priority to representatives of Consultative 
Parties who signify their desire to speak, and may in inviting

6
representatives of non-Consultative Parties to address the
Meeting limit the time to be allotted to each speaker and the
number of times he may speak on any subject.

27.    Non-Consultative Parties are not entitled to participate
in the taking of decisions.

28.(a). Non-Consultative Parties may submit documents to the
Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as
information documents. Such documents shall be relevant
to matters under consideration at the Meeting.

(b) Unless a representative of a Consultative Party requests
otherwise such documents shall be available only in the
language or languages in which they were submitted.

Amendments

29.    These Rules of Procedure may be amended by a two-thirds
majority of the representatives of Consultative Parties
participating at the Meeting. This rule shall not apply to
Rules 23, 25 and 27, amendment of which shall require the
approval of the representatives of all Consultative Parties
present at the Meeting.

 
7
