TRATADO ANTARTICO
XII REUNION CONSULTIVA                                          ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XII CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                                ANT/XII/INF6
                                                                12 September 1983

CANBERRA
13-27 SEPTEMBER
1983

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR STANDARDS TO BE MET BY CRUISE
OPERATORS IN THE ANTARCTIC

(Recommended by one tour operator)
miss Richter/mrs G[?]dling.

Adapted from recommendations of tour operators Neckermann 
and Reisen, and submitted by the Australian Delegation as a 
basis for discussion.

1.      Permission for Antarctic expedition cruises should be 
granted to operators who can give proof of the following:

1. Capable ship and crew
2. Insurance
3. Educational program
4. Survival program
5. Limited number of passengers - up to 300 and no more
6. Control of group movements.

2.      Ships should

        have sufficient specification and technical equipment to 
meet Antarctic conditions. Liners without rudder and 
propellor protection should not enter Antarctic waters;

        be capable of being self contained for a maximum period 
of 20-30 days;

        have an incinerator for rubbish, and owners should have 
to prove that no oil will be discharged;

        have modern navigational, communication and weather-chart 
receiving equipment;

        have a hospital, fully equipped with a minimum of two 
doctors; and

        be required to follow all decisions of station 
commanders.

1.
3.      Shipowners should

        -   have to prove that at least the Captain and the First 
            Officer are trained for Antarctic waters. Consultation 
            with experienced operators should take place;

        -   have to prove that deckhands are capable of navigating 
            and operating rubber dinghies, which are vital equipment 
            in Antarctic waters for landing; and

        -   be required to assign one co-ordinator for all small boat 
            operations. Sufficient communication systems, such as 
            walkie-talkies should be used for such operations.

INSURANCE

4.      Shipowners and charterers should have to prove that 
        vessel, crew and passengers are insured.

EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM

5.      Charterers should be required to issue, together with 
        their application for permission to call at a station, details 
        of their:

        1.  Sailing schedule (maximum of 7 days per cruise in the 
            Antarctic)

        2.  Name of qualified expedition leader

        3.  Name(s) of qualified lecturer(s)

        4.  Summary of lecture themes

        5.  Summary of educational material/equipment on board.

2.
SURVIVAL PROGRAM

6.      Shipowners should be required to supply survival 
equipment including:

1. Mountaineering equipment
2. Sleeping bags and tents
3. Hot drink containers and minimum food rations.

7.      It is advisable to provide a survival expert for all 
passenger movements.  Essential equipment should be landed prior 
to passengers.  A briefing should take place before entering an 
area.  In addition, all movements should be co-ordinated by an 
appropriate communication means.  The survival expert should be 
directly responsible to the expedition leader.  A ship's 
capacity for the Antarctic should not exceed 300 passengers. 
150 to 200 passengers are preferable, being the best number of 
control in order to prevent disturbance of any kind.

8.      All nations party to the Treaty should establish one 
authority within their administration to whom charterers of 
expedition vessels can apply for permission to enter Antarctic 
waters.  This authority should judge competence and distribute 
the application to all other nations concerned.  At present, 
procedures and standards required by different administrations 
vary greatly.  Authorities should analyse the submitted schedule 
and should be permitted to apply essential restrictions, 
delineate prohibited areas, or otherwise restrict visits to 
stations.  The arrival of passengers can reduce manpower 
resulting in the restriction of scientific work at stations.

9.      It is recommended that shipowners and charterers should 
have to accept an observer to travel with them (against 
payment).

3.
10.     A reasonable landing fee should be paid to the authority 
concerned, the money to be used for scientific research.

11.     If cruises are to be educational it is very necessary to 
teach people how to approach rookeries. Passengers are very 
surprised by the tameness of animals and they therefore move 
close to species. Disturbance of any kind is the biggest 
problem of all movements in Antarctica. Close control on all 
aspects of movements is necessary, and in our experience our 
efforts have worked, both in respect of the wildlife, and also 
to the passengers. In this respect, charterers should be 
checked very carefully.

12.     If nations expect a high standard of behaviour from 
tourists they should prove that they also are concerned about 
the area. Examples of oil pollution, disturbance of penguins 
and seals, and uncontrolled dumping of rubbish have been seen 
near national operations in Antarctica.

SUMMARY

13.     Under the control of a good organisation, aware of 
conservation, tourism should be possible in Antarctic waters. 
Limited areas of the continent should be accessible responsible 
people.

4.
