TRATADO ANTARTICO
XII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XII REUNION CONSULTATIVE




CANBERRA
13-27 SEPTEMBER
1983

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT/XII/INF/2

Information for Delegates : Weekend Activities

A range of weekend activities are proposed, which delegates are welcome to participate in.  Where participation in a particular activity is limited to a certain number, the participation of delegates will be handled on a first-come first-served basis. Delegates wishing to participate should make their intentions known to the Secretariat as soon as possible after arrival in Canberra. Detailed arrangements for activities will be made by the Secretariat during the first week of the meeting.

1. Weekend at "Reynella", 17/18 September

    A maximum of 45 delegates can be accommodated, 3-4 per room.  Facilities are comfortable, but not sophisticated. "Reynella" is a property high in the Snowy Mountains south of Canberra.  It offers walks in beautiful country and horses for riders at all levels of skill.  Warm clothes and stout boots suitable for walking and/or riding should be brought. Delegates will be transported by bus on Saturday morning, returning on Sunday afternoon.

2. Bushwalking, 17 September

    A maximum of 40 delegates can be accommodated.  This excursion involves a half-day trip after lunch to Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve, at which some of Australia's unique animals may be sighted.  Delegates will be transported by bus to and from the Nature Reserve.  Stout boots should be worn.  There is an easy trail for those who feel like bushwalking but it is not necessary to take the trail to see the animals.

3. Sunday lunch at "Reynella", 18 September

    All delegates are invited to lunch at "Reynella" on Sunday 18 September.  Delegates will be transported by bus to and from "Reynella".  Warm clothes should be worn.  If the weather is good, lunch will be an open air barbecue.
2.

4. Sydney Trip, 24/25 September

A maximum of 40 delegates can be accommodated.
Delegates will be transported by bus early on Saturday morning, 
returning on Sunday afternoon. Delegates will be free to spend 
the time in Sydney as they wish, as no organised activities are 
envisaged. Opera tickets for Richard Strauss' "Der 
Rosenkavalier" at the Sydney Opera House have been reserved. 
Delegates will be responsible for their own accommodation and 
meals throughout this weekend. Accommodation at the Wynyard 
Travelodge has been reserved, at a cost of $55 per room.  The 
cost per delegate is halved if delegates are prepared to share 
rooms.  The hotel is within walking distance of the Sydney 
Opera House.
