TRATADO ANTARTICO
XII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XII REUNION CONSULTATIVE


CANBERRA
13-27 SEPTEMBER
1983

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT/XII/INF7
13 September 1983

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND COOPERATION IN ANTARCTICA

Paper given by Mr Tore Gjelsvik (Norway) at the Antarctic
Symposium organised by an Institute for International Law,
University of Kiel, 22-24 June 1983

(Submitted by Norway as an Information Document)
Introduction

Up to the time of the Second World War, scientific 
research in Antarctica had been carried out by privately 
organized Polar expeditions, either for exploration or 
commercial purposes. (I am in this respect disregarding the 
strictly geographic exploration carried out by the navies of 
Great Britain, France, Russia and the USA in the 18th and 19th 
centuries).  Although science was often said to be the main 
object of the expeditions, their Leaders faced to be the first 
to attain the South Pole, and usually the expeditions carried 
only one flag. Thus the scientific activity became an 
instrument for national as well as personal aspirations. 
Despite the small financial and logistic resources of these 
expeditions, their scientists made great contributions in 
various fields. Mostly their findings were published, and 
during the first part of our century the  coastal areas of 
Antarctica became quite well known.  However, most of the 
interior was still completely unknown and knowledge of the 
all-year geophysical conditions was  mainly restricted to small 
areas far apart.  During the same period, only the UK or 
associated states and France had made sovereignty claims.

The Second World War became a turning point in the 
history of Antarctica.  A number of new nations made territorial 
claims on the continent (Norway 1939, Chile 1940, Argentina 
1942).  The USA considered making claims, but decided, like the 
USSR, not to acknowledge territorial claims of other nations, 
whilst reserving its right to make claims.  The claims of the 
two South American states overlapped with the UK claim, as well 
as with each other, which gave rise to considerable diplomatic 
heat, and on one occasion gunfire.  The reason for this 
development was partly economic, partly strategic.  The whaling 
industry had proved very profitable in Antarctic waters and the

1.
interest for other resources was increasing. During the war 
German submarines had used bases on sub-Antarctic islands for 
attack on Allied ships and thus demonstrated the geopolitic 
location of Antarctica.

        Use of the remote continent for testing nuclear and other 
weapons was also feared.

        The number of Antarctic expeditions grew, and very soon 
they became solely government sponsored. In 1946/47 the USA 
sent the greatest expedition ever to be launched in Antarctica, 
"Operation Highjump", (4000 men and 13 ships, including 
icebreakers and an aircraft carrier). Scientific research was 
not the main objective on these expeditions. Under these 
lircumstances Antarctic science could easily have taken a 
chauvinistic course.

        Fortunately, just at the right moment American physicists 
proposed holding a third international Polar Year in 1957/58, a 
year of maximum solar activity. The proposal was placed before 
a commission of the International Council fo Scientific Unions 
(ICSU) and quickly approved. A Special Committee was convened 
in 1952. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) joined it 
and suggested that a global approach would be more useful. It 
was agreed to arrange an international geophysicazl year, to 
last for 18 months in 1957/58. In 1955 a regional working party 
for Antarctica was set up. 12 nations, including all the seven 
claimant states in Antarctica, and in addition Belgia, Japan, 
South Africa, the USA and the USSR, agreed to establish a total 
of 55 observatories in Antarctica. National committees were 
established, in most countries by the academies of sciences, to 
develop programmes and coordinate the activities.

 
        2.
In Antarctica, it is difficult to separate science and 
politics.  The great support given by the 12 nations to the 
I.G.Y. programme in Antarctica was no doubt based upon other 
interests also than just the love of polar science.
Nevertheless, from the start the first Antarctic IGY conference 
unanimously adopted a motion that the overall aims of the 
programme should be entirely scientific.

In 1957, ICU took steps to examine the merits of further 
general scientific investigations in Antarctica and in 1958 The 
Special Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) was established. 
In the same year it was also agreed to extend the IGY program in 
Antarctica throughout 1959.  The snowball had started rolling 
and soon SCAR was to be a permanent scientific committee under 
ICSU.

SCAR after IGY

It should be made clear, that SCAR does not conduct 
scientific programmes.  All research in Antarctica is carried 
out and financed by national organizations.

The main point in the constitution of SCAR reads:

"SCAR is a scientific committee of ICSU charged with the 
initiation, promotion, and coordination of scientific 
activity in the Antarctic, with a view to framing and 
reviewing scientific programmes of circumpolar scope and 
significance.  In establishing programmes, SCAR will respect 
the autonomy of other existing international bodies".

3.
SCAR is made up of one permanent delegate and an 
alternative delegate nominated by each national committee, one 
delegate from OCSI. three from scientific unions federated in 
ICSU and one from WMO.  A general meeting is held every second 
year.  The SCAR executive consists of one president, two vice 
presidents and a secretary which meets once a year.  A small 
secretariat is located in Cambridge, handling daily business. 
It is a simple and cheap structure, keeping the annual fee at a 
low level.  In addition, working groups are established for the 
various disciplines - presently 11.

The SCAR programmes are based upon recommendations by 
these groups.  The working group of logistics, which has a key 
role in Antarctic operations, meets at the same time as the 
general meeting, the other groups have formal meetings only 
every fourth year at the most, although opportunities may be 
found for informal meetings in between.

The executive may appoint ad hoc groups of specialists 
for examination of multi-disciplinary or special problems. 
There are presently four such groups two of which have been 
established to formulate scientific recommendations in response 
to requests for advice from Antarctic Treaty governments.  These 
are the Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecosystems and 
their Living Resources, and the Group of Specialists on 
Antarctic Environmental Implications of Possible Mineral 
Exploration and Exploitation.  There is no formal link between 
SCAR and the Antarctic Treaty governments, the link is from SCAR 
through its national committees.  Unless special urgency is 
indicated, recommendations to the Treaty governments are 
considered by a full SCAR meeting.

In order to carry out scientific research in Antarctica, 
many SCAR nations have established special polar research

4.
institutes, responsible for the field operations, the running of 
permanent bases, and planning and coordinating of the scientific 
programmes. Some of these institutes have similar 
responsibilities in the Arctic, and are capable of conveying 
information and experience of Arctic research. The national 
programmes may reflect specific national needs, but in most 
cases the recommendations of SCAR or its working groups are 
incorporated. In some cases several nations join in special 
programmes - such as the International Antarctic Glaciological 
Project. Presently 11 nations work together under The Biomass 
Programme relating to the Antarctic marine ecosystems and the 
utilization of living resources. Generally, the Antarctic 
programmes have been centred on fundamental scientific research, 
which has yielded a rich crop that has been fully shared by the 
world scientific community. Considering the great impact which 
Antarctic has on the world climate and oceans, this approach has 
been the right one.

Time does not allow a full presentation of the results of 
the scientific activity in Antarctica since the establishment of 
SCAR. They are not only scientific. Since no infrastructure 
existed in Antarctica before I.G.Y. the scientific organizations 
coordinated by SCAR had to organize the logistic base for all 
operations. The following is a list of some of the main 
achievements.

1. The meteorological station network located at the 
permanent stations provides the synoptic data base for the 
meteorological and aerological information needed not only 
for Antarctic use, but for the whole southern hemisphere 
weather watch system.

2. Geographical, tolpographical, and bathymetrical maps have 
been produced of mountain ranges, coastal areas, ice shelves 
   
5.
and adjacent seas, without which neither scientific studies
nor any other human activity could take place.

3. Geophysical observatories have kept continuous watch on
the geophysical processes of the atmosphere, ionosphere,
magnetosphere and outer space over Antarctica for more than
25 years. Also magnetic, gravimetric and seismic studies of
the continent have been carried out in order to learn about
the composition and properties of the crust of Antarctica.

4. The main features of the geology of Antarctica have been
disclosed, and the key role of the icy continent as the core
of the disintegrated supercontinent Gondwanaland consisting
also of South America, Africa, India, Australia and New
Zealand has been proved.

5. Glaciological studies, in particular of the great inland
ice domes and the coastal ice shelves have been undertaken by
geophysical methods. Ice core drilling and geochemical
(isotopic) analyses have given information on the climate
conditions thousands of years back. Particularly since the
airborne radio echo sounding methodes became available, it
has been possible to measure the thickness of the ice cover
and produce maps of the sub-glacial topography of
Antarctica. Based on this information, it is possible to
estimate the volume of Antarctic ice 30 mill. km3, which
amounts to 70-80 per cent of the fresh water resources of
mother earth. This method also gives information on the
internal structure of the ice domes, and has shown the
existence of lakes under the ice.

6. Oceanographic research has centered on hydrographic
studies for marine biological purposes, current systems, and
especially, on the formation and dynamics of the cold bottom

6.
water - which flows northwards, mixes with and renews the 
water of the world oceans, and by upwelling, gives rise to 
some of the greatest fish stocks of the world.

7. The terrestrial Antarctic flora and fauna are very poor, 
and related biological research has mainly comprised 
microorganisms and lower plants.  The role of penguins and 
other birds as links between the terrestrial and marine 
ecosystems has been clearly demonstrated.  Marine mammals in 
the Southern Ocean, on the other hand, have been very 
abundant and the object of intense commercial exploitation 
and related marine biological investigations.  The importance 
of the krill (Euphausia Superba) as a key species in the 
Antarctic marine ecosystem has become evident.

8. The adaptation of Antarctic fauna and flora to the 
extreme light conditions and climate of Antarctica is another 
aspect which has been extensively studied.  Closely related 
to this is the study of human physiology and psychology under 
the great environmental stress during field work and 
wintering.

As we all know, the interest for Antarctica has been 
growing in the later few years, and a number of "new" nations 
have appeared on the scene.  In this way, Antarctic science has 
also been growing.  As of today, 900 people winter over at 36 
stations.  In the Austral summer 3000 scientists and support 
personnel are at work.  The USSR has the largest wintering 
activity:  310 men at seven stations.  In the field season, the 
US activity comprises 1000 men and women and is supported by 
large icebreakers, ski-equipped, big airplanes and helicopters.  
Also the Soviet research has good logistic support.  Several 
other Treaty nations have prepared airstrips in Antarctica, 
making it possible to transport scientists from their homeland

7.
to the icy continent in a few hours time as compared to several 
weeks on ships.

COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM AND SCAR

Conservation of nature in Antarctica

Effective protection of nature must be based upon legal 
action. Already in its second year of existence, at the time 
when the Antarctic Treaty was discussed, the matter was raised 
within SCAR, and in 1960 SCAR, through the national committees 
submitted a report from its newly established working group on 
Biology, and urged that the parties to the Treaty should draft 
applicable regulations.  At the first consultative meetings in 
1961, the proposal of SCAR was discussed and it was recommended 
that, as an interim measure, rules of conduct should be issued 
in accordance with principles suggested by the working group. 
After having sought more advice from SCAR, the Consultative 
parties in 1964 adopted the Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

The Agreed Measures applied to the land area south of 
60°S Latitude, including ice shelves.  The main features of the 
Measures were:

    Conservation of native fauna,
    by prohibiting all killing and other specified 
activities, except in accordance with a permit.  Permits 
shall only be issued for compelling scientific purposes 
or to provide indispensable food for dogs or men in the 
Treaty area.

8.
Minimizing harmful interference,
such as disturbance of seal and bird concentrations by
flying or landing aircraft or driving vehicles too close
(within 200m), use of explosives or discharge of firearms
close to seal or bird concentrations (within 300m),
disturbance of bird and seal colonies during breeding
periods, alleviation of pollution of the water adjacent
to the coast and ice shelves.

Designation of Specially Protected Areas (SPA),
where, in addition to the measures listed above, the
following rules apply:

Prohibition of collection of any native plant, except in
accordance with a permit for very restricted scientific
reasons, and prohibition of the driving of any vehicle.

Prohibition of introduction of non-indigenous species,
except in accordance with a permit, and precautions
against introduction of parasites and diseases.

In 1965, SCAR considered guidelines for the selection of
Specially Protected Areas, and later suggested a number of areas
to be designed as such.  At a meeting in 1972 of the
Consultative Parties a new category of specially protected areas
called Sites of Specific Interest (SSSI) was instituted.  At the
request of Treaty governments, SCAR, in 1974, formulated
criteria for selection of these.  Later revision and additions
have been made in consultation with SCAR.

9.
The first 10-15 years of the existence of SCAR and the 
Treaty have been called the honeymoon time in Antarctica.
Science and conservation were the only things that mattered, and 
most of the discussions aimed at ways and means to facilitate 
research and enhance cooperation.  The number of people 
attending SCAR and Treaty meetings was small, and also because 
many SCAR scientists took part in Treaty delegations as 
advisers, the amiable atmosphere of the SCAR meetings was 
transferred to the consultative meetings.  An Antarctic 
solidarity developed among many members of the delegations.  In 
this respect I would like to pay homage to Dr Brian Roberts, an 
outstanding UK delegate who worked ceasely at all meetings 
during this time in order to obtain agreement on recommendations 
of substance, particularly in the field of conservation.  He had 
worked in the Antarctic as a scientist in his early years and he 
had a unique feeling for the Antarctic environment.  He indeed 
deserved the title of honour:  Mr Antarctica, which his fellow 
delegates gave him.

Establishment of regimes to control resource development in 
Antarctica

In the beginning of the 1970's, the resource problems in 
the Antarctic became urgent.  I shall not use time to describe 
the change of atmosphere and the strains that were felt.  During 
the negotiations of the Treaty, the resource problems were swept 
under the carpet, and the Treaty had no reference to them.  The 
early discussions, therefore, were very difficult; the only 
substantial recommendations the parties could agree on were to 
request advice from SCAR on relevant scientific or environmental 
matters.

10.

Since then, SCAR has provided preliminary environmental assessments, asked its working groups to participate in the studies, and appointed Groups of Specialists to draft recommendations at the request of the Consultative Parties. Meanwhile, the Parties have continued their discussions on the regime for eventual mineral resource development, for a long time at a slow speed.  It seems to me, however, that great progress has been made during the last months.  Informal discussions between legal, scientific and technical experts such as the one which was arranged at Teniente Marsh in Antarctica last autumn (the first multinational conference to take place in the Antarctic Treaty area), have proved very useful.

It became evident during the discussions on the research needs in relation to the mineral resource question, that too little information was available on the oceanographic and coastal conditions, as well as on the composition of the continental shelf and the conditions on the sea floor.  The research initiated during IGY was mainly directed towards the continent itself and its atmosphere.  It is necessary to continue this research, but more attention has to be paid to shipbased science. During the last few years a number of states have recognized this, and a series of geophysical, especially seismic surveys, have been carried out.  Still, there is a great need for multidisciplinary research with emphasis on the environmental sciences, such as was conducted by the two Norwegian expeditions to the Antarctic between 1975 and 1980.

The geological research on the continent has so far provided little evidence to support the overoptimistic notion of tremendous mineral riches in Antarctica, so often presented in newspapers.  The research has mostly been of a general, geologic character, very little mineral prospection has been carried out, if any.  Metallic, industrial and fuel minerals have been

12.
detected, but no deposit which can be considered commercial in
the foreseeable future has been reported.  Many and good
deposits are no doubt present, but they will mostly be buried
under a thick cover of glacial ice and be very difficult to find
and exploit with a profit.  It is generally agreed among
Antarctic geologists that only in exceptional cases will
exploitation of minerals take place before the end of this
century.  A more optimistic view may be held with regard to
petroleum resources on the continental shelf.  Nonetheless, the
shelf is muich deeper in Antarctica than along the Arctic
coasts, the climate is harsher, transport distances longer and
work seasons shorter.  Thus expenses will be much greater than
presently in the Arctic, and only really giant fields will be of
interest under the present conditions.  The state of knowledge
of the structure and composition of the Antarctiv continental
shelf is insufficient for making predictions as to its petroleum
potential or to the timing of offshore activity.

When looking at the possibility of mineral resource
activity in the Antarctic it is necessary to take a long look
into the future to understand that before any profit can be
riped, large amounts of risky investments will have to be made.
For the coming decades, perhaps well into the next century, it
is expenses, not profits which will have to be shared if
Antarctica is to be opened for mineral resource activity.

An interesting resource is the great tabular icebergs in
Antarctic waters.  If they could be towed to dry and hot regions
in the continents adjacent to the Southern Ocean, they would
represent a most needed addition to the fresh water supply in
these countries. Although some research has been done on the
response of the icebergs to the sea state, we know too little

13.
about the technical and economic aspects of getting them to the 
markets.

During the 1970's, the interest for living resources in 
Antarctica also grew rapidly. Special attention was given to 
the possibility of utilization of a little crustacean called 
krill which was thought to occur in such great amounts as to 
allow a sustainable yield comparable to the total fish catch of 
today.

Already in the 1960's some Treaty Nations began to look 
into the possibilities of harvesting and processing krill for 
commercial purposes.  In 1972 SCAR charged a subcommittee of 
the Working Group of Biology with the examination of the current 
state of knowledge of the Antarctic marine ecosystems.  The 
subcommittee drew attention to the key role played by krill in 
the Antarctic ecosystem and to the insufficient knowledge of the 
biology of this pelagic crustacean, estimated to have a standing 
crop of at least 800 million tonnes.  The group expressed 
concern at the small shipborne activity in Antarctic waters, and 
called attention to the significance of marine biological 
studies in the Southern Ocean as prerequisites for the wise 
management of its resources.

In 1975, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
(IOC) invited SCAR to prepare practical proposals for the 
realization of this proposal.  SCAR elevated the subcommittee to 
the status of a Group of Specialists, asked its 
sister-organization for oceanographic research (SCOR) to 
co-sponsor it, and also invited representatives of a scientific 
committee of FAO.  The need for a legal framework for protection 
and rational use of Antarctic marine living resources was raised 
at the Treaty Consultative Meeting the same year.

14.
The recommendation to governments, however, mainly asked the
parties to increase marine biological research in the Antarctic
and urged SCAR to continue its studies of the matter.
Responding to this recommendation, SCAR called a representative
meeting of experts to review the present knowledge and develop
future coordinated scientific programmes.  At the end of the
conference the Group of Specialists drew up a detailed plan for
an integrated and fully coordinated biological investigations of
Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks, called BIOMASS, and
submitted it to SCAR and SCOR.  The programme received
enthusiastic support from the scientific community, and nearly
all SCAR nations decided to take part in it.  I expect that
later speakers will present various aspects of the programme and
its implementation.  I therefore restrict myself to point out
that the first experiment of the program (Fibex), which started
early in 1981, was the largest multiship experiment in
biological oceanography ever undertaken, involving 16 ships from
10 nations.  It was followed by a series of workshops to compare
and analyze the data, using advanced computer systems and
modelling, and planning for the next experiment (SIBEX) to be
executed in 1984.  The execution of BIOMASS is the most
laborious and comprehensive task of SCAR to date, and has
imposed a great strain on the human and financial resources of
the organization.

In 1980 the Parties to the Treaty were able to agree upon
a Convention for Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources.  Again, I find it outside my theme to inform in
detail about this important Convention, I only want to emphasize
its unique character as a system based upon modern conservation
and ecological principles, which surely is a result of the basic
scientific work of SCAR and of the good cooperation between this
organization and the Antarctic Treaty System.

15.
This cooperation has also worked very well within a
number of other aspects of man's impact on the Antarctic
environment, such as establishing codes of conduct for
expeditions and scientific bases, tourist activity, aiding
cooperation in transport and telecommunications, exchange of
information etc.  The successful cooperation has been of
reciprocal importance, SCAR has helped the Treaty system to
develop smoothly in many ways, even to broaden the original
purpose of the Treaty.  On the other hand the recommendations of
the Consultative Meetings have increased the status of Antarctic
science in the eyes of governments, and helped to secure the
national contributions to the scientific activity.

I am confident that a main reason for the success of SCAR
is to be found in its scientific philosophy.  No one I know has
expressed this philosophy better than the present president of
SCAR, Dr J.H. Zumberge, in a letter to a colleague, of which I
have received a copy.  I quote:

"SCAR has been active in planning and coordinating Antarctic
research since the end of the IGY, and during the intervening
years we have managed to keep SCAR clear of involvement in
the international politics of Antarctica.  We accomplished
this mainly by concentrating on science and leaving the
politics to the Consultative Parties.  SCAR has responded on
a number of occasions to the Consultative Parties when they
have asked us to prepare reports or advise them on certain
matters related to Antarctic policy, but we have assiduously
aavoided making recommendations of a political nature.  It is
true that several scientists who are delegates to SCAR
Working Groups and Groups of Specialists have independently
represented their countries in one way or another at Treaty
meetings, but they have not done so as SCAR representatives.

16.
This policy has kept SCAR free from political entanglements 
and has been the prime reason in my opinion why SCAR has been 
so successful for 25 years.  Considering the vastly different 
political philosophies of the nations represented in SCAR, 
and considering that some SCAR nations have no diplomatic 
relations with other SCAR nations, we are justly proud of our 
record on international cooperation in SCAR activities."

Perhaps now is the time to ask if Antarctic science is in 
a heavenly condition just now, and if there are no clouds in the 
sky.  The answer is no, to both questions.  SCAR is financially 
a very poor organization and it is extremely difficult for it to 
meet all the expectations.  SCAR cannot always provide quick or 
thorough answers to Treaty requests for advice, since the 
Consultative Parties do not provide the money which is needed by 
SCAR to produce the answers.  This situation should not be 
allowed to continue; the Consultative Parties will have to find 
ways and means to foot the bill.  Nor do I find the present 
system for exchange of information within SCAR good enough, 
particularly since the resource problems cropped up.  And there 
should be more money to increase the frequency of meetings of 
working groups and of groups of specialists.

SCAR, to this day, has been able to guide Antarctic 
science in the direction of fundamental problems.  The 
establishment of conventions to control resource developments in 
Antarctica automatically raises needs for applied science and 
monitoring.  If the Parties to these conventions, which mostly 
are nations working together in SCAR, are not able to put up the 
extra money which is needed, there is a danger that the present 
funds will be directed away from fundamental science.  This 
would be a very unhappy development, since the Antarctic 
challenge still is to find answers to many fundamental 
scientific problems which are of great importance not only for 
our mother Earth.

17.
