TRATADO ANTARTICO
XII REUNION CONSULTIVA                                          ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                        
XII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                                CANBERRA
                                                                  13-27 SEPTEMBER
                                                                     1983

ANT/XII/INF13
23 September  1983
Original: Spanish


SATELLITE TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT THE
ANTARCTIC METEOROLOGICAL CENTRE, "VICECOMODORO MARAMBIO"
(Submitted by Argentina)
Given the need to secure telecommunications between 
Antarctica and the rest of the world and in view of the frequent 
difficulties encountered when trying to attain efficiency and 
speed with traditional systems currently in use, Argentina is 
installing a satellite communications station at the Antarctic 
Meteorological Centre, Vicecomodoro Marambio. This station 
should commence operations before the end of this year and should 
serve to link up this station with the Buenos Aires Regional 
Telecommunications Centre and via this Centre, with the World 
Telecommunications System of the WMO.

This new means of communication will serve to greatly 
increase the two-way exchange of meteorological data on Antarctica 
and of data from other latitudes but necessary in Antarctica, 
and in addition to other benefits, will bring about a qualitative 
improvement in Antarctic forecasts, so that Antarctic 
Meteorological Centres which maintain contacts with Marambio 
may expect to receive more frequently a greater amount of 
information ranging from surface  and upper air data 
collected from distant Antarctic and Subantarctic stations, 
to other types of information, such as information on the 
ranges of density of different atmospheric layers, data 
collected from drifting buoys, or meteorological data on the 
clouds and winds of the upper air collected by meteorological 
satellites in lower latitudes, data from ships operating in the 
vicinity of the Antarctic continent, etc.

At present, the Antarctic Meteorological Centre, Vicecomodoro 
Marambio, receives, at hours and frequencies established by 
bilateral agreement, meteorological data from Chilean Antarctic 
stations via the Presidente Frei Antarctic Meteorological Centre 
and from several Antarctic stations of other countries via the 
centres Molodezhnaya and Bellingshausen, in addition to data 
from the 7 (8 by the Summer) Argentine Antarctic stations.

1
With this information and other data currently received 
by radio from Buenos Aires, the Centre will be able to issue 
forecasts for shipping and air traffic in its sphere of 
responsibility, and broadcast them within Antarctica on a 
regular basis four times a day.

It also broadcasts at established hours and on fixed 
frequencies, for reception inside and outside Antarctica, 
information collected there and recorded by meteorological 
satellites, meteorological data which comprises data collected 
from the surface and upper air around Argentine Antarctic 
stations as well as ciphered surface analyses compiled at the 
Centre.

The new satellite telecommunications technology to be 
applied will indirectly, but also effectively, ensure a greater 
degree of security to human life and equipment in Antarctica 
and its waters.

2
RULES_OF_PROCEDURES
(Draft paragraph for inclusion in Final Report)

Draft Rules of Procedure incorporating the necessary 
amendments were prepared by the Meeting, and will be referred to 
Governments for their consideration on the clear understanding 
that this would not affect the right of Special Consultative 
Meetings which are also held pursuant to Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty to adopt their own Rules of Procedure.
Consultative Parties which have not indicated their views by 1 
February 1984 will be taken to have accepted the text:  if any 
government requests that the matter be discussed further, the 
Australian Government will either pursue the matter through 
diplomatic channels or will refer the draft Rules of Procedure 
to the preparatory meeting for the XIIIth Consultative Meeting.
5.     At its inaugural session, a Chairman from one of the Consultative Parties shall be elected.  The other representatives of Consultative Parties shall serve as Vice-Chairmen of the Meeting in order of precedence.  The Chairman normally shall preside at all plenary sessions.  If he is absent from any session or part thereof, the Vice-Chairmen, rotating on the basis of the order of precedence as established by Rul'e 3, shall preside during each such session.

Secretariat

6.     The Secretary shall be appointed by the Meeting on the proposal of the Chairman.  The Secretary shall be responsible for providing secretarial services, and shall carry out such other tasks as the Meeting may require or direct.

Sessions

7.     The opening plenary session shall be held in public, other sessions shall be held in private, unless the Meeting shall determine otherwise.

Committees_and_Working_Groups

8.     The Meeting, to facilitate its work, may establish such committees as it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions, defining their terms of reference.

9.     The committees shall operate under the Rules of Procedure of the Meeting, except where they are inapplicable.

 
2
10.     Working groups may be established by the Meeting or its 
committees.

Conduct of Business

11.     A quorum shall be constituted by two-thirds of the 
representatives of Consultative Parties participating in the 
Meeting.

12.     The Chairman shall exercise the powers of his office in 
accordance with customary practice.  He shall see to the 
observance of the rules of procedure and the maintenance of 
proper order.  The Chairman, in the exercise of his functions, 
remains under the authority of the Meeting.

13.     Subject to Rule 26, no representative may address the 
Meeting without having previously obtained the permission of the 
Chairman and the Chairman shall call upon speakers in the order 
in which they signify their desire to speak.  The Chairman may 
call a speaker to order if his remarks are not relevant to the 
subject under discussion.

14.     During the discussion of any matter, a representative of 
a Consultative Party may rise to a point of order and the point 
of order shall be decided immediately by the Chairman in 
accordance with the rules of procedure.  A representative of a 
Consultative Party may appeal against the ruling of the 
Chairman:  The appeal shall be put to a vote immediately, and 
the Chairman's ruling shall stand unless over-ruled by a 
majority of the representatives of Consultative Parties present

3
and voting.  A representative of a Consultative Party rising to
a point of order shall not speak on the substance of the matter
under discussion.

15. The Meeting may limit the time to be allotted to each
speaker, and the number of times he may speak on any subject.
When debate is thus limited and a representative has spoken his
allotted time, the Chairman shall call him to order without
delay.

16. During the discussion of any matter, a representative of
a Consultative Party may move the adjournment of the debate on
the item under discussion.  In addition to the proposer of the
motion, representatives of two Consultative Parties may speak in
favour of, and two against, the motion, after which the motion
shall be put to the vote immediately.  The Chairman may limit
the time to be allowed to speakers under this rule.

17.  A representative of a Consultative Party may at any time
move the closure of the debate on the item under discussion,
whether or not any other representative has signified his wish
to speak.  Permission to speak on the closure of the debate
shall be accorded only to representatives of two Consultative
Parties opposing the closure, after which the motion shall be
put to the vote immediately.  If the Meeting is in favour of the
closure, the Chairman shall declare the closure of the debate.
The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers under
this rule. (This rule shall not apply to debate in committees.)

18. During the discussion of any matter, a representative of
a Consultative Party may move the suspension or the adjournment

4
of the Meeting. Such motions shall not be debated, but shall be 
put to the vote immediately. The Chairman may limit the time to 
be allowed to the speaker moving the suspension or adjournment 
of the Meeting.

19.	Subject to rule 14, the following motions shall have 
precedence in the following order over all other proposals or 
motions before the Meeting:

	(a)	to suspend the Meeting;
	(b)	to adjourn the Meeting;
	(c)	to adjourn the debate on the item under discussion;
	(d)	for the closure of the debate on the item under 
discussion.

20.	Decisions of the Meeting on all matters of procedure 
shall be taken by a majority of the representatives of 
Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting, each of whom 
shall have one vote.

Languages

21.	English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the 
official languages of the Meeting.

22.	Any representative may speak in a language other than the 
official languages. However, in such cases he shall provide for 
interpretation into one of the official languages.

			5
Recommendations and Final Report

23.     The recommendations formulated by the Meeting shall be 
approved by the representatives of all Consultative Parties 
present and shall be set forth in the final report.

24.     The final report shall also contain a brief account of 
the proceedings of the Meeting.  It will be approved by a 
majority of the representatives of Consultative Parties present 
and shall be transmitted by the Secretary of the Meeting to 
governments of all Consultative and non-Consultative Parties, 
for their consideration.

Non-Consultative Parties

25.     Representatives of Contracting Parties, if invited to 
attend a Consultative Meeting, may be present at:

        (a) all plenary sessions of the Meeting, and

        (b) all formal Committees or Working Groups, comprising all 
Consultative Parties, unless a representative of a 
Consultative Party requests otherwise in any particular 
case.

26.     The relevant Chairman may invite a representative of a 
non-Consultative Party to address the Meeting, Committee or 
Working Group which he is attending, unless a representative of 
a Consultative Party requests otherwise.  The Chairman shall at 
any time give priority to representatives of Consultative 
Parties who signify their desire to speak, and may in inviting

6
representatives of non-Consultative Parties to address the 
Meeting limit the time to be allotted to each speaker and the 
number of times he may speak on any subject.

27.     Non-Consultative Parties are not entitled to participate 
in the taking of decisions.

28.(a) Non-Consultative Parties may submit documents to the 
Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as 
information documents. Such documents shall be relevant 
to matters under consideration at the Meeting.

    (b) Unless a representative of a Consultative Party requests 
otherwise such documents shall be available only in the 
language or languages in which they were submitted.

Amendments

29.     These Rules of Procedure may be amended by a two-thirds 
majority of the representatives of Consultative Parties 
participating at the Meeting.  This rule shall not apply to 
Rules 23, 25 and 27, amendment of which shall require the 
approval of the representatives of all Consultative Parties 
present at the Meeting.

 
7
