On the issue of developing regulatory and methodological provision
of the reduction of air pollutant emission sources impact on the
Antarctic environment
On the issue of developing regulatory and methodological provision
of the reduction of air pollutant emission sources impact on the
Antarctic environment
Information paper submitted by the Republic of Belarus
Summary
Emissions are one of the main ways of influencing the Antarctic
environment, its climate and biota. Despite the limited human
presence in Antarctica, human impact is tangible here, especially in
areas with vigorous scientific and logistical activities, due to the
vulnerability of the natural environment of this region. The
legislative framework for regulating the impact of anthropogenic
activities on the natural environment in Antarctica, including the
air was laid down by the Protocol on Environmental Protection of
1991, however, specific requirements regarding sources of impacts
on atmospheric air, mechanisms and ways to achieve them have not
yet been prescribed. This reduces effectiveness of the Protocol.
Proposed document aims to draw the attention of the Parties to the
Protocol to the need to develop regulatory and methodological
support for reducing the impact of pollutant emission sources on
the environment of Antarctica.
The Protocol on Environmental Protection of 1991 has laid down
the legal basis for regulating impacts on the Antarctic environment,
including atmospheric air. The Annex III to the Protocol - Waste
Disposal and Waste Management contains direct indications of the
need for air protection measures in relation to waste incineration.
Article 3 - Waste disposal by incineration of the Annex III
prescribes: “1. ...combustible wastes, other than those referred to in
Article 2 (1), which are not removed from the Antarctic Treaty area
shall be burnt in incinerators which to the maximum extent
practicable reduce harmful emissions. Any emission standards and
equipment guidelines which may be recommended by, inter alia,
the Committee and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
shall be taken into account.” At the same time, the analysis of the
documents adopted by the ATCM, CEP, COMNAP, SCAR after the
signing of the Protocol showed that among them there are few
documents that can be considered as the implementation of its
provisions in relation to emission sources.
The CEP, SCAR and COMNAP have developed a number of
guidelines covering various environmental aspects. But only the
revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica (2016) anticipate the implementation of measures to
reduce environmental impacts during the construction and
operation of facilities in Antarctica. Section 3.5 Measures to
minimize or mitigate impacts requires that the EIA process include
consideration of measures to reduce, prevent or eliminate any
component of the impact on the environment or the scientific
research process and other use or values of the proposed activity
area. This Section of the Guidelines provides examples of specific
mitigation measures depending on the type of activity and the
characteristics of the environment, and may include different
options for action. These include the development of site
management measures (e.g., fuel storage and handling measures,
the use of renewable energy sources and other devices to minimize
air pollutant emissions and water consumption, the use of adequate
waste disposal and disposal methods, and ways to minimize noise
and light pollution of the environment). However, these
requirements apply only to the proposed activity for which an EIA
is being developed, and they are general. There are no documents
directly regulating the impact on the atmospheric air.
The analysis showed that papers (Working Papers, Information
Papers, Basic Papers) on air impacts are rarely submitted to the
ATCM. Examples are the Information paper on quantifying
cumulative air impacts from impact assessments in Antarctica
(ID30) presented at the 43rd ATCM in Paris (2021); Information
paper on the application of emission dispersion modeling for
construction/operational impact assessment objects in Antarctica -
ID 3 (2016), the establishment of thresholds for critical loads and
allowable levels for the Antarctic environment - ID5 (2017), etc.
The submitted documents, however, did not cover the issues of
regulation and reduction of pollutant emissions.
Conclusions and proposals
Regulatory requirements to the sources of air impact established by
the Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty in relation to waste incineration installations are
not provided: no elaborated standards on emission levels for
incinerators and other categories of sources of impact. There are
also no manuals and guidelines for accounting and assessing air
sources impacts and their mitigation. This significantly reduces the
effectiveness of air protection in Antarctica.
Given the need to implement the requirements of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection, it seems appropriate to implement the
following steps to develop regulatory and methodological support
for reducing the impact of pollutant emission sources on in
Antarctica:
– development of systems for inventory and accounting of air
pollutants and greenhouse gases emission sources at different levels
of aggregation;
- supplementing the annual reports of the Parties in accordance
with the obligations under the Protocol on Environmental
Protection with quantitative information on emission levels and
parameters of emission sources; this information will be used to
assess and project the impact on the environment;
– development of recommended emission standards for the main
sectors – sources of emissions (priority sector – waste incineration);
– development of recommendations on systems of environmental
control, accounting and monitoring of emission sources;
– preparation of reference books of the best available BAT
technologies (BAT-BEP) for energy, heating, waste incineration,
vehicles in Antarctica based on EU BREF reference books.
The preparation of such documents, using the best international and
national experience in these areas, can be included in the work plan
of the CEP.
References
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica.
Annex to Resolution 1. ATCM XXXIX – CEP XIX 2016.
ATCM39/IP3, 2016. Application of air dispersion modeling for
impact assessment of construction/operation activities in
Antarctica.
ATCM40/IP5, 2017. Towards establishing of values of critical loads
and thresholds for the Antarctic environment.
ATCM43/IP30, 2021. Information provision of quantitative
assessment of cumulative air impacts in the framework of
environmental impact assessment in Antarctica.
