Ice Sheet Instability, Long-term Sea-level Rise, and Southern Ocean
Acidification: Time for Coordinated Action by Antarctic Treaty
Parties
Ice Sheet Instability, Long-term Sea-level Rise, and Southern Ocean
Acidification: Time for Coordinated Action by Antarctic Treaty
Parties
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Summary
In addressing climate change, the main focus of Antarctic Treaty
System bodies has been ecosystem impacts on Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean. However, it is time these bodies began to address
more directly the impacts of these changes on the entire planet, as
current research makes clear that these will be massive,
catastrophic, essentially permanent and potentially rapid; especially
with current rates of CO2 increase in the atmosphere, primarily
from fossil fuel use. The ATCM should charge the Secretariat and
successive Chairs of the ATCM and/or the CEP with exploring ways
to bring this science and its policy implications to greater public
and political attention, including at COP-27 in Egypt in November
2022. ATCPs should do likewise, and re-examine their Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) in light of the non-adaptable
impacts, on both national and global levels, of irreversible Antarctic
change.
Introduction
Traditionally, the Antarctic Treaty System has focused its climate
change work on documenting the impacts of global warming on
Antarctic continental and Southern Ocean marine ecosystems. As
research on ice sheet and Southern Ocean dynamics has expanded
exponentially over the past two decades however, it has become
apparent that these have strong implications for climate ambition,
in particular the need to avoid overshoot of the Paris Agreement
temperature limit of 1.5°C, and especially 2°C. This is because peak
temperatures, and CO2 concentration levels in the atmosphere
largely set the risk of irreversible ice sheet collapse and resulting
sea-level rise, as well as Southern Ocean acidification. The narrative
of climate change in Antarctica today is therefore no longer solely
one of the impacts on the region itself; but of the massive global
impacts from a rapidly changing Antarctica causing essentially
permanent sea-level rise, as well as other impacts due to loss of
Southern Ocean keystone species from essentially permanent
acidification. The IPCC, in its 2022 Sixth Assessment (AR6),
characterized these impending changes, absent rapid emissions
reductions, as “beyond the limits of adaptation.” IPCC,
2022: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska,
K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V.
Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press. In
Press.
Converging Models and Ancient Records of Antarctic Sea-level Rise
Antarctica holds enough ice to raise current global sea level by 58
meters. Exponentially expanding research, especially over the past
two decades shows that the risks of non-reversible melting
processes increase as temperature and rates of warming rise,
affecting the stability of buttressing ice shelves and the marine-
based portions of the ice sheet. While this primarily affects the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS), parts of East Antarctica are similarly
marine-based and therefore vulnerable. Blackburn, T., Edwards, G.,
Tulaczyk, S., Scudder, M., Piccione, G., Hallet, B., . . . Babbe, J.
(2020). Ice retreat in Wilkes Basin of East Antarctica during a warm
interglacial. Nature, 554–559. https://doi.org/10.26022/
IEDA/111548 Together, these portions of the ice sheet may hold up
to 20 meters of global sea-level rise (SLR). While still limited to a
few studies, this recent, more sophisticated modeling that takes into
account the physical properties of the ice sheet also shows their
collapse may be unexpectedly rapid. This could lead to annual rates
of 5 cm SLR by the middle
of the next century; and 10 meters total by 2300 from Antarctica
alone; findings noted as a matter of concern in IPCC AR6. DeConto,
R., Pollard, D., Alley, R., Velicogna, I., Gasson, E., Gomez, N., . . .
Dutton, A. (2021). The Paris Climate Agreement and future sea-
level rise from Antarctica. Nature, 83-89. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-021-03427-0
While these figures may at first seem extreme, they track well with
the paleo-climactic record. In Earth’s past, warming of even 1°C
above pre-industrial levels resulted in very different coastlines than
those of today, at 3-6 meters above contemporary; and 12-20
meters at 2°C. Dutton, A., Carlson, A., Long, A., Milne, G., Clark, P.,
DeConto, R., . . . Raymon, M. (2015). Sea-level rise due to polar ice-
sheet mass loss during past warm periods. Science. https://
DOI.org/10.1126/science.aaa4019 The rate of change, and ability
to adapt to swings in sea levels and flooding is also important. Here
again, Earth’s past indicates that we should have a high level of
concern. While some of these past changes occurred over thousands
of years, there have also been periods where extremely fast sea-
level rises (up to 4 meters per century) occurred due to rapid ice
sheet collapse. Termed “melt-water pulses”, the last of these took
place 14,000 years ago: when global sea levels rose between 15–18
meters in just 350 years, likely when the Laurentide Ice Sheet over
Canada collapsed.
Improving Models and Observations of Ice Sheet Loss
Today, much of the WAIS sits over a vast archipelago of islands
separated by extremely deep ocean basins. Its ice rests on marine
sediments that are up to 4 km below sea level, sloping downwards
toward its center. As warm water melts the edges of the ice sheet, it
retreats into these deep ocean basins, exposing more and more of
the underside of the ice sheet to warming waters. This rapidly
forces further melting and eventually causes the ice sheet to become
unstable. That process, known as Marine Ice Sheet Instability, may
cause rapid ice sheet loss to occur over a few centuries or less.
Similar conditions exist in parts of East Antarctica and have become
far better documented on the continent through coordinated
scientific efforts over the past five years. Crawford, A., Benn, D.,
Todd, J., Åström, J., Bassis, J., & Zwinger, T. (2021). Marine ice-
cliff instability modeling shows mixed-mode ice-cliff failure and
yields calving rate parameterization. Nature Communications.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23070-7
Ice shelves also play a strong role in stabilizing much of the
Antarctic ice sheet, buttressing (holding back) the land-based ice
behind. Once an ice shelf disappears, as has occurred on the
Antarctic Peninsula as well as Greenland, the outlet glaciers from
the main ice sheet may speed up their discharge of ice into the
ocean by several times. Once collapsed, ice shelves rarely re-form.
On Greenland and the Antarctic Peninsula, there is no observed
record of an ice shelf returning even under a period of colder
atmospheric temperatures, likely because the warmer surrounding
ocean waters prevent ice shelf restoration.
Extreme Modern Era Rates of CO2 and Temperature Rise
Significantly, the observed human-induced global temperature rises
over recent decades, now unequivocally attributed by the Inter-
government Panel on Climate Change largely to human greenhouse
gas emissions IPCC, 2021: Climate Change 2021: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L. Connors, C.
Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M. I. Gomis, M.
Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J. B. R. Matthews, T. K. Maycock, T.
Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press. In Press., is much faster than anything
documented in the Earth’s past. CO2 increases in the last 50 years
are 200 times greater than during the end of the last Ice Age and
period of rapid meltwater SLR 14,000 years ago. This means that
future rates of ice sheet loss and SLR could increase even further
beyond the acceleration that has been observed over the past few
decades, and potentially be more rapid than at any other time in at
least the past 130,000 years.
This record from Earth’s past indicates that the gradient between
1°C and 2°C of warming holds high levels of risk for human
societies on a global level. Today’s better understanding of ice sheet
behavior, especially interactions between the ice and surrounding
warming oceans informs us that ice sheet collapse and potentially
rapid SLR cannot be ruled out.
Irreversible Ecosystem Impacts of Rapid CO2 Rise from Southern
Ocean Acidification
In addition to ice sheet loss from anthropogenic warming, the rise
in CO2 has led to levels of ocean acidification unprecedented in at
least the past 3 million years. The Southern Ocean has absorbed up
to 40% of anthropogenic CO2 emissions from fossil fuel use over
the past two centuries, thereby performing an invaluable ecosystem
service by slowing global warming. This is because its colder and
fresher waters take up CO2 more readily than the mid-latitude and
tropical oceans (a process also observed in the Arctic). However,
this has come at a high cost, as both polar oceans have become the
most acidic on the planet.
Shell damage to pteropods (a small shelled invertebrate at the base
of the food chain) from corrosive waters was observed in samples
from scattered regions of the Southern Ocean as early as 2008
Bednaršek N, Tarling GA, Bakker DCE, Fielding S, Feely RA.
Dissolution Dominating Calcification Process in Polar Pteropods
Close to the Point of Aragonite Undersaturation. Ross P, ed. PLoS
ONE. 2014;9(10):e109183. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0109183.,
when CO2 levels were still below 400ppm. At today’s 420ppm,
these regions and observations of shell damage are expanding
rapidly at both poles.
Should atmospheric CO2 levels reach 450ppm – which at current
rates of CO2 increase given lack of concrete action on fossil fuel
use, will occur in just 11 years – it is believed McNeil BI, Matear RJ.
Southern Ocean acidification: A tipping point at 450-ppm
atmospheric CO2. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2008;105(48):18860-18864.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0806318105. that these regions of higher acidity
in the Southern Ocean will have significant impacts on the ability of
all species to reproduce, whether through acidification impacts on
the shelled organisms at the base of most food chains, or directly
from the additional pressures of warming waters from continued
atmospheric heating; and less saline waters due to continued ice
sheet melt. Invasive species from lower latitudes will add to
pressures on native Southern Ocean marine and marine-dependent
species. Higher still atmospheric levels of CO2, beyond 450ppm will
cause non-survivable levels of acidification to spread northwards,
including into the southwestern Atlantic, home to the largest
concentrations of Antarctic krill.
Ocean acidification is an essentially non-reversible process on any
human timescale. The corrosive waters caused by CO2 absorption
will persist 30-50,000 years before pH levels can return to those of
today. The level of acidification, in other words, will be set entirely
by peak CO2 levels in the atmosphere; stabilize only when CO2
levels decrease; but then take thousands of years to return to
survivable levels. Should CO2 levels continue to rise, a mass
extinction event in the Southern Ocean becomes unavoidable. IPCC,
2019: IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a
Changing Climate [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-
Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A.
Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer
(eds.)]. In press. In addition to loss of endemic Antarctic species and
ecosystems, this will have far-reaching negative impacts on global
fisheries and food production.
Recommendations
The ramifications of fast-evolving Antarctic science, and its clear
communication by ATCM bodies and ATCPs should comprise a
matter of highest concern to the Treaty System. Specifically:
ATCPs should work to bring these scientific findings to strong
global attention at the 27th Conference of Parties (COP-27) of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) in Sharm-al-Sheikh, Egypt in November 2022; and at
COP-28 in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, especially in light of the
vulnerability of both host nations to even moderate levels of SLR.
Egypt is extremely vulnerable to rising sea levels. Much of the Nile
Delta is lost with just 1 meter of SLR; near-complete loss of
agricultural lands occurs along the Nile well above Cairo at 10
meters SLR due to flooding and salinization. In the UAE, most of the
host city Dubai, including its busy international airport will be
under water at 3 meters SLR.
ATCPs should further re-examine and revise their own NDCs in light
of the non-adaptable impacts, on both national and global levels, of
irreversible Antarctic change.
Future ATCMs should regularly consider developments in Antarctic
science that have implications for global impacts and limits of
national adaptation by ATCPs and other governments, including
consideration of potential inputs from ATCMs into other
appropriate forums.
The ATCM should agree on ways to bring this science and its policy
implications to greater public and political attention at future COPs,
for example by charging the Secretariat, CEP or successive Chairs of
the ATCM to do so.
The ATCM might also request SCAR officially to represent
Antarctica at each COP, in light of the reality that this 10% of
Earth’s land mass otherwise is unrepresented within the Framework
Convention.
