The Value of Long-term Ecological Datasets to Evaluate Ecosystem
Response to Environmental Change along the Antarctic Peninsula
The Value of Long-Term Ecological Datasets to Evaluate Ecosystem
Response to Environmental Change along the Antarctic Peninsula
Information paper submitted by the United States
Summary
The Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) represents a boundary
region between the polar and sub-polar climates. This region is one
of the most rapidly warming regions on Earth, with increases in air
and water temperatures over the last half century leading to
substantial reductions in sea-ice coverage. The variability and
change in the physical environment and documented biological and
biogeochemical responses make this a model system for how
climate and sea ice changes might restructure high-latitude
ecosystems. Although the WAP shelf region is arguably one of the
better studied areas around Antarctica, significant gaps remain in
needed spatial and temporal data to resolve the atmosphere-ice-
ocean-ecosystem feedbacks that control the ecosystem dynamics
and evolution of this complex polar system. The US has funded a
program a Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program for over
30 years to capture regional environmental change. The resulting
datasets constitute a major advancement understanding of how the
ecosystem is changing. The value of long-term research programs
like the Palmer LTER are helping us to anticipate how global
change might evolve over the next few decades and to build a
scientific foundation to guide action plans toward sustainability of
ecosystems and their life supporting functions.
Background
The Long-Term Ecological Research program at Palmer Station
Antarctica (PAL LTER) studies a polar marine biome with research
focused on the Antarctic Peninsula pelagic marine ecosystem,
including sea ice habitats, regional oceanography and terrestrial
nesting sites of seabird predators. The program has allowed
scientists to consistently track environmental changes taking place
over 30+ years along the Antarctic Peninsula, one of the fastest-
warming regions on Earth. Multiple teams of U.S. and associated
international scientists have been gaining new mechanistic and
predictive understanding of ecosystem changes in response to
disturbances spanning long-term, decadal, and higher-frequency
“pulse” changes driven by a range of processes, including natural
climate variability, long-term climate warming, transformed spatial
landscapes, and food-web alterations. Scientists in this program are
using traditional ecological monitoring paired with autonomous
vehicles, floats, moorings, satellite data, and modelling to expand
and bridge time and space scales not covered by shorter sampling
periods. These observations are complemented with process studies
that include lab and ship-based manipulative experiments. They
have documented how changes have affected all parts of the food
web, affecting everything from microscopic ocean plants and
crustaceans and fish to penguins and other seabirds and marine
mammals. Data collected over multiple time and space scales in the
region (Fig. 1; Henley et al. 2019) helps researchers understand not
only how climate change is disturbing the marine ecosystem of the
Antarctic Peninsula, but also provides an indication of what this
region might look like in the coming decades.
Figure 1: Map showing the major sustained research efforts in the
WAP discussed here, including northern (N), central (C) and
southern (S) sub-regions (white dashed lines), and the major
circulation and bathymetric features of the shelf system.
Figure 1: Map showing the major sustained research efforts in the
WAP discussed here, including northern (N), central (C) and
southern (S) sub-regions (white dashed lines), and the major
circulation and bathymetric features of the shelf system.
Key Outcomes
Bringing together physical, biological and chemical oceanographers
and a variety of animal ecologists has allowed the PAL LTER
network scientists to track many components of the Antarctic
Peninsula marine ecosystem simultaneously over longer time
periods. Results of the PAL LTER program have shown that over
time, sea ice has declined, glaciers have retreated, and the weather
has overall become warmer, wetter, and stormier in the region.
Summer precipitation has in many areas switched from snow to
rain, and the sea ice, which historically lasted around six months
long, now only lasts three to four months, with less predictability
from season to season. The sea ice changes have had major impacts
to the food web in the peninsula area (reviewed by Henley et al.,
2019).
This briefer highlights two representative examples of how the PAL
LTER program ecosystem datasets are tracking environmental
influences on ecosystem structure:
1. Antarctic research links warming to fish decline: Drop in sea ice
linked with decline in larvae of key forage fish.
Analysis of 25 years of data (1993–2017) from the WAP region
reveals the first significant relationship reported between warming
waters, decreased sea ice, and reduced abundance of larval
Antarctic silverfish, Pleuragramma antarctica (Fig. 2; Corso et al.
2022).
Figure 2: Positive (red; warmer temperatures) and negative (blue;
cooler temperatures) anomalies in the standardized mean sea
surface temperature for the Palmer LTER study region during
austral summer (Dec, Jan, Feb). Standardized anomalies in mean
annual larval Antarctic Silverfish abundance (larvae/1,000 m3) that
were captured during Jan and Feb are overlaid (black dotted line)
(Corso et al. 2022; Photo credit: Andrew Corso).
Figure 2: Positive (red; warmer temperatures) and negative (blue;
cooler temperatures) anomalies in the standardized mean sea
surface temperature for the Palmer LTER study region during
austral summer (Dec, Jan, Feb). Standardized anomalies in mean
annual larval Antarctic Silverfish abundance (larvae/1,000 m3) that
were captured during Jan and Feb are overlaid (black dotted line)
(Corso et al. 2022; Photo credit: Andrew Corso).
Antarctic Silverfish are the only fish in the Southern Ocean that
have been shown to use sea ice as spawning habitat, and they are
important prey for penguins, seals, and other predators. The authors
showed that warmer sea surface temperature and decreased sea ice
are associated with reduced larval abundance. Further regional
warming predicted to occur during the 21st century could displace
additional populations of Antarctic Silverfish, further altering this
pelagic ecosystem (Fig. 3).
Figure 3: Timeline with optimal and suboptimal conditions for
Antarctic Silverfish reproduction near the Western Antarctic
Peninsula (Corso et al., 2022).
Figure 3: Timeline with optimal and suboptimal conditions for
Antarctic Silverfish reproduction near the Western Antarctic
Peninsula (Corso et al., 2022).
2. Ecosystem changes result in Penguin colony shifts:
The LTER program research has also provided clear examples of
how species are shifting ranges as the WAP warms. For example,
penguin species that used to be endemic throughout the WAP
region are giving way to ones that are more adapted to warmer,
wetter conditions (Henley et al. 2019). Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis
adeliae) thrive in colder, drier regions with ample sea ice. Their
populations used to dominate breeding grounds adjacent to Palmer
Station with about 15,000 breeding pairs in 1975. Now there are
less than 2,000 – a decrease by approximately 90% in the region
(Fig. 4). Gentoo (Pygoscelis papua) and chinstrap (Pygoscelis
antarcticus) penguins prefer ice-free nesting areas and have
historically been found in more sub-polar, lower latitude regions.
Warmer and wetter conditions in the region around Anvers Island
has decreased sea ice coverage and resulted in the long-term change
from the once dominant Adélie penguins to the more sub-polar, ice-
intolerant species. The Adélie penguin population has decreased by
~90% near Palmer, with no declines seen at colder, higher latitude
southern colonies. Since 1993, sub-Antarctic species like Chinstrap
and Gentoo penguins have migrated into the region. In 1975, there
were almost no Chinstrap or Gentoo penguins in the Palmer area;
now, there are more than 3,500 breeding pairs of Gentoos and
several hundred pairs of Chinstraps. This change is one of many
occurring within the ecosystem.
Figure 4: Percent change in penguin populations in the Palmer
study region between 1975-2020. The ice-dependent Adelie
penguins have declined by 90% while ice-intolerant Chinstrap and
Gentoo penguin populations have increased Graph: Bill Fraser,
Polar Oceans.
Figure 4: Percent change in penguin populations in the Palmer
study region between 1975-2020. The ice-dependent Adelie
penguins have declined by 90% while ice-intolerant Chinstrap and
Gentoo penguin populations have increased Graph: Bill Fraser,
Polar Oceans.
About the Palmer Long-Term Ecological Research Program
The National Science Foundation established the U.S. National
LTER program in 1980 to support research on long-term ecological
phenomena. The PAL LTER program is a collaborative effort
involving a large group of scientists and students investigating
ecological processes over long temporal and broad spatial scales in
the Western Antarctic Peninsula region. The Program promotes
synthesis and comparative research across sites and ecosystems and
among other related national and international research programs.
Since inception, the program has demonstrated outstanding
productivity, amassing > 600 peer-reviewed publications. Many of
the publications are a result of leveraged international collaboration
and cooperation from many teams of researchers (available here
https://pallter.marine.rutgers.edu/), numerous graduate student
theses, and leveraged external and international funding. All
program data is freely available through the PAL LTER homepage
or the United States Antarctic Program-Data Center (USAP-DC)
portal; https://www.usap-dc.org/.
References
LTER related publications: https://pallter.marine.rutgers.edu/
Corso, A. D., Steinberg, D. K., Stammerjohn, S. E., & Hilton, E. J.
(2022). Climate drives long-term change in Antarctic Silverfish
along the western Antarctic Peninsula. Communications
Biology, 5(1), 1-10.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03042-3.
Henley, S.F., Schofield, O.M., Hendry, K.R., Schloss, I.R., Steinberg,
D.K., et al., 2019. Variability and change in the west Antarctic
Peninsula marine system: Research priorities and opportunities.
Progress in Oceanography. 173:208-237. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pocean.2019.03.003.
