Efficiently and Safely Conducting Expeditions in the Arctic and
Antarctic During the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic
Efficiently and Safely Conducting Expeditions in the Arctic and
Antarctic During the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
Since the beginning of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in 2020, the
German Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and
Marine Research (AWI) has focused on how to conduct safe and
infection-free Arctic and Antarctic expeditions to enable researchers
from around the globe to pursue their research in the polar regions
despite the ongoing pandemic. In particular, the MOSAiC
(Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic
Climate) expedition, which was of unprecedented scale and already
underway at the time of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak, made doing so
necessary early on. The constantly changing nature of the
pandemic, including the emergence of variants, posed new
challenges time and time again. The AWI was forced to adapt its
measures and implement jointly the COVID‐19 Outbreak Prevention
& Management Guidelines These guidelines are available from the
COMNAP member website (username and password required). of
COMNAP (Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs) and
DROMLAN This protocol has been agreed by DROMLAN members
but is not available online. (Dronning Maud Land Air Network)
Sanitary Protocol in order to continue the research activities. Over
the past two years, the AWI has organised and implemented nine
quarantines. Throughout this time, there has not been a single
SARS-CoV-2 infection, either at the German Neumayer Station III or
on the German Research Ice Breaker (RIB) Polarstern expeditions to
the Arctic and Antarctic. This shows that due to the comprehensive
application of the measures, which entailed substantial time,
financial and organisational investments, it was possible to conduct
efficiently and safely field research in polar regions despite the
conditions imposed by the pandemic.
Expeditions in the Arctic and Antarctic during the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic
When the World Health Organisation categorised SARS-CoV2 as a
pandemic in March 2020, international research institutes were
confronted with the question of how and to what extent expeditions
to the polar regions of the Arctic and Antarctic were still possible
under the given conditions. The challenge was, on the one hand, to
protect the health of the expedition participants; on the other, the
lockdowns in place around the globe made travel and transport
virtually impossible, posing serious logistical challenges. Making
matters worse, in the first year of the pandemic, no causal therapies
or vaccines were available.
In December 2019, when the SARS CoV-2 virus was first identified,
the first phase of the Alfred Wegener Institute’s MOSAiC expedition,
which had begun in September 2019, was in full swing. Researchers
from 18 countries were taking part in the expedition, the goal of
which was to monitor changes in the Arctic over the course of an
entire year. Moored to a large ice floe, the German RIB Polarstern
drifted with the sea ice. Numerous research facilities and
monitoring stations were installed on the ice for the duration of the
expedition, and the original plan was to exchange the researchers
and crew every three to four months with the aid of resupply ships
and icebreakers, which would also provide fuel and provisions.
Preventive measures
In this stage of the pandemic, a confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection on
board the RIB Polarstern would have meant the immediate
termination of the expedition, the outcome of years of preparation.
At the time, there were no vaccines, and the number of infections
with serious,
even fatal outcomes continued to climb. Since the ship would be cut
off from the outside world in the winter and, from a medical
standpoint, left to its own devices, options for preventing or
containing an outbreak on board and for providing patients with
the best possible treatments for suppurative symptoms were
evaluated. Provisions were readied and e.g. the following measures
were implemented:
• Procurement of laboratory equipment for conducting PCR tests;
• Increasing the oxygen reserves;
• Increasing reserves of selected medications;
• Increasing reserves of personal protective equipment;
• Increasing reserves of disinfectants.
However, the utmost priority was ensuring passengers arrived on
board infection-free.
Measures taken prior to the personnel changeover and deployment
of MOSAiC expedition participants
In February 2020, the Alfred Wegener Institute prepared a
catalogue of measures for completing a personnel changeover
without the risk of a SARS-CoV-2 infection:
• For all participants: domestic self-isolation for 5 days prior to
departure;
• PCR test immediately before departure;
• Subsequent 14-day quarantine in a dedicated hotel;
• Regular PCR testing;
• Planned response formulated in the event of an infection during
the quarantine;
• Participants had to sign a consent form confirming that they
understood the risks in the event of an infection, and that they
could be excluded from the expedition for violating the measures.
Quarantines during the MOSAiC expedition
It was planned to implement the first quarantine during the
MOSAiC expedition in late March / early April 2020 in Barentsburg,
Svalbard. All participants were to stay in individual rooms at an
exclusive, dedicated hotel for their 14-day quarantine. During this
time, they were to take 3 PCR tests and be examined with the
mobile test equipment provided. However, as the infections in
Europe continued to worsen, many borders were closed, which also
affected travel to Norway and Svalbard.
As a result, all plans for the safe changeover of participants and
crew had to be revised. The transfer to RIB Polarstern was
reorganised and, with the aid of other research vessels, carried out
from Germany. This was possible due to the fact that Germany’s
research fleet had suspended operations and the vessels were
therefore unexpectedly available. The quarantine for all travellers,
including the crews of the resupply ships, took place in hotels in
Bremerhaven. Due to the need for new planning and organisation,
this didn’t begin until May 2020 (quarantine no. 1); the procedure
largely included the measures planned for the exchange at Svalbard:
• For all participants: domestic self-isolation for 5 days prior to
departure;
• Subsequent 14-day quarantine in a dedicated hotel in
Bremerhaven;
• Regular PCR tests: on quarantine days 3, 8 and 13;
• Planned response formulated in the event of an infection during
the quarantine;
• Participants had to sign a consent form confirming that they
understood the risks in the event of an infection, and that they
could be excluded from the expedition for violating the measures;
• Participants were transported to the ships by bus, buses had
separate cabins for the driver;
• Bus drivers were tested.
In July 2020, the same procedure was used in the quarantine for
the last leg of the MOSAiC expedition (quarantine no. 2). In October
2020, the expedition was successfully completed without a single
COVID infection on board.
Antarctic season 2020/21
The lessons learned from the two quarantines already implemented
provided a basis for planning and realising preventive measures in
connection with the Antarctic seasons 2020/21 and 2021/22. These
measures were subsequently adapted in response to the changing
nature of the pandemic, the latest findings, and available options. In
addition, the guidelines on Antarctic expeditions (ship/station) that
were issued by COMNAP and DROMLAN were consistently and
stringently complied with. These are the following:
• COVID‐19 Outbreak Prevention & Management Guidelines
(COMNAP)
• DROMLAN Sanitary Protocol
The goals for both Antarctic seasons were:
• to prevent the intercontinental spread of SARS-CoV-2;
• to prevent its spread on the continent between stations;
• to contain any infections at stations, should the need arise;
• to ensure the safe evacuation of SARS-CoV-2 patients.
To keep the risk of exposure to SARS CoV-2 as low as possible, no
air travel in the Antarctic via DROMLAN was used in the 2020/21
season. The overwintering staff, together with all scientists and
technicians for the summer season, were directly transported from
Bremerhaven to the Neumayer Station III by ship. Their departure
was preceded by a 10-day individual quarantine in keeping with the
tried and proven procedures and including 3 PCR tests (quarantine
no. 3), being transported to the ship by bus (with the driver in a
separate cabin), and a final test and contactless customs processing
before boarding the ship.
Once on board, participants spent the next four days in group
quarantine with contact restrictions, mandatory masking and social
distancing; another PCR test was administered at the end of
quarantine. All operations at the Neumayer Station III were
successfully carried out and completed without any COVID
infections.
A simultaneous RIB Polarstern expedition in the Antarctic from
January to late March 2021, which involved nearly 60 researchers,
was made possible with the aid of a non-stop chartered flight from
Germany to the Falkland Islands(Islas Malvinas).
Prior to the expedition, all participants, the ship’s crew and flight
crew were quarantined in Bremerhaven (quarantine no. 4). The
measures taken to avoid potential infections included:
• 14-day quarantine for the researchers, ship’s crew and flight crew
• Contactless handover of the plane to the flight crew
• An airport terminal was reserved for the departure to avoid
potential contact
• Contactless security check
• Contactless customs check prior to departure
In late March 2021, the summer staff were picked up from the
Neumayer Station III by RIB Polarstern and transported to the
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas).
The changeover of crew and personnel was accomplished with a
second chartered flight in early April. The flight was preceded by
another, analogous quarantine in Bremerhaven (quarantine no. 5).
The outgoing crew, researchers and summer team from the
Neumayer Station III took the chartered flight from the Falkland
Islands (Islas Malvinas) back to Germany.
Antarctic season 2021/22
From late 2020, effective vaccinations for SARS CoV-2 were rolled
out, and were readily available by early 2021. From this point on,
providing evidence of being fully vaccinated with a vaccine
approved for use in Europe became a prerequisite for participating
in expeditions organised by the AWI. This offered a significantly
higher level of protection for all participants. In light of
breakthrough infections, the limited medical possibilities inherent
to expeditions, how long rescue / evacuation would take, and the
risk not only to participants’ individual health and safety but also of
having to completely abandon an expedition, the tried and proven
quarantine measures were also used in this season. This was done in
full compliance with the guidelines jointly agreed upon by
COMNAP and DROMLAN. The preparatory quarantines were
relocated to Cape Town (as the gateway to Antarctica). Having
them take place in Germany would have necessitated further
chartered flights, which, following a painstaking risk analysis, were
decided against. Moreover, Cape Town offered the requisite
infrastructure in terms of laboratory capacities for PCR tests and
contactless transport options.
In the 2021/22 season, the AWI implemented four quarantines for
ship-based and land expeditions in the Antarctic (quarantines no. 6,
7, 8 and 9) in Cape Town.
Due to the emergence of the omicron variant during the second
quarantine in Cape Town, the season was particularly challenging.
Several infections were confirmed among those persons in
quarantine. These infections were attributed to an infection among
the hotel staff and the omicron variant’s significantly higher
contagiousness.
Thanks to the regular PCR tests, the infections were detected prior
to departure for the Antarctic and the virus was not spread there,
which we consider to be a further validation of the effectiveness
and reliability of the procedures implemented. In response to these
infections, the hotel staff were included in subsequent quarantines
and the testing regime was expanded to PCR tests every two days,
so as to detect infections as soon as possible. After quarantines no. 6
and 7 the arrivals were made by exclusive chartered flights.
Following a COVID-19 outbreak at another station in Dronning
Maud Land, the last planned flight to the Neumayer Station III was
cancelled; the overwintering team came with RIB Polarstern
instead. At the station, vaccinations and boosters were made
available to the outgoing overwintering team and the summer team
alike. For this purpose, vaccines were repeatedly shipped
(temperature-controlled) from Germany to the station.
Conclusion
The past two years have demonstrated that consistently and
stringently upholding quarantine measures can enable efficient and
safe research fieldwork even during a pandemic, and without
spreading the SARS-CoV-2 virus to untouched regions of the Arctic
and Antarctic.
Recommendation
ATCM is invited:
1. to note the measures applied and implemented by the German
Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine
Research (AWI), which made it possible to conduct efficiently and
safely field research in polar regions despite the conditions imposed
by the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic;
2. to consider the experiences gained by Germany when discussing
the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on safety and operations in
Antarctica.
