DROMLAN’s efforts to prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2 virus
within the Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica
Precautionary measures taken and experiences gained by
DROMLAN member states
Sweden:
We had two teams travelling to Wasa, all following the DROMLAN
protocol. Team 1 had no problems with SARS-CoV-2. However,
Team 2 was slightly delayed from Cape Town due to bad weather
and one participant tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on day 16 of the
quarantine (in group quarantine). This meant that the whole team
went back from group to individual quarantine for another 7 days.
The virus was probably contracted from the hotel staff in mid-
December, at the very peak of the fourth wave in South Africa.
Then followed the holiday season with the hotel fully booked and
the next DROMLAN flight to Antarctica was scheduled to January
12. The team was therefore relocated to a new group quarantine in
a less populated setting. After a discussion with the medically
responsible doctors and an infectious disease specialist, the Director
of our agency decided to cancel the second part of the expedition,
and the participants of Team 2 went back.
The lessons learned from this incident are:
The quarantine setting:
The participants should be quarantined in a truly self-contained
setting.
The length of the quarantine:
With 3-plus vaccinations for all participants in a team, it should be
possible to have a shorter quarantine.
Format of the quarantine:
With a shorter quarantine period, it may be preferable to have only
strict individual quarantine.
Testing:
The PCR testing with external staff is a risk factor. It should be
enough with only one PCR test at the end of the quarantine.
Finland:
basic principle was to lean to DROMLAN and COMNAP information
and protocols to avoid in the first hand to bring SARS-CoV-2 to
Antarctica but also make it safe as possible for our own team to
fulfill tasks for season.
All our expedition members were vaccinated with two shots (third
was not available before season). We also had influenza vaccination
for everyone, just to avoid risk that seasonal influence would spoil
someones trip. There was PCR test max. 72 hours before leaving
Finland as air operators demanded in November 2021.
The First FINNARP team (7 pax) arrived Cape Town 17 th of
November. We travelled in business class to lessen amount of
contacts during our trip, Helsinki-Doha-Cape Town and two pax
Helsinki Munich-Cape Town.
We stayed one week in single rooms in quarantine (meals were
brought to rooms) and after that there was PCR test. All negative.
Then second week we continued but added possibility to move to
walk on beach which was pretty empty and having meetings
between team members in garden. When out of own room we wore
FFP2 masks and had distance between each other. Mask were
immediately available in case of need when we were out of rooms.
After the second week quarantine there was another PCR test and
the
FMI team flew in a private jet to Novo Runway. We stayed there 6
days, first in runway facilities and then couple of days in ALCI guest
house
During our stay in Cape Town we got information of omicron,
couple of days before we left. There was discussion between
FINNARP team and FMI administration Corona group and the
director of administration. As there was very little of information of
omicron then the decision was made to postpone the rest of
expedition till next season, so 6 scientist and one technician stayed
in Finland and did not travel to Cape Town or Antarctica at all.
They will join next FINNARP expedition.
There was an issue with a cargo flight and SARS-CoV-2 cases in last
week of year 2021. We were receiving cargo with an ALCI Basler
and got the information about positive SARS-CoV-2 cases the same
day. We prepared one small four person living module and field
toilet available for the Basler team of four to accommodate if
needed, but closed the possibility to access main building.  The
crew did not stay at Aboa but flew to Neumayer (as the facilities
there “were better”)
At Aboa we decided to have a one-week quarantine as some of us
had been in more close contact with Basler crew (medical support
for flight assistant). Meals were picked up and ate separately and
there was no inside work together but outside work with distancing
continued. Nobody had any symptoms and we made antigen test
after one week and continued as normal after negative tests (the
problem of course is that if no symptoms the test is not really
valid). We also kept strict distance to the team of the Swedish Polar
Research Secretariat (SPRS) and no visits were allowed between
stations during that time. There was also discussion about if second
SPRS team would arrive to Basen, we would keep two-week
distancing between stations.
For the rest of cargo flights we paid even more attention during
loading operation to wear FFP2 masks.
We flew back via Novo Runway, stayed one night there. In Cape
Town we had an antigen test when arrived and then there was PCR
test before we left Cape Town on 17th of February
Japan:
DROMLAN Basler made refuels four times in November 2021 at
Syowa Station runway and once in February 2022 at S17 runway.
Since 31 station winter crews were not vaccinated, they have never
contacted either crew of Basler or passengers during refuel.
Six JARE expeditioners who have been vaccinated twice started
MIQ strictly ruled by DSP just after arrival in Cape Town on 15
October 2021. On 30 October, the expeditioners flew from Cape
Town to Novo runway by D01-IN intercontinental flight and moved
further from Novo runway to Syowa Station on 4 November by
DROMLAN Basler. These expeditioners were in isolation
(accommodating in an isolated building) during their stay until 10
November, when they left the station for an inland traverse. Since
the traverse team consists of those six vaccinated new expeditioners
and three non-vaccinated winter expeditioners, two groups stayed
in different snow vehicles and were accommodated separately until
18 November. There were no reports of suspicious symptoms from
the traverse team and the station.
Eight JARE expeditioners left the S17 runway to Novo runway on 7
February 2022 by DROMLAN Basler and flew from Novo to Cape
Town on 11 February 2022 by D10-OUT intercontinental flight.
These expeditioners implemented all necessary DSP procedures
during flights and their stay on the Novo runway.
Lessons learnt
Once the number of new cases goes down, people quickly feel
uncomfortable keeping the rules. However, we should keep in our
mind that easing sanitary procedures by our own decision is very
dangerous. For example, no one can predict the surge of the
Omicron wave when we finalise DSP. Our pre-departure MIQ was
conducted before the outbreak of the Omicron variant, but it may
be
undergoing and may have a chance to bring it to the station. We
might be just lucky that all tests of JARE expeditioners in Cape
Town showed negative results.
In case of emergency during the feeder flight, DROMLAN Basler
may land any possible runway of the station. When crews and
passengers may have suffered infectious diseases, not all stations
could provide isolated accommodation and treat properly such
persons at the station.
Norway:
When NPI on December 28, 2021, received information that there
was an Omicron outbreak in Dronning Maud Land and that there
was a risk that some our personnel at Troll could have been infected
we immediately tested and isolated all personnel that could have
been exposed. In total 10 persons, or 25% of the on-station
personnel at the time. It included scientists that had spent time in
transit at Novo in late December, a transiting Finnish scientist, as
well as personnel that had interacted the Kenn Borek aircrew from
C-GKKB. As part of our SARS-CoV-2 prevention procedure we had
already tested all persons that arrived from other stations and
limited interaction between station personnel and visiting aircrews.
The overnight stay by the air crew of Basler C-GKKB on December
27-28 had been at the airfield, separated from the rest of station.
After discussions with Tim Heitland from AWI and co-author of the
COMNAP as well as DROMLAN covid prevention protocol as well as
NPI management it was decided that a strict quarantine, completely
isolated, of 3 days followed by another test should be sufficient.
Since this happen during a very hectic part of the season a longer
quarantine could not be justified. The cabin used by the aircrew for
overnight stay was sealed off. After the 3-day quarantine everyone
tested negative again and was released from their quarantine. The
cabin used for overnight stay was thoroughly cleaned after 7 days.
After this it was decided that there could be absolutely no
interaction between NPI personnel and other programs for the rest
of the season.
The effects for the Norwegian program was, besides the loss of 30
days of work, that one very important and long-term science project
in early January which required Basler support was cancelled.
India:
Deployment of team in Antarctica for season 2021-22 was planned
in compliance with the guidelines of COMNAP and DROMLAN. All
the members were fully vaccinated prior to their induction
however, the overwinter members at the stations remained
unvaccinated until they returned India. A total of 69 persons
traveled from Cape Town to Novo on shared DROMLAN flights in
three batches on 09-Nov, 04-Dec and 11-Dec 2021 while the voyage
team sailed from Cape Town on 4 Jan 2022. Prior to boarding the
flight or vessel, each batch underwent mandatory institutional
quarantine in Cape town and periodic RT-PCR testing were
conducted.
Influenza like illness/ SARS-CoV-2
In the third week of December 2021, a couple of persons developed
symptoms of influenza like illness (ILI) with a recovery period of
about two to three days. With continued resurgence of SARS-CoV-2
variants, the symptoms of flu were a matter of concern.
Symptomatic persons were isolated and wearing masks were made
mandatory. Despite appropriate measures, 28 persons at Maitri and
30 persons at Bharati manifested ILI symptoms during the course of
about 2-weeks. No new cases were reported after 29 December
2021 and all the members recovered by 1 Jan 2022.
Rapid antigen tests were conducted on 13 persons at Maitri on 22
December 2021 who were expected to travel on board D07(OUT)
on 23 December 2021 from Novo to Cape Town and the reports for
all the members were negative. Despite testing NEGATIVE in “Rapid
Antigen Test” conducted at Maitri, 12 out of 13 persons were
tested POSITIVE at Cape Town in the RT-PCR test conducted on 24
December 2021. It indirectly confirmed that the cases at Maitri and
Bharati were indeed SARS-CoV-2 instead of common flu or ILI.
Management of Situation
The manifestation and the severity of the infection were very much
similar for vaccinated and unvaccinated persons. The illness was
characterized by fever, coryza, sore throat and body pain and
nobody developed features of Respiratory Distress Syndrome
(ARDS). Symptomatic persons were prescribed Vitamin-C, Zinc
tablets along with cough syrup and paracetamol when required. In
addition, oxygen saturation for all symptomatic persons were
regularly monitored. All the members fully recovered by 1 January
2022.
Suggestions
Implementation of globally known best practices the for prevention
from SARS-CoV-2 appear to have helped India for 4 out of 5 batches
inducted to Antarctica. However, the infection once arrived at
Indian stations – Maitri and Bharati, quickly spread to the majority
of population without making any noticeable difference in the
symptoms or severity in the vaccinated and unvaccinated members.
Notifying other nations of the infection through COMNAP and
DROMLAN helped contain the spread to the members of other
stations. In all likelihood, the Covid-19 cases at Indian stations were
of highly infectious Omicron variant however, the source of
infection could not be ascertained for the want of contact tracing.
As the highest standard of the SARS-CoV-2 protocol could not fully
keep Antarctica Covid-free, additional/alternate layers of safety
should be explored.
Germany:
Germany followed the DROMLAN Sanitary Protocol with additional
dedicated flights between Cape Town and Neumayer Station III
operated by White Desert. In total three intercontinental flight were
planned with a 14-day quarantine being mandatory for each
expedition participant and flight crew beforehand and strict hygiene
measures for White Desert personnel at the sites. During the second
quarantine phase, the Omicron variant already dominated the
infection situation in South Africa. This highly contagious variant
led to infection within the second expedition team being in
quarantine at Blaauwberg Beach Hotel, which caused the
quarantine to be tightened (no group phase anymore) and extended
by a minimum of 14 days. After the second group arrived at
Neumayer Station III with a delay of 26 days, they had to stay
outside the station for 72-hours and were only allowed to enter
after tested negative. Due to the uncertainty of the infection, the
third intercontinental flight was cancelled and the overwintering
team was brought to Neumayer Station III via the research
icebreaker RV Polarstern after a strict single quarantine (together
with the scientists and the ship crew).
During the whole season, there was no contact with other national
Antarctic programs, only the sharing of the DROMLAN feeder
flights led to contact outside the own expedition. For leaving
expedition participants, the shared infrastructure of DROMLAN was
used under compliance of the DROMLAN Sanitary Protocol.
The station staff at Neumayer Station III were informed about the
SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in Dronning Maud Land by the operator ALCI
on the evening of 28 December 2021. As there was contact with the
affected flight crew, the affected people were tested. At no time was
there a positive case at Neumayer Station III. However, it should be
noted, that personal protective equipment was always worn and
distance was kept, as soon as there was contact with people outside
the national expeditions. Every cargo handling operation was
carried out without contact. During the entire season, flight crews
were not allowed to interact with the station personnel apart from
cargo and fueling operations under strict hygiene protocol. At least
one mobile living module close to the skiway was dedicated for
flight crews. If meals had to be taken, they were handed over
without contact. After the flight crew had stayed in one of the
modules, it was not possible to enter it for the following 14 days.
Further and more detailed information on efficiently and safely
conducting expeditions in the Arctic and Antarctic during the SARS-
CoV-2 pandemicis given in the IP 58 presented separately by
Germany.
