Information about the German concept paper “Polar Regions in
Transition”
Information about the German concept paper
“Polar Regions in Transition”
Presented by Germany
Introduction
The German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
has commissioned a dedicated Advisory Board to develop a polar
research concept paper within the frame of the research programme
of the Federal Government of Germany “Mare:N – Coastal, Marine
and Polar Research for Sustainability”. The concept paper “Polar
Regions in Transition” will enable the Federal Government to
address the respective future scientific needs in pending political
processes and national, European and international frameworks.
Based on the concept paper, a first call has been published in
January 2022 (see below), followed by further national and
international research calls over the next decade. While several
scientific questions of the concept paper refer to both poles, the
authors also published a chapter addressing Antarctic Protection
Concepts and identified corresponding research and development
needs.
Background
Good knowledge of the Antarctic ecosystems and its services is
indispensable when preparing global reports with policy advice, for
example within the framework of the Intergovernmental Science-
Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) and
the Decade of Ocean Science as well as the United Nations’ Global
Ocean Assessment. An understanding of ecological processes is also
important for Antarctic-specific recommendations for action under
the Antarctic Treaty System with its Protocol on Environmental
Protection and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).
Antarctica is regarded as an ecosystem of great scientific and
aesthetic value that is predominantly unaffected by humans and has
recently been increasingly exposed to anthropogenic – i. e. human-
induced – changes. There is therefore a broad consensus that
additional efforts are needed to keep the “human footprint” as small
as possible. Safeguard measures need to take into account the
current state of scientific knowledge.. They aim to preserve the
biodiversity and ecosystem services, the atmosphere and the
terrestrial, freshwater, glacier and marine environments of the
Southern Polar Region from adverse anthropogenic influences and
interventions. This is particularly important because of the
uniqueness and high sensitivity of many organisms to
environmental changes. Direct threats are mainly based on
increasing exploitation by fisheries and tourism, which can lead to
the destruction of habitats, pollution and the introduction of non-
native species, including pathogens. Among the globally relevant
ecosystem services, oxygen production, carbon dioxide uptake,
nutrient recycling and food production are of particular importance
for worldwide migratory whale and bird species. For these reasons,
areas with high biological activity and biodiversity should be given
special attention in the scientific validation of existing and new
protection concepts. Natural resources such as krill and fish are
used directly for human consumption only to a limited extent. They
are otherwise used for animal feed production and in the
production of health-related lifestyle products. There are only a few
examples of the usability of genetic resources, for example in
connection with cold resistance or in the pharmaceutical / medical
field. Against this background, the internationally agreed goal of
protecting 30 percent of the world’s oceans by 2030 is also to be
implemented in the waters surrounding Antarctica. This has so far
only been achieved for less than a third of the Southern Ocean.
Nonetheless, the species conservation decided upon after the
historic depletion of some Antarctic mammalian and fish stocks
serves as a model for regulations in other oceans. With regard to the
atmosphere, the first successes of research into the ozone layer in
Antarctica and the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the
Ozone Layer for its protection are emerging.
Guiding questions
The concept paper “Polar Regions in Transition” contains, inter alia,
the following guiding questions:
Which groups of organisms and habitats are of great importance for
the Antarctic and global biosphere, but are sensitive to human
impact and, thus, in particular need of protection?
How can the effectiveness of protected areas and area-independent
protection measures be optimised under the specific Antarctic
conditions?
What influence do pollution, non-native species and introduced
diseases have on the well-being of Antarctic and Southern Ocean
organisms, which are largely isolated from the rest of the world?
How can the “human footprint”, especially of fisheries and tourism,
on the sensitive Antarctic biosphere and its environment be
reduced?
How can an efficient network of protected areas be established from
an ecological-strategic point of view?
Recommendations
The concept paper “Polar Regions in Transition” contains, inter alia,
the following recommendations:
The success of international regulations for the protection of the
Antarctic and Southern Ocean environment and biosphere can only
be assessed with an increased understanding of the ecological
system. As a basis for this, long-term observations must ensure an
analysis of human impact and interference on key organisms and
ecological functions.
The designation of new protected areas and the review of existing
protected areas require a constant improvement in the knowledge
of geographical priorities in terms of biodiversity, specific
environmental conditions, ecosystem services and the occurrence of
rare communities.
In addition to general studies on biodiversity, the scientific
relevance and effectiveness of various protective measures can be
demonstrated and verified through the development of future
scenarios in ecological and physical modelling approaches.
Socio-scientific research could increase the acceptance of science-
based policy decisions to protect Antarctica.
Further information
For detailed information about further research and development
needs please follow the link:
https://www.fona.de/medien/pdf/01_Konzeptpapier_MARE-
N_Polarforschung_Kurz-EN_BF.pdf
BMBF published a dedicated research call (https://www.bmbf.de/
bmbf/shareddocs/bekanntmachungen/de/2022/01/2022-01-19-
Bekanntmachung-MAREN.html) about the influence of global and
regional stressors in the Polar Regions. The funding measure aims
to identify the interaction of conflicting usage concepts and could
also contributes to the evaluation of marine protected areas (MPA).
Research consortia will be prioritised by end of 2022, with
anticipated program start in 2023.
