National Antarctic Programs’ operations as the global pandemic
continued
National Antarctic Programs’ operations as the global pandemic
continued The 2021/22 Antarctic season
Background
After what national Antarctic programs’ called “a challenging but
successful 2020/21 Antarctic summer season”, programs had hoped
that the 2021/22 season would be less challenging, that the global
number of cases of COVID-19 would be trending downward, that
international travel restrictions would have eased, and that the
global pandemic would soon be at its end. This was not the case,
and as the 2020/21 season was coming to a close, planning began
for the 2021/22 season under challenging circumstances once
again.
This paper follows on from COMNAP IP 82 (2021) “National
Antarctic Programs’ operations during an unprecedented Antarctic
Season” and presents information on the work of COMNAP and
COMNAP Member national Antarctic programs’ to keep
expeditioners safe, continue to support research in the Antarctic
Treaty area, and to evolve and implement protocols in order to
sustain the collective goal for the 2021/22 Antarctic season to keep
Antarctica COVID-19 free. With the global pandemic not yet over,
this paper provides information and serves to document a few of the
many continuing, extraordinary, challenges, and responses for
Antarctic season 2021/22.
Sustained Efforts Continued
Carrying out Antarctic activity since the start of the global
pandemic has required sustained effort by the national Antarctic
programs during a time when individuals are also under pressure
due to changes in work situations and personal constraints.
For another year, through COMNAP, national Antarctic programs
worked proactively to identify and address additional risk imposed
on operations during the global pandemic. Due to good planning,
open and regular communications, and by adapting to lessons
learned from the 2020/21 season, for the 2021/22 season there was
a return to near pre-pandemic science facilitation levels for many
programs, though not all. Several programs managed to increase
science capacity from planned levels to ensure support was given to
researchers with postponed projects from the 2020/21 Antarctic
season. Many programs had resource and capacity to start large
operational projects that had been delayed from planned start dates
during the 2020/21 Antarctic season. Winter-over activities,
including winter-over research, were carried out at “usual” levels.
In Support of the Common Goal
For the 2021/22 Antarctic season, the common goal continued to
focus COMNAP and COMNAP Member national Antarctic programs.
That goal was: “Keep the coronavirus off the Antarctic continent,
thereby keeping national Antarctic program expeditioners healthy
and safe”. This took individual and collective effort and all
stakeholders should be acknowledged for their commitment to
making Antarctic season 2021/22 successful.
In support of the common goal:
COMNAP continued to convene the COVID-19 ad hoc
Subcommittee.
COMNAP continued to review and adapt the “COVID-19 Outbreak
Prevention and Management Guidelines” to collectively strengthen
national efforts.
There were regular updates and sharing of information amongst
program medical practitioners, especially through the Joint Expert
Group on Human Biology & Medicine (JEGHBM).
All COMNAP Member national Antarctic programs implemented
COVID-19 protocols pre-deployment of their expeditioners,
reviewed their on-station medical capabilities and supplies, and
their medevac plans.
Regional groups adopted and committed to protocols for their inter-
continental and intra-continental movements and collaborative
activities. Intra-Antarctic transit facilities developed and
implemented robust protocols.
Through the Secretariats, COMNAP and IAATO remained in regular
and open conversation throughout the season. COMNAP guidance
continued to recommend no interactions between tourists and
Antarctic-based program personnel, including a COMNAP
recommendation that tourists should be prevented from entering
national Antarctic program facilities and from any interaction with
national Antarctic program personnel. IAATO supported this
recommendation.
COMNAP carried out core business and supported Members and
Observers through a range of virtual meetings, forums and
workshops.
The COMNAP Secretariat increased its use of social media,
especially YouTube and Twitter, as additional informal outlets to
share information, news and events.
The COMNAP Secretariat also issued eight formal status
communiques to Members and Observers, and one public statement
in response to incorrect media reports in early January 2022.
Unprecedented, AGAIN
There are many successes to report including that the 2020/21
winter-over period began with full complement of winter-over
expeditioners on the continent at year-round stations with all
national Antarctic programs having implemented protocols to
ensure those winter-over personnel began their seasons SARS-CoV-2
virus free. The early availability of vaccines in some countries
coupled with later starts for some programs winter-over periods
meant that some national Antarctic programs were able to
distribute vaccines to their Antarctic expeditioners at the close of
the summer season, before winter-over periods began. Planning
then began for the opening of stations and the start of Antarctic
season 2021/22.
Staying connected by virtual means
COMNAP convened four Townhall Meetings on 7, 8, 13 and 14
April 2021 each led by an EXCOM officer and each focused on
regional considerations. Participation in these sessions was high
with delegates from all Member programs, from three of the seven
Observer programs and with representatives from IAATO. The focus
was on sharing common themes, concerns, opportunities and
actions in the context of the continuing pandemic. Even during
these early April 2021 meetings, there was a feeling that the
2021/22 season “could be more challenging and complicated than
the 2020/21 Antarctic summer season.”
The “Townhall Meetings” were followed by online Expert Group
Forums in June 2021 on the topics of:
Air Operations (the Aviation Workshop also took place in March
2022)
Advancing Critical Technologies
Safety
Education, Outreach & Training
Marine Platforms
Environmental Protection (an additional session also took place in
February 2022)
Medical (a mid-season review meeting also took place in February
2022)
The Executive Committee held online business meetings and
meetings under urgency on 17 March 2021, 11 May 2021, 30 June
2021, 18 August 2021, 22 & 23 September 2021, 9 December 2021,
4 January 2022 and 3 March 2022. The SCAR President, the
COMNAP Chair & the COMNAP Executive Secretary held a
discussion together on 14 October 2021.
The online Regional Break-out Group sessions proved critical to
exchange pre-season information once again and to advance plan
based on the global situation as at mid-July 2021. The regional
groups were: Peninsula, Ross Sea, East Antarctica, Larsemann Hills
Management Group, High Plateau, and Dronning Maud Land. These
pre-season meetings were updated during the 4 November 2021
Antarctic “Gateways” Situation Update Session.
For 2020 and 2021, the planned in-person COMNAP Annual
General Meetings (AGM) were cancelled and contingency plans
were implemented to move to a virtual platform. The COMNAP
AGM XXXIII (2021) included an online plenary business session on
14 July 2021. In total, 289 people registered to participate in at
least one of the online AGM sessions-that was almost double the
total from the online COMNAP AGM XXXII (2020). The COMNAP
Antarctic Aviation Workshop 2022 was held from 15 February
through 15 March 2022 by way of YouTube on demand sessions
and a Zoom plenary session. Ninety-fine people registered for the
workshop.
While there is a strong preference for in-person meetings when
possible, there was also a recognition that virtual platforms are vital
to our collaborative, sustainable work.
Developing and Sharing Guidance & Information
The first version of the “COMNAP COVID-19 Outbreak Prevention &
Management Response Guidelines” (non-mandatory) were
developed and distributed to Member and Observer national
Antarctic programs on 29 June 2020 in response to the global
pandemic declared on 11 March 2020. During the 2020/21
Antarctic season they were revised and updated five times. With
version 6 (13 January 2021) being the final version for the 2020/21
Antarctic season.
In anticipation of the 2021/22 Antarctic season, COMNAP prepared
version 7 (15 June 2021) “COMNAP COVID-19 Outbreak
Prevention & Management Guidelines for the 2021/22 Antarctic
season” with an update on 15 July 2021. These were regularly
reviewed through-out the Antarctic season in light of the evolving
situation globally and the situation at each pre-deployment point to
Antarctica.
In addition, the JEGHBM produced a “COVID-19 Vaccination:
Current and Predicted Challenges; Important considerations for
National Antarctic Programmes” advisory paper (V5.1, March
2021).
Regular communiques were issued from the COMNAP Secretariat to
all national Antarctic programs and to the IAATO Secretariat to
update the number of reported cases in Antarctica and to confirm
outcomes of the reported cases. All reports indicated that infected
individuals had made full recoveries. COMNAP issued eight
communiques in total. Programs not only reported positive cases in
the Antarctic Treaty area but shared information in regards to pre-
deployment situations, cases identified while expeditioners were in
isolation awaiting deployment, and cases identified as expeditioners
were travelling north from Antarctica.
Isolation and regular testing, coupled with a “pause” in some intra-
continental movements stopped the spread of the virus as per the
protocols’ intention. There was one medical evacuation related to
an unwell expeditioner-who subsequently recovered, and one
evacuation of all persons at a station who tested positive, including
all those who were asymptomatic. All information was freely
shared.
Providing operations, logistics and other critical support
Armed with learning from the 2020/21 Antarctic season and
committed to delivering their Governments’ Antarctic strategies and
programmes for the 2021/22 Antarctic season, national Antarctic
programs in consultation with the authorities at each country the
program would transit through, navigated the evolving situation to
return, in the case of many of the programs, to near pre-pandemic
levels of activity.
The continuing global supply chain crisis worked against planning
for the season with the onset of the Omicron variant in late 2021
taking hold globally and impacting the workforce at ports, in
manufacturing, and in cargo and fuel supply chains. Globally, port
infrastructure could not keep pace with arrival of container vessels.
This continues to create global chaotic ripple effects around the
world. The Guardian International Edition “Global supply chain
crisis could last another two years, warn experts”, Martin Farrer, 18
December 2021. Experts are predicting that global supply chain
operations may not get back to normal until mid-2024. In addition,
rising inflation and insufficient supply across a range of goods
including fuel and food meant cargo costs have increased
significantly. The cost of moving a 40ft container was 170% higher
in December 2021 than it was in December 2020. See https://
www.drewry.co.uk/supply-chain-advisors/supply-chain-expertise/
world-container-index-assessed-by-drewry, accessed 28 March
2022. This significantly affects national Antarctic program
planning/ability to deliver required cargo and supplies to Antarctica
and adversely impacts programs’ budgets. There were other
significant programs’ budgets impacts, especially due to the costs
associated with a high number of person-days in quarantine.
Other critical support included that provided to expeditioners,
many of whom consider working in the Antarctic, an opportunity of
a lifetime. For the past two Antarctic seasons, expeditioners were
subject to additional mental stresses that traveling during a global
pandemic presented. They left family and friends behind during a
time of global uncertainty, were asked to subject themselves to
additional pre-deployment medical screening processes, long
isolation and quarantine periods, and were asked to comply with
non-pharmaceutical practices (such as facemask wearing) and
protocols (including extended isolation/quarantine periods)
especially during transit but also, in some cases, when required in
the Antarctic. National Antarctic programs were already aware of
the challenges deploying to, living and working in, the isolated and
austere Antarctic environment presented to expeditioners and so
were able to respond to additional mental health and well-being
considerations. This, however, took additional resource and
additional consultation with experts in the fields of mental health
and well-being in extreme environments. It required heightened
training and raised awareness from station managers and others
with oversite of expeditioners’ health and safety.
Continuing to deliver and facilitate Antarctic research
The core business of national Antarctic programs is to support,
deliver and facilitate their countries’ Antarctic strategy. There were
changes to plans as the season unfolded, however, by-and-large, the
programs all worked as planned to deliver their seasons
successfully. A few highlights of the season as provided by national
Antarctic programs:
Capturing of data from a rare warm weather event, Concordia
Station, 18 March 2022.
The International Thwaites Glacier collaboration and a team of 32
international scientists carried out research utilizing underwater
robotic technology to understand present and past conditions close
to and underneath the Thwaites ice shelf and neighbouring Dotson
Glacier, early January 2022.
The “Beyond EPICA Oldest Ice” ten nation team successfully
completed the first ice core drilling campaign, finished the field
camp installation, set up the drilling area reaching a depth of 130
metres, completed the temporary storage cave, and installed the
complex drilling system, which is necessary to continue this
unprecedented challenge during the next few seasons, from late
November 2021 through end of January 2022.
A traverse team completed a 1,200 kms ice shelf journey to set up
camp for a team of climate change scientists, November/December
2021.
The IceCube Collaboration of approximately 300 physicists from 53
institutions in 12 countries continued to collect and investigate data
related to observations of the cosmos.
The Australian icebreaker Nuyina made its first journey to
Antarctica and successfully trialled a krill “wet well” enabling
capture of krill and plankton live and in perfect condition for
research purposes, December 2021/January 2022.
The British icebreaker Sir David Attenborough made its first journey
to Antarctica and completed ice trials while a team of researchers at
Rothera Station completed the first phase of a multi-year
programme to understand sources of aerosols and their impact on
cloud properties in Antarctica, with a view to ultimately reducing
uncertainties in climate sensitivity due to clouds. Infrastructure and
specialist instruments were installed and are currently making year-
round observations.
At Princess Elisabeth Station, the Belgian Antarctic Research
Expedition (BELARE), coordinated the installation of a string of
automatic weather stations (AWS) in conjunction with the WSL
(Zurich), the University of Colorado at Boulder (CIRES) and the
Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium, creating a transect from
the ocean to the Antarctic plateau over a distance of over 300 kms.
It is envisioned that the data from this transect will greatly enhance
weather and climate models. Also, at the station, there was a
successful test of a snow rover electric vehicle for operations in the
area while reducing environmental impacts.
Conclusion
COMNAP IP 82 (2021) closed by saying that “It appears that the
2021/22 season will also be especially challenging due to the SARS-
CoV-2 virus”, and that statement proved to be correct. At the start
of Antarctic season 2021/22 there were vaccines in our toolbox to
combat the virus but there was inequality in distribution,
availability and up-take. There were very different situations at the
various pre-departure points to Antarctica and international travel
restrictions remained in place and were subject to frequent change
and cancellations. COVID-19 fatigue was identified as a real issue,
with everyone dealing with the stress resulting from being eighteen
months into a global pandemic.
Delivering personnel to and from Antarctica remained challenging
and several national Antarctic programs continued to implement
their contingency plans based on lessons learned from the 2020/21
Antarctic deployments.
Presently, the global pandemic continues even as countries lift all
restrictions related to socialising and travel. There are 227 countries
reporting over 472,000,000 cases Four times the number of cases
reported in our COMNAP IP 82 (2021). to date and over 6 million
deaths. Double the number of deaths reported in our COMNAP IP
82 (2021). After a consistent decrease in the number of new
COVID-19 cases reported globally on a weekly basis since the end of
January 2022, during the week of 7 through 13 March 2022, the
number of new weekly cases has increased by 8% as compared to
the previous week. WHO Weekly Epidemiological Update, edition
83, published 15 March 2022. So the pandemic remains far from
over. However, current data from WHO indicates that the situation
continues to improve in regards to reduced morbidity and mortality
in those without additional risk factors from the current dominant
variant of the virus.
If the trends continue along this path, this likely points to a
lowering of risk related to Antarctic activity. COMNAP and national
Antarctic programs are making plans in advance of the 2022/23
Antarctic season with a view to all the continuing challenges, and to
addressing and mitigating risk, all while continuing to deliver and
support their Antarctic activity in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.
