Commemoration of the 62nd Anniversary of the signing of the
Antarctic Treaty by the APAL countries
Commemoration of the 62nd Anniversary of the signing of the
Antarctic Treaty by the APAL countries
Summary
The commemoration of the sixty-second anniversary of the signing
of the Antarctic Treaty by the Administrators of Latin American
Antarctic Programmes (APAL) was held in virtual mode on 1
December 2021 with live streaming on the YouTube channel by the
Colombian Commission of the Ocean. The event was organised by
the National Antarctic Directorate of Argentina and the Colombian
Antarctic Programme and included the participation of the
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, the Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP), the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR), and the Administrators of Latin
American Antarctic Programmes (APAL).
This activity was aimed at the national and international scientific
community, universities, personnel from different national Antarctic
programmes, and members of the general public interested in
Antarctic issues. The main purpose of the event, in addition to
commemorating the anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic
Treaty, was to reinforce the dissemination of the existing spirit of
cooperation at the regional level around the importance of
promoting knowledge of the White Continent and the protection of
its environment by generating Antarctic awareness.
Development
The commemoration of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty was held
on 1 December, between 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. (UTC), and
consisted of opening remarks followed by the panel “Antarctic
International Cooperation Forums” and presentations under the title
“Vision of the Administrators of Latin American Antarctic
Programmes in their Antarctic work”. Finally, some closing
speeches were made.
The first item was the participation by the Executive Secretary of
the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, Mr Albert Lluberas, who opened
the proceedings with a presentation in which he briefly explained
the history of the Antarctic Treaty System, its relevance over its
history and in the present, and the challenges and aspirations that
the countries administering Antarctic programmes must address in
the future.
Next, the panel on the “Antarctic Forums of international
cooperation” was held. The two guests who spoke were Dr Jefferson
Cardia Simões, Vice-Chair of the SCAR, and Dr Antonio Quesada,
President of COMNAP. Both interventions focused on disseminating
the respective histories of these institutions, their importance and
work, in addition to the current challenges and main issues to be
addressed in a post-pandemic and climate change context. Dr
Jefferson, for his part, commented on the importance of continuing
to promote joint work in Antarctic scientific research, while Dr
Quesada focused on the considerations and precautions to be taken
with respect to the continued sustained development of Antarctic
expeditions in the near future, in addition to promoting cohesion
between international preventive measures against COVID-19.
Subsequently, the second panel was held on the “Vision of
Administrators of Latin American Antarctic Programmes in their
Antarctic work”. The managers and delegates of the national
Antarctic programmes of Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Colombia and
Venezuela participated in it, focusing mainly on the objectives to be
met in terms of international cooperation in the coming years.
Finally, the closing words of the event were given by Uruguay and
Ecuador, as presidents of the thirty-second and thirty-third RAPAL
(meeting of APAL), respectively. They highlighted the work and
achievements achieved this year in the region in individual terms
and in international cooperation, what remains to be done, and
urged to continue cooperating and collaborating in order to carry
out increasingly forceful and impactful scientific research.
Conclusion
Through the commemoration of the sixty-second anniversary of the
signing of the Antarctic Treaty, a space was created that was
conducive to the dissemination of knowledge concerning the
Antarctic Treaty System, the most relevant institutions, and the
work, context and immediate objectives of the countries of the Latin
American region. Likewise, the importance of this continent at a
regional and global level was disseminated to academia, the general
public and those involved in national Antarctic programmes.
It should be noted that this event, since it was held virtually and
was open to the public, made it possible to reach and impact a
greater number of people, thus increasing knowledge about the
relevance of protecting and conserving the Southern Continent. In
turn, the transmission was left online on the YouTube platform, at
the link https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=0SwOWBtDsd8&t=1s. This event was disseminated through the
social networks of the national Antarctic programmes that
collaborated in its execution.
Promotional spots
