Gender approach in the National Antarctic Program of Argentina
Gender approach in the National Antarctic Program of Argentina
Summary
This document describes the general background and the activities
that the Antarctic Program of Argentina is currently carrying out
with regard to gender equality, and reaffirms the Argentine
commitment to the implementation of measures that facilitate equal
conditions and promote the full development of women in their
Antarctic work.
Background
The National Directorate of the Antarctic (DNA) and the Argentine
Antarctic Institute (IAA), both part of the organizational structure of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship,
strongly support gender-specific actions in order to put on the
spotlight the work and role of women in the field of Antarctic
studies. This sustained effort has been complemented and
reinforced since April 2021 with the creation, within the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, of the Focal Point for Sexual and Gender Diversity
(FOGENE), which purpose is to design policies and programs to
advance the promotion and protection of the rights of LGBTIQ+
people, and the sexual diversity and gender identity of the workers
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This instrument made it possible
to incorporate a gender agenda within the management of Antarctic
science.
Gender diversity is currently the object of public policies in
Argentina. For example, on September 4, 2020, the Government
established a quota for transvestites, transsexuals and transgender
people in the Federal Government, meaning that they will have to
constitute not less than 1% of the its workforce.
Within the structure of the DNA-IAA, women hold leadership
positions as directors and managers with regards to the
administration of resources in Antarctica and environmental
management. As for scientific personnel, for years there has been
gender parity among the personnel who carry out tasks in the
different Argentine Antarctic stations. However, this situation was
not yet reflected among the logistics support staff. Only in the
summer bases Matienzo, on one occasion, and Brown on four
occasions, the base leadership was in charge of women.
Institutional Actions
Within the framework of a special event dedicated to Antarctic
researchers associated with the XXXIV SCAR Meeting (Malaysia,
2016), where more than 100 biographies of Antarctic women were
launched on Wikipedia, a researcher and an environmental
manager from Argentina were proposed on an international
nomination mechanism to be part of this select group of
biographies. The objective of this “Wikibomb” was to promote the
profile of female Antarctic researchers so that they serve as an
inspiration for future generations of professionals.
It is also noteworthy that on the 50th anniversary of the campaign
in which four female Argentine scientists carried out fieldwork in
Antarctica for the first time (1968), four new Antarctic toponyms
were approved so as to pay tribute to these pioneers of Argentine
Antarctic science. They were: Irene Bernasconi, outstanding
specialist in echinoderms; María Adela Caría, bacteriologist; Elena
Martínez Fontes, expert in marine invertebrates, and Carmen Pujals,
renowned specialist in seaweeds. These four toponyms correspond
to previously unnamed features in the extreme southeast of the
Jason Peninsula, on the Weddell Sea.
With regard to personnel in Antarctica, thanks to an active gender
policy, and in coordination with the institutions in charge of
Antarctic logistics (Antarctic Joint Command), in recent years
female staff have been commissioned to occupy positions
traditionally in charge of men, such as mechanics or drivers. In this
regard, it is noteworthy that in the last Summer Antarctic Campaign
(CAV 2021/22) absolute gender parity was achieved in the logistics
of Carlini station - managed by the National Directorate for
Antarctica-. Moreover, for the first time in the history of the station
the position of Deputy Head of station was held by a woman. It is
expected that next season, and also for the first time, the position of
Head of said base will be assigned to a woman.
Likewise, the 2021/2022 crew of the Carlini base received, before
their transfer to the Antarctic continent, a lecture by experts on
gender issues. This was the first time that they delivered this talk,
the objective of which was to train personnel on gender issues and
thus prevent inappropriate behaviour among personnel who will
remain in Antarctica for a year. These talks will be repeated every
year and it is expected that they will be extended to other groups
that participate in the Antarctic campaigns.
It is within this framework that the Argentine Antarctic Institute
carried out actions to promote gender equality in digital media as
well as via institutional policies.
Promotion actions
Since 2020, the new social media accounts of the National
Directorate for the Antarctic (@dna_iaa) and the Argentine
Antarctic Institute (@instituto_antartico_argentino) are not only
used to promote science on the Antarctic continent, but also to
strive for equal conditions in all areas within their organizational
structure. These promotion actions contribute to making the work
of women in science more visible and also acknowledging the
gender parity verified in the latest Antarctic campaigns. In
particular, a number of posts have been made on the DNA and IAA
Twitter, Instagram and Facebook accounts to promote the work of
the female professionals and technicians of the Argentine Antarctic
Institute. These posts included interviews, stories and scientific data
so as to give visibility to what women in the continent are doing.
Moreover, as a way of celebrating the Day of Women and Girls in
Science (February 11) and Women's Day (March 8), social media
posts highlighted the outstanding role of female Antarctic workers,
as a valuable example and inspiration that will surely help future
generations of young Argentine women nurture their Antarctic
vocations.
Next steps
Each year Argentina reaffirms its commitment to equal conditions
and carry out policies so that more women can fully develop in
their field of work. At the same time it promotes, in the framework
of broader national and ministerial policies, an active participation
of women in Antarctic science.
In that sense, the Argentine Antarctic institutions will continue to
work in a coordinated manner to effectively promote and achieve
gender objectives within the framework of the activities carried out
by Argentina in the sixth continent.
