Authorization of Science Activities Associated with Tourist and
Other Non-governmental Expedition Organizers
Authorization The term “authorization” is used broadly throughout
to reference compliance with U.S. laws and regulations
implementing Protocol obligations. Unlike some other Competent
Authorities, the United States does not implement a generic permit
or authorization advising whether an organization can proceed with
its activity, or not. of Science Activities Associated with Tourist and
Other Non-governmental Expedition Organizers
Submitted by the United States
Introduction
This information paper is submitted with reference to Article 13,
paragraph 4 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) regarding the sharing of information
on activities affecting the implementation of the Protocol. The
purpose of this paper is to discuss how the United States authorizes
so called “expeditions within expeditions” in which scientific
activities are conducted with the support of tourist and other non-
governmental expedition organizers. Our intent is to share our best
practices with other Competent Authorities, to bring awareness to
potential challenges, and to encourage continued discussion
amongst parties on this and related topics.
Background: Accessing the Continent
U.S. scientists or scientists at U.S. institutions who receive grant
support for research in Antarctica from the National Science
Foundation (NSF) are in almost all cases provided field support
using U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) logistics. Scientists supported
by other U.S. federal government agencies may rely on USAP
logistics or may be provided logistics support by their funding
agency. For scientists supported by the National Science
Foundation, there may be an option for logistics support to be
provided by non-governmental organizations, generally tour
operators. Such researchers will have undergone an environmental
impact assessment conducted by the NSF and would receive any
permits required under the U.S. implementation of the Protocol
through NSF.
Non-governmental (NGO) scientific expeditions have relied on tour
operators for logistical support and access to the continent for many
years. Tour operators provide scientific expeditions with access to
field sites and allow scientists to conduct land and marine based
research in the region. U.S. scientists may rely on domestic or
international operators for such logistic support. All U.S. NGO
science expeditions are expected to seek individual authorization
from U.S. Competent Authorities following the procedures detailed
in the following section. In the United States, multiple government
agencies cooperate to oversee the authorization of such NGO
activities.
Authorization of NGO Science
As with all tourist and other NGO Antarctic expeditions, science
expeditions must first provide advance notification under article VII
(5)(a) of the Antarctic Treaty. In the United States, the Competent
Authority for this stage of authorization is the U.S. Department of
State, which makes the determination of whether an expedition is
subject to the advance notification requirements.
Following this determination, the Expedition organizer must submit
an environmental impact assessment (EIA) in accordance with
Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol. In the United States, the level
of environmental impact assessment is typically an IEE, which
considers issues of cumulative impact. The review of the EIA is led
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, as the
Competent Authority, which determines whether the EIA meets the
requirements of Article 8 and Annex 1 of the Protocol.
Under U.S. legislation which implements the Protocol and Annex II,
IV, and V of the Protocol, the National Science Foundation is the
Competent Authority for the implementation of flora and fauna
permits in accordance with Article 3 of Annex II of the Protocol,
permits for entry into protected areas in accordance with Article 7
of Annex V of the Protocol and waste management permits required
by U.S. legislation which implements Article IV of the Protocol.
Only approved scientific expeditions may obtain flora and fauna
and protected area permits, with the exception being that tourist
and other NGO expedition organizers may be issued permits for
entry into Historic Huts which are designated as ASPAs. If the
scientific expedition plans to use remotely piloted aircraft systems
(RPAS) the expedition is strongly encouraged to seek a waste
management permit in the event of an accidental release of waste
should the RPA become lost or unretrievable. Science expeditions
and all tourist and other NGO expedition organizers are expected to
follow—at a minimum—the guidelines described in the
Environmental Guidelines for Operation of Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (Resolution 4, 2018). Though the EIA and
Permitting processes are overseen by different Competent
Authorities, these agencies collaborate to ensure consistency across
all authorizations for a particular expedition.
Following the appropriate steps outlined above, the scientific
expedition will have obtained authorization to conduct its own
scientific activities in the Antarctic.
Science and Tourism
As tourism continues to grow in the region, more tour operators
seek to incorporate scientific activities into their programming. This
includes activities such as participating in crowdsourcing or citizen-
science projects or inviting NGO scientists to actively engage with
guests during voyages. In recent seasons we have also seen an
increase in small-scale, independent research projects seeking to
coordinate with tour operators. In some cases, tour operators seek
to have these research activities included in their own
authorizations and/or permits. This has sparked discussion amongst
the U.S. Competent Authorities regarding which types of scientific
activities should be included in a tour operator’s authorization and/
or permits and which activities would be expected to obtain
independent authorization via the procedures described in the
previous section. While this type of request is still fairly uncommon,
we acknowledge that the fast-changing landscape of Antarctic
tourism makes it likely that these requests may become more
prevalent in future seasons. We hope to collaborate with other
Competent Authorities to discuss shared experiences and to share
insights on how to develop a consistent approach to authorizing
such requests.
Conclusion
While we seek to share our best practices in this paper, the United
States understands that other Competent Authorities may have
different processes or requirements for authorizing scientific
projects relying on tourist and other NGO facilities or logistics
support. In some cases, Parties may also have different
requirements for authorizing citizens and foreign nationals who
seek to work with domestic operators. We hope to encourage
communication between Competent Authorities on this matter and
are interested to hear insight on how other Authorities address
authorizing similar scientific activities.
The United States supports the work being undertaken by Working
Group 2 (Tourism) to promote conversations on this topic. We
strongly support working with other parties to encourage informal
methods for communicating information on tourist and other NGO
expeditions working or seeking to work with foreign operators.
Such information sharing would provide transparency between
parties and potentially reduce instances of “forum shopping”, a
concern shared by many Parties. It is our hope that through such
continued communication and knowledge sharing treaty parties will
continue to work towards a harmonization of standards and
discover new opportunities for enhanced cooperation.
