‘Building Back [and forth] Better’ for Antarctic Tourism: Enduring
Concerns in Pursuit of a Strategic Vision
‘Building Back [and forth] Better’: Enduring Concerns in Pursuit of
a Strategic Vision
Abstract
At the 43rd ATCM (Paris, 14-24 June 2021), ‘India recalled its IP
104, submitted to ATCM XXXVIII, which had summarised
recommendations pending in relation to tourism and non-
governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. India proposed
updating the paper to present to ATCM XLIV to facilitate
discussions.’ Final Report of the 43rd Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting, Paris, 14-24 May 2021, Para. 258.
This Information Paper (IP) is based on the assumption that the past
ATCM discussions have amply shown that a strategic vision of –and
approach to a pragmatic yet robust action plan is to be seen in
conjunction with –and not in divorce- from the larger concerns
related to authority, legitimacy and effectiveness of governance
both on land and at sea. A proactive, precautionary and persistent
approach --combining the best practices of government standard
setting and IAATO’s regulatory framework— holds the key to
realizing an effective strategic action plan for Antarctic tourism and
its multifaceted, multi-spatial and multi-scalar regulation. It shows
–with the help of a few examples-- how the term ‘strategic’ has been
understood, approached, analysed and discussed at the ATCMs over
the past decades.
It is hoped that this IP would also provoke the ATCM discussions on
what ‘building back better’ could –and should—mean for Antarctic
governance in general and Antarctic tourism regulation in
particular, by highlighting (through selective italicization of certain
sections of textUnless specified to the contrary the emphasis given
through italicizations may please be taken as added.) some of the
enduring concerns and key policy insights and recommendations
that have accumulated over the past few decades at the ATCMs. In
some respects, it also speaks to the astute reference made by ASOC
in IP 81 ASOC 2021, The Madrid Protocol at Thirty: Where Do We
Go from Here, IP 81, ATCM XLIII. at the Paris ATCM (June 2021) to
the need for developing Antarctic specific ways of ‘building back
better’ in the larger context of building resilience for the Antarctic
as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science, and its multi-
layer governance in totality; including Antarctic environment and
dependent and associated ecosystems. It was also noted in passing
by ASOC that ‘the notion of “building back better “, was a common
thread in the informal discussions convened by the Netherlands and
the United Kingdom, 4th March, 2021. The Netherlands in WP 35
Permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental
activities in Antarctica, has also made an important reference to the
principle of ‘building back better’.
The IP is structured as follows:
1. Introduction: Conceptualizing ‘Building Back Better’ in and for
the Antarctic?
2. Origins and Evolution of ‘Strategic’ Vision for Antarctic Tourism
in ATCM Discussions
3. From Strategic Vision to Strategic Action
4. India’s Understanding of Strategic Vision of and Approach to
Antarctic Tourism
1. Introduction: Conceptualizing ‘Building Back Better’ in and for
the Antarctic
As pointed out in a seminal study on the subject Mannakkara, S.,
Wilkinson, S., & Potangaroa, R. (2018). Resilient post disaster
recovery through building back better. Routledge.4th , the multi-
dimensional term ‘Building Back Better’, has received a great deal
of academic and policy attention in ‘post disaster environments’
after the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami, and the International
Building Back Framework (IBBF) has three major categories --i.e.,
disaster risk management; community recovery and effective
implementation-- and eight principles; namely structural resilience,
multi-hazard based land-use planning, psychological and social
recovery, economy recovery, institutional mechanism, legislation
and regulation, monitoring and evaluation. A recent OECD study
titled ‘Building Back Better: A Sustainable Resilient Recovery after
COVID 19’, points out that ‘unchecked, global environmental
emergencies such as climate change and biodiversity loss could
cause social and economic damages far larger than those caused by
COVID-19’, and ‘Biodiversity and natural infrastructure such as
forest, wetland and mangrove ecosystems, are essential inputs for
many economic activities, and are central to hundreds of millions of
livelihoods. Natural ecosystems are also essential pillars of
resilience. Yet most of this natural capital is undervalued in the
economy, or valued only as a harvestable commodity and not for
the vital ecosystem services provided.’ OECD, ‘Building Back Better:
A Sustainable Resilient Recovery after COVID 19’, https://
read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=133_133639-
s08q2ridhf&title=Building-back-better-_A-sustainable-resilient-
recovery-after-Covid-19 (emphasis added).
What does ‘Building Back Better’ mean in case of Antarctic tourism?
The question needs critical reflection by all the stakeholders. Our
colleague from the Netherlands have already made reference to
both the term and the desirability of internalizing it for Antarctica
in WP 35, Permanent Facilities for Tourism and Other Non-
Governmental Activities in Antarctica. WP 35, Permanent Facilities
for Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica,
presented by the Netherlands, 43rd ATCM (Paris, France, 12-24
June 2021), p. 1. Similar to IP 104 Rev (Sofia, ATCM, 2015), this
Information Paper adopts the following classification of key
Antarctic tourism stakeholders provided in a seminal study on the
subject:Liggett, D., McIntosh, A., Thompson, A. Gilbert, N., Storey,
B. 2011.‘From frozen continent to tourism hotspot? Five decades of
Antarctic tourism development and management, and a glimpse
into the future’ Tourism Management, 32: 357-366. (a) Regulators:
‘government representatives directly involved in Antarctic policy’;
(b) Organisers: ‘tour operators and industry representatives’; and (c)
Monitors: ‘representatives of environmental NGOs and Antarctic
tourism researchers’.Ibid. While doing so it takes due cognizance of
diverse perspectives and priorities within each category of
stakeholder, and the role played by wider geopolitical, geoeconomic
and legal contexts and trends.
2. Origins and Evolution of ‘Strategic’ Vision for Antarctic Tourism
in ATCM Discussions
The IP 104 Rev (Sofia, ATCM, 2015) had shown that many of the
issue-areas related to the regulation of Antarctic tourism have
remained on the ATCM agenda, and, in some cases even repeatedly
discussed over a long period of time. The IP 104 also invited
attention to the fact that both the texts and the contexts of several
enduring concerns too have changed over the past five decades or
so. As the numbers of stakeholders in Antarctic governance and
their concerns have multiplied over the years, the value of a
building-block approach to the ‘strategic vision’ and the importance
of making good use of the institutional memory of the ATS has also
been realized by the Parties. India, through the medium of IP 104,
had also underlined the critical importance of a more focused
discussion on how best to formalize, operationalize and
institutionalize the insights, Resolutions, Recommendations and
Measures accumulated over the decades at various ATCMs. It was
also pointed out that the major onus of responsibility/
accountability/action lies on the part of Antarctic tourism
Regulators and that there are limits to self-regulation by the
Organizers.
It is useful to note that some of the enduring concerns that remain
central to the ongoing discussion on the strategic vision for
Antarctic tourism today surfaced early on in the ATCMs during the
1960s. For example, one such concern related to the adverse effects
of tourist activities on the conduct of science and scientific stations.
(Recommendation IV-27 (1966): Effects of Antarctic Tourism);
Recommendation VI-7 (1970): Effects of Tourist and Non-
Government Expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area’
Areas of Special Interest to Tourists
Another major contemporary concern, namely the question of
designating certain areas of special interest to tourists also started
receiving attention during 1970s. Recommendation VII-4 (1972):
Effects of Tourists and Non-Governmental Expeditions in the
Antarctic Treaty Area (Wellington, 1972), urged the ATCPs to
consult each other well in advance about the possibility of
designating at the Eighth Consultative Meeting an adequate number
of areas of interest to which tourists could be encouraged to go, and
about the criteria to be used to determine such areas; use their best
efforts to ensure that the provisions of the Treaty and subsequent
recommendations relating to the conservation of fauna and flora are
applied in practice to all visitors who are not sponsored by
Consultative Parties, as well as to tourists.’ Needless to say, this
basket of issues is closely related to the important issue of tourism
monitoring for frequently visited sites, which is currently under
discussion at the ATCMs. It is worth reiterating that agenda item 12
of 8th ATCM (Oslo, 9-20 June 1975) related to ‘Areas of Special
Interest to Tourists’, and a number of useful recommendations were
made in this regard. Final Report of the Ninth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, London, 19 September-7 October 1977. Para
12. The Final Report of the 11th ATCM (Buenos Aires, 23 June-7
July 1981), which was held against the sad backdrop of the 1979
tragic air crash, noted: Regarding Areas of Special Tourist Interest,
work was begun on the principles that might be adopted if such
Areas were to be designated but discussion indicated a measure of
doubt as to whether it would be prudent to proceed further with the
designation of such Areas. It was agreed that there should be
further study of the issues raised in discussion with a view to
further consideration of the topic at the Twelfth Consultative
Meeting.
There was no further consideration of ‘Areas of Special Tourist
Interest’ at the next 12th ATCM (Canberra, 1983). The IP 104
described the period 1982-1992 as the ‘Decade of No-
Recommendations on Tourism Issues’. and the ATCPs returned to
this important issue-area at the 14th ATCM (Rio de Janeiro, 5-16
October 1987), acknowledging that ‘so far tourism and non-
governmental activities have had minimal adverse impact, very
significant numbers of people were now involved in these activities
and, given the concentration of such activities in various areas,
there was potential for serious impacts, both in environmental
terms of possible damage to fragile ecosystems and compounding
existing waste problems and in scientific terms on national research
programs.’ Final Report of the Fourteenth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, Rio de Janeiro. 5-16 October1987. Para 120.
And it was at the 15th ATCM (Paris, 9-20 October 1989), that one
could discern a growing concern over the risk that, ‘tourism and
non-governmental activities if uncontrolled or excessive, could have
potentially serious adverse impacts on scientific investigations and
the Antarctic environment.’Ibid. On the list of a number of
important issues raised by the delegation of the United Kingdom in
a WP presented at the Paris Meeting Document XV/ATCM/WP/33
was the following question: What roles should Areas of Special
Tourist Interest or the management of activity within designated
areas have with respect to recreational activity?
The Decade of 1990s: The Madrid Protocol and the Growing Focus
on Environmental Impacts Assessment of Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities
The 6th ATCM, held in Bonn (7-18 October 1991), witnessed an
unprecedented return and rise of a number of enduring concerns.
especially given the new context of the Madrid Protocol and its
Annexes. These included: ‘supervision of tourists on the continent,
registration and licensing of shipping, provision of air-navigation
arrangements and emergency and rescue services, the need to
educate those involved in all aspects of tourism, the scientific
tourists sites as to avoid interference with the sites of scientific
research and the need to integrate both existing and new
recommendations in a single code.’
At the 18th ATCM, held in Kyoto (11-22 April 1994), the IP
submitted by the UK concluded on a revealing note: ‘the face of
Antarctic tourism is changing. With these changes come new
challenges for Antarctic policy makers. New operators are entering
the market, often with little or no experience of the area, resulting
in an increased number of passengers carried aboard such ships.
The days when only a handful of operators brought tourists to the
Antarctic aboard expedition-sized vessels appear to have
ended.’Ibid. The only general agreement was that ‘the objective at
this Meeting was not to create new rules and regulations but to
provide guidance to those existing Antarctica and those organizing
and conducting tourism and non-governmental activities there.’
Ibid.:14Accordingly, some of the listed obligations under
Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994): Tourism and Non-governmental
Activities Ibid.: 41 addressing organizers and operators were as
follows: (1) to provide prior notification of, and reports on,
activities to the competent authorities of the appropriate Party or
Parties; (2) to conduct environmental impact assessment of planned
activities; (3) to ensure effective response to environmental
emergencies, especially with regard to marine pollution; (4) to
respect scientific research and the Antarctic environment, including
restricting regarding protected areas, and the protecting of flora and
fauna; and (5) to prevent the disposal and discharge of prohibited
waste.
By the time the ATCPs met at Seoul for the 19th ATCM (8-19 May,
1995), a realization had dawned upon them that whereas the
existing requirements for tourism and non-governmental activities
covered advance notice of such activities, gap in terms of post-
activity reports were yet to be addressed. ‘Resolution 3 (1995):
Reporting of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities’ was
adopted. ATCM/WP 6. The Final Report of Nineteenth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting noted the diversity of concerns that
were expressed by some of the key stakeholders: Final Report of
Nineteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Seoul, 8-19 May:
Para 56. ‘that the reporting burden for tourism should be no greater
(or less) than for other activities’ (IAATO); ‘that there may be value
in having some information concerning on-board waste production
and disposal at gateway ports’ (Canada); and ‘that the impact of
tourism on science’ needs to be taken into serious consideration
(Russia). The Delegation of the Netherlands also invited attention of
the Meeting to ‘the issue of compliance enforcement for gateway
ports.’
The 20th ATCM (Utrecht, 29 April-10 May 1996), did not pursue
further the concerns raised in the previous ATCM with regard to
port state control. The Meeting ‘stressed the importance of effective
self-regulation by the tour industry’ and urged IAATO to ‘ensure
that its members conform fully to the provisions of the Protocol;
disseminate ATCM Recommendations and other texts relevant to
tourism; produce further guidelines and codes of conduct where
appropriate; and encourage all tours companies operating in
Antarctica to become members of the Association.’ Final Report of
the Twentieth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Utrecht, 29
April-10 May 1996. Para 84. ASOC ‘urged all non-governmental
operators to start producing Environmental Impact Assessments
consistently now as the best way to be prepared when the Protocol
comes into force’ and ‘to use all possible means to encourage
compliance with the provisions of Annex I, for instance by making
station visits conditional upon such compliance.’ One finds a
number of concerns related to ‘cumulative effects of tourism
activities’, ‘navigational safety’ and ‘safety of ships’ being expressed
at the 21st ATCM (Christchurch, 19-30 May 1997) but few
statements recommending policy or action or both. Some
Delegations did refer to the IMO ‘Polar Code’ for ‘ships sailing in
polar waters, and considered that the technical issues raised by this
Code should be discussed by ATCM XXII.’Final Report of the
Twenty-first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Christchurch,
19-30 May 1997. Para 98. There is no evidence in the Final Report
of the 22nd ATCM (Tromsø, 25 May-5 June 1998) to suggest, as
desired by the previous ATCM, that any discussion of the technical
issues raised by the IMO ‘Polar Code’ took place. Whereas the key
focus of tourism-related discussions was on the important ‘Antarctic
Visitor Site Project’ lead by the US, UK and Federal Republic of
Germany, ‘the importance of using accurate place names in site visit
reports was noted by several Delegations.’ Final Report of the
Twenty-second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Tromsø, 25
May-5 June 1998: Para 104. The information presented in the
IAATO report was highly appreciated but ‘several delegates asked
questions about the flagging of tourist vessels and the number of
tourists visiting various sites. It was noted that it would be useful if
future reports also included information on the flag state of tourist
vessels and information on the number of tourists that visit the
various sites each season, in order to have information on the
distribution of the possible effects of tourism on the individual
sites.’Ibid. Para 107.
At the 23rd ATCM (Lima, 24 May-4 June 1999) one concern that
loomed large related to the ‘number of large passenger vessels and
vessels of countries that are not Party to the Antarctic Treaty, or the
Environmental Protocol, now entering Antarctic waters.’ ASOC
invited attention to environmental impacts of large-scale tourism
and proposed that ‘consideration be given to introducing strategic
impact assessment as means of assessing the possible environmental
impact due to the growth in tourism and other activities in
Antarctica.’Ibid. Para 120. The Final Report of 24th ATCM (St.
Petersburg, 9-20 July 2001) graphically revealed a rather short
engagement with Antarctic tourism policy matters. A number of
delegates and IAATO expressed concerns ‘about the practical
management of adventure tourism on national programs and tour
operators that may become involved in search and rescue for
unsupported adventure tourists.’ Final Report of Twenty-fourth
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, St. Petersburg, 9-20 July
2001: Para 107. The Meeting noted that ‘there is an increase in the
diversity of tourism activities, which may present new management
challenges.’Ibid. Para 106.
As far as 25th ATCM (Warsaw, 10-20 September 2002) is
concerned, IP 104 had recalled how ASOC brought back on the
agenda of the ATCMs a number of complex but compelling issues
regarding port state jurisdiction in IP 063, the executive summary
of which noted: ‘International law has recognized that port states
may affirmatively take measures to inspect vessels visiting their
waters and enforce internationally-recognized maritime standards
for ship operations and other environmental rules. Such port state
regimes are in place in virtually every other part of the globe. In
order to provide an added element of enforcement of maritime
standards and the provisions of the Madrid Protocol, merchant and
tourist vessels, bound for the Antarctic Treaty Area, and calling at
gateway ports, should be subject to inspection.Document XXV
ATCM/ IP 063. The Information Paper outlines the international
law basis for a port state regime for the Antarctic and also proposed
a draft Memorandum of Understanding on the subject.
A New Protocol on Antarctic Tourism?
It was noted in the IP 104 that at the 26th ATCM (Madrid, 9-20
June 2003) there was some evidence of the maturing of discussion
on Antarctic tourism regulation issuesAustralia introduced WP-13
on ‘Management of Antarctic Non-Government Activities, which
contained draft proposals related to the setting up of a database and
to adventure tourism. United Kingdom introduced WP-23 on
‘Proposals to improve the Management and Regulation of Antarctic
Tourism’. COMNAP introduced IP-37 on ‘The Interaction Between
National Operators, Tourists and Tourism Operators’ and United
Kingdom introduced WP-26 on ‘Proposed Amendment of
Recommendation XVIII -1 (1994)’. , but consensus on how best to
turn, both enduring and emerging, multifaceted concerns (as
expressed by the Regulators, Organizers and Monitors) into
regulatory policies remained rather illusive. Issues related to safety,
insurance, port state control, search and rescue, cumulative
environment impacts, and information data base appeared to be in
competition with one another for greater attention. There had been
no formal collective articulation and assertion of priorities and
policy directives since 1995 when the ‘Resolution 3: Reporting of
Tourism and Non-governmental Activities was adopted. On the
issue of a ‘new legal instrument’, the Final Report of the Meeting
noted: ‘Some delegations questioned whether a new legal
instrument was necessary for a targeted and efficient approach to
these issues. In this respect, options appeared to be: i) the
elaboration of a new Protocol on Tourism, ii) the elaboration of a
new Annex to the Madrid Protocol, iii) the
adoption of a specific Measure, iv) The use and review of the
existing guidelines on tourism activities.’ Final Report of the
Twenty-sixth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Madrid, 9-20
June 2003. Para 134. As the following analysis reveals, it is the last
option, namely ‘the use and review of existing guidelines on tourism
activities’ that is acting as one of the key drivers behind the work in
progress.
Connecting the Dots: Emerging Strategic Intersectionality,
Entangled Issues and Outstanding Concerns
The 28th ATCM (Stockholm, 6-17 June 2005), saw the return and
rise of the strategic focus on creation of areas of special tourist
interest. Issues that were discussed fell under five broad categories:
Site specific guidelines; Land-based tourism; Creation of areas of
special tourist interest; and Accreditation.’Final Report of the
Twenty-eighth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Stockholm
6-17 June 2005: Para VI. In the overarching context of land-based
tourism, the complex but compelling issue of tourist infrastructure
on land, invited –and continues to invite-- a good deal of debate in
Stockholm. While some delegations felt that the Madrid Protocol
should be implemented ‘in such a way as to prevent the
construction of infrastructure to support activities primarily for the
conduct or support of tourism’, others felt the need for a more in-
depth understanding of the issue, including current domestic laws
which might make it ‘difficult to prohibit permanent and semi-
permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental
activities.’ IP 12, ‘Creation of Areas of Special Tourist Interest’,
pointed out foresightedly that the increase in tourism may bring
Parties to considering limiting tourism to certain areas.Ibid. Para
175. The 29th ATCM (Edinburgh, 12-23 June 2006) did return to
the issue of tourist infrastructure but without any consensus; “The
United Kingdom tabled a draft Resolution on Limiting Permanent
Non-Governmental Infrastructure in Antarctica. This proposed that
Parties should refrain from authorizing permanent land-based
facilities in Antarctica that are not in support of national Antarctic
science programmes or associated with a government operator.
Whilst many delegations supported the draft some delegations
believed that clearer definitions were needed. Despite lengthy
debate, consensus on the draft, or any alternative draft considered,
could not be reached. The Meeting decided not to establish an inter-
sessional contact group, but instead to address this issue again at
ATCM XXX. Final Report of the Twenty-ninth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, Edinburgh 12-23 June 2006: Para 170
At the 30th ATCM (New Delhi, 30 April-11 May 2007), a significant
step forward was taken by the ATCPs with the passing of two
Resolutions: Resolution 4 (2007): Ship-based Tourism in the
Antarctic Treaty Area and Resolution 5 (2007): Tourism in the
Antarctic Treaty Area. Resolution 4 (2007) recommended that:
‘Parties, consistent with their national law, 1. discourage or decline
to authorize tour operators that use vessels carrying more than 500
passengers from making any landings in Antarctica; and 2.
encourage or require tour operators to: a) coordinate with each
other such that not more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site
at any one time; b) restrict the number of passengers on shore at
any one time to 100 or fewer, unless otherwise specified in
applicable ATCM Measures or Resolutions; and c) maintain a
minimum 1:20 guide-to-passenger ratio while ashore, unless
otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures or Resolutions.’
Resolution 5 (2007) recommended that: ‘the Parties discourage any
tourism activities which may substantially contribute to the long-
term degradation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent
and associated ecosystems.’ Both Resolutions, by their very nature
and scope, raised highly pertinent issues related to the need for
inspection and compliance.
At the 31st ATCM (Kyiv, 2-13 June 2008), United Kingdom through
WP 51 Developing a Strategic Vision of Antarctic Tourism for the
Next Decade. The WP noted that ‘Measures and Resolutions agreed
during recent years were largely directed at the conduct of tourism
within Antarctica, and that there had been little discussion about
whether Parties should place greater
controls on the overall size, geographic limits or diversity of
tourism activities in Antarctica.’Ibid. Para 180. The UK proposed
that ‘the ATCM take a proactive approach through the development
of a strategic vision of tourism. The United Kingdom had discussed
options for developing such a strategy with government, NGOs and
industry, and found general support for the overall concept.’ The
UK further ‘proposed that development of the vision should include
general principles for the overall development of tourism in
Antarctica and should aim to articulate, as far as was practicable, a
more precise volume and form of tourism that Parties would wish to
see in the future. Essentially, the aim of the vision would be to
clarify: what the ATCM expected tourism activities in Antarctica to
look like – for example, in terms of volume, geographic and
seasonal limits, and diversity; how tourism in Antarctica would be
managed in order to deliver such a vision; how information about
tourism activities would be collected, analysed and reported; and
how the Antarctic environment would be monitored to identify any
potential impacts of tourism activities.’Ibid. The UK proposed that
‘such a vision, as a non-mandatory and aspirational tool, be
developed in time for ATCM XXXII to form part of the celebrations
of the 50th Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty.’
It was at the 32nd ATCM (Baltimore, 6-17 April 2009) that strategic
vision for Antarctic tourism was further broadened and deepened.
ASOC (IP 53 ‘Key Elements of a strategic vision for Antarctic
Tourism’), argued ‘that there is an urgent need for Antarctic Treaty
Parties to develop a clear vision of tourism in the Antarctic, and to
agree on a Tourism strategy that delivers step by step on that vision
through time.’Final Report of the Thirty-second Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, Baltimore, 6-17 April 2009. Para 168. ASOC
‘characterised tourism as a whole system composed by a departure
region, a transit region, a destination region, the tourism industry,
and the tourists themselves, which helped to conceptualise tourism
as more than visitation of certain landing sites’ and ‘considered that
the unending growth of Antarctic tourism was not desirable,
required or inevitable.’ ASOC’s contention was that ‘Tourism
activities in Antarctica should demonstrably have no more than a
minor or transitory impact on the environment. A precautionary
approach should be used to manage tourism in the absence of
conclusive scientific evidence about tourism impacts. Certain types
of commercial tourism would need to be discouraged or
prohibited.’Ibid.
The 34th ATCM (Buenos Aires, 20 June-1 July 2011), saw some
forward movement on how to further advance the strategic vision
for Antarctic tourism, with a number of delegations participating in
the discussion. ‘India, supported by several other Parties, suggested
that it was important for the ATCM to focus not only on the
adequacy of current measures, but also on the adequacy of their
implementation by national authorities.’Ibid. Para 217 India,
(supported by several Parties), also ‘referred to the importance of
considering Antarctic issues within a wider global context, and
highlighted the value of developing linkages with other relevant
international instruments and organisations.’Ibid. Para 308 ‘The
Netherlands felt that the development of certain forms of extreme
tourist activities in Antarctica should be discouraged. It feared that
the ATCM, by not developing tourism policies fast enough to keep
up with developments in the industry, would face shifting baselines
for decision making. It felt that the Parties have the right to
withhold permits for activities they deem incompatible with the
intrinsic or wilderness values of Antarctica, even if such activities
do not cause direct environmental harm, and that the ATCPs
should, in the Netherlands’ view, jointly or individually, prevent
that Antarctica become a playground for extreme activities that
Parties would prohibit in their own national natural reserves.’Ibid.
Para 311 The Meeting agreed that ‘it was highly desirable to take a
more strategic approach to the ATCM’s review of tourism policies,
identify gaps, and set priorities for future discussion, taking into
account existing regulatory instruments and guidelines and
implementation thereof.’Ibid. Para 232
At the 35th ATCM (Hobart, 11-20 June 2012), the important
intervention was made by the Netherlands (WP 27 rev. 1, Report of
the Intersessional Contact Group ‘Outstanding Questions’ on
Antarctic Tourism), listing out five priorities, as identified by the
ICG: improving information exchange and cooperation; measuring
and managing cumulative impacts of visitation; the merits of
regulatory instruments to prevent or regulate the further expansion
of tourist activities; the increasing diversity of activities in
Antarctica; and the potential development of regulations in respect
of permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica. Ibid. Para 210 The
critical issue of ‘cumulative impacts’ of tourism on sites frequently
visited and challenges posed by data deficit and data access were
also identified. The 36th ATCM (Brussels, 20-29 May 2013),
adopted Decision 5 (2013) Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, under which one of the
priority areas was “reviewing and assessing the need for additional
actions regarding area management and permanent infrastructure
related to tourism, as well as issues related to land-based and
adventure tourism, and addressing the recommendations of the CEP
tourism study.’Final Report of the Thirty-sixth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, Brussels, 20-29 May 2013.
3. From Strategic Vision to Strategic Action
The 38th ATCM (Sofia, Bulgaria, 1-10 June 2015) –on the floor of
which India had the honour of introducing IP 104 rev-- stood out in
terms of widely shared concern among all the three categories of
stakeholders that a large number of issues –having remained on the
agenda of previous ATCMs over the past five decades and more—
were now in urgent need of coherent and systematic action plan for
ensuring ecologically responsible and safe tourism management in
ecologically exceptional Antarctica. The final report of the 38th
ATCM summed up the key message of WP 24, titled ‘Adopting a
Strategic Approach to Environmentally Managed Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities in Antarctica’ (introduced by New Zealand
and jointly prepared with the United Kingdom, Norway and the
Netherlands) as follows: ‘Acknowledging the effort made at
previous ATCMs to review tourism policies, this paper highlighted
that little headway had been made on consolidating this work and
progressing towards setting priorities for future discussion. It
recognised that tourism was expanding in Antarctica and that
tourism activities were diversifying. The proponents encouraged the
Meeting to adopt a forward thinking, proactive approach to the
management of tourism and non-governmental activities in
Antarctica, with a view to drafting a work programme to develop a
strategic vision for the management of tourism.’ Final Report of the
Thirty-eighth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Sofia,
Bulgaria, 1-00 June 2015. Para 210. ASOC expressed the view that
‘it was time to move from strategic thinking to strategic action.’
Ibid. Para 214. The importance of identifying and addressing both
outstanding issues/questions/gaps and priorities on Antarctica
tourism too was highlighted. One of the key recommendations
made by ASOC in IP 109 Antarctic Tourism and Protected Areas,
was ‘that Parties consider strategically using ASPAs and ASMAs to
regulate current and potential future tourism. It recognised that
ASMAs were one of the best tools for the management of tourism,
including at the subregional level. It noted that ASMA coverage
could be usefully extended to that effect. It also suggested that
ASPAs could be designated to protect from tourism sites that meet
the criteria of Article 3(2) of Annex V to the Environment Protocol.’
Ibid. Furthermore, as noted in the Final Report of the 38th ATCM:
New Zealand welcomed a more strategic approach towards this
issue and suggested that this line of reasoning could be expanded to
particular examples of areas potentially threatened by the increase
of touristic activities in the Antarctic. The United Kingdom added
that ASMAs may be a useful management tool for managing tourism
in Antarctic interior areas, where there are also a range of scientific
and other activities. IAATO agreed that a strategic approach
towards the use of protected areas and other site
management tools was important to address all human activities in
Antarctica, not only the activities of non-governmental
organisations. Ibid. Para 237.
Given the centrality of meticulously collected data and information
exchange to the realization of a strategic approach to Antarctic
tourism, yet another major contribution at the 38th ATCM came
from Argentina in IP 128 Areas of tourist interest in the Antarctic
Peninsula and South Orkney Islands region: 2014/2015 Austral
Summer Season’. Ibid. Para 259. The IP provided useful data about
the tourist visits to one of most visited areas in the region based on
the ‘voyages made by vessels during the 2014/15 summer season,
operating through the port of Ushuaia.’ Ibid.
The decision to establish an ICG on ‘Working towards Developing a
Strategic Approach to Environmentally Managed Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities in Antarctica’, which was also expected to
take into account the outcomes of 2011/2012 Intersessional Contact
Group on ‘Outstanding Questions’ on Antarctic Tourism –with New
Zealand and India acting as joint convenors-- was a clear indication
of the dawning perception that movement towards a collective
strategic action was no longer a matter of simply choice but sheer
necessity.
Working Together Towards a Strategic Approach to Antarctic
Tourism!
The 39th ATCM (Santiago, 23 May-1 June 2016) saw momentum
gathering around discussions directed at working out a more
nuanced yet systematic strategic approach to Antarctic tourism.
New Zealand introduced WP28 Report of the Intersessional Contact
Group ’Developing a Strategic Approach to Environmentally
Managed Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities’, jointly
prepared with India. The final report of the Santiago ATCM noted
Final Report of the Thirty-nineth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting, Santiago, Chile, 23 May--1 June 2016. Para 241. that ‘The
ICG had identified priority areas and gaps within the existing
tourism management framework which had been recognised in
previous ICGs and Working Papers addressing tourism (e.g., ATCM
XXXI - WP 51, ATCM XXXII - WP 10 and Resolution 7 (2009),
ATCM XXXVII - WP 24 and ATCM XXXVIII - IP 104 rev.1).’ Some of
the key recommendations were that the ATCM: ‘consider its report;
agree to work to develop a common vision of Antarctic tourism at
ATCM XL; conduct a comprehensive review of progress in
implementing the recommendations of the 2012 CEP Tourism
Study, and agree to a Multi-year Work Plan to implement
outstanding areas of work focused on tourism.’ Furthermore, ‘New
Zealand emphasised the need for the Parties to agree on a common
vision for the development of tourism in Antarctica in order to
better consider effective measures that were able to manage its
continued growth and diversification, and invited Parties to provide
input regarding specific elements of the strategic vision for
consideration at ATCM XL.’
At the 40th ATCM (Beijing, China, 22 May-1 June 2017), the
ongoing discussion at the ATCM on strategic approach to Antarctic
Tourism was taken to the next level by New Zealand by
introducing, WP 31 A Strategic Approach to Environmentally
Managed Tourism. The WP 31 recalled ‘that ATCM XXXIX agreed to
commence work to develop a common vision of Antarctic tourism
(ATCM XXXIX - WP 28), and ‘noted that WP 31 laid out a general
framework that builds on the ATCM’s previous work on tourism,
including the framework provided by Resolution 7 (2009) General
Principles of Antarctic Tourism.’ New Zealand recommended in WP
31 that the ATCM adapt a strategic approach aimed at ensuring that
‘Antarctic tourism’ –tourism with a difference—‘serves to enhance
global understanding of the need to protect Antarctica and should
have no more than a minor or transitory impact’ and ‘that the
environmental impact of tourist and non-governmental activities in
Antarctica are understood through a system of
environmental monitoring and data collection, and that negative
environmental impacts are prevented through proactive responses
to that data’.
The WP 31 called upon the ATCPs to ‘take a consistent approach to
site management that includes the development of criteria assessing
the suitability of a site for tourism and sets thresholds for its use’;
have a common understanding of how to regulate Antarctic tourism
and actively do so, including through strong and effective
instruments that seek to address issues arising from tourism and
non-governmental activities in a proactive way; and ‘efficiently and
effectively implement and enforce new and existing instruments
relating to tourism and non-governmental activities, and apply a
consistent and precautionary approach to the authorisation of these
activities; and work ‘constructively with the tourism industry on the
identification and resolution of issues arising from tourism and non-
governmental activities.’ Yet another important emphasis placed by
New Zealand in WP 31 was that ‘all tourist and non-governmental
activities in Antarctica remain under the governance of the
Antarctic Treaty System and its ATCPs, which will regularly review
the effectiveness of the regime.’ New Zealand underlined the critical
importance of a strategic approach focussed on active and effective
management of tourism activities by the Parties.
While noting Resolution 7 (2009) remained relevant and
represented the agreed common values of the ATCM as they relate
to tourism, New Zealand stressed that a strategic approach to
environmentally managed tourism required further
operationalization of these principles. It was noted that ‘a strategic
approach to environmentally managed tourism should be supported
and guided by comprehensive monitoring and Populate the multi-
year strategic work plan to begin operationalising the strategic
approach from ATCM 41 onwards.’
Some of the issues seen at the core of a strategic vision of Antarctic
tourism (e.g. port state control) at the previous ATCMs were
conspicuous by their presence on the agenda of the Beijing ATCM.
At the 41st ATCM (Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2018), there was
evidence of connecting the dots! The thoughtful mention of ‘Trends
and Patterns’ in the Final Summary of 41st ATCM in the sub-title of
Item 7a, Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic
Treaty Area, was highly suggestive of the fact that basket of tourism
related issues/concerns had started overflowing with wide-ranging
issues –both old and new-- and forming complex patterns. Both the
numbers provided by IAATO for 2017-18 season and preliminary
estimates for 2018-19 season in IP 71 were quite telling and
underlined the importance of trend analysis for strategic approach
to Antarctic tourism regulation. As noted in the Final Report:
Antarctic tourism continued to be primarily focused on traditional
commercial ship-borne tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula, which
accounted for over 95% of all landed activity. In the 2017-18
season, 42,576 people landed in Antarctica, including those from
IAATO land-based operators, which surpassed the previous season.
IAATO noted that this was in part due to vessels being operated
with higher passenger capacity and that the industry was
benefitting from strong world economic growth. Additional site-
specific information was highlighted in IP 72, submitted by IAATO.
IAATO’s estimates for the 2018-19 season indicated that passenger
numbers would rise to circa 55,764 individuals, in line with global
trends of travel growth to remote and high latitude places. More
than 100 different nationalities were represented by tourists who
visited the Antarctic during the 2017-18 season. Final Report of the
41st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, 13 May—18 May 2018. Para 73.
It was widely felt by the Parties that wide-ranging impacts and
implications –including legal-- of the ‘trend of increasing tourist
numbers and diversification of tourism activities warranted their
attention’ Ibid. Para 75. , including those emanating from the
presence of non-IAATO
operators, unauthorised activities (Russia, IP 53), including
unauthorized yacht visits, and lack of data about their
environmental impacts. The WP 22 A Practical Approach to
Antarctic Tourism Management (UK and USA) while reminding the
Parties that tourism could have a positive impact if ‘managed
appropriately to ensure that it had no more than a minor or
transitory impact on the environment’. Moreover, ‘tourism should:
have no negative impact on national Antarctic programmes; fully
comply, both in practice and in spirit, with the rules of the
Antarctic Treaty and the Environment Protocol; and create
Ambassadors for Antarctica.’ The United Kingdom ‘emphasised that
significant Measures agreed by the ATCM and designed to regulate
and improve the management of tourism were not yet in force
including: Measure 4 (2004), Measure 1 (2005) and Measure 15
(2009).’ This remains the case in 2022! The important intervention
by the Netherlands in WP 22 could also be seen as the
reinforcement of the vital normative dimension of the ‘strategic
vision’ for Antarctic tourism regulation and management. As noted
in the Final Report, ‘the Netherlands, underlined the importance of
attention to impacts on the wilderness values of Antarctica. It noted
that these values are explicitly mentioned in Article 3 of the
Protocol and in the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism
(Resolution 7 (2009)).’ Whereas ASOC’s intervention in IP 61
ensured that the long-standing concern with ‘Areas of Special
Interests to Tourists’ remained at the centre stage of ongoing
discussions. ASOC’s intervention was duly noted as follows:
Noting that polar tourism was expected to grow, ASOC raised the
matter of how the current Antarctic tourism regulatory system
would respond to growth and provided a first attempt to answer
this question. It recommended that the Meeting: review the current
regulatory and management system for tourism to ensure adequate
resilience and effectiveness in the future, including the adoption
and/or review of Site Guidelines; consider ways to improve the
assessment and monitoring of cumulative impacts, particularly at
the most visited sites and on a regional basis; and continue to
expand the network of ASPAs and ASMAs taking into consideration
tourism growth on a regional basis. ASOC further noted that with
projected increases in visitor numbers and other measures of
tourism growth, and a continued focus of visitation at particular
sites, it will be necessary for the ATCM to develop a more targeted
look at visited sites to ensure that activities have a minimal impact.
Ibid. Para 89.
It is useful to cite in full/verbatim the summary provided in the
Final Report of the 41st ATCM of the WG II discussion on Antarctic
tourism and non-governmental activities, as it reveals the
intersectionality of the old/enduring and new/emerging challenges
in the pursuit of a strategic action plan for the regulation and
management of Antarctic tourism:
The Meeting noted several key issues raised by Parties in the course
of the discussion, including:
concern about the increasing pressures on the environment, in
particular regarding the pressures on landing sites and on search
and rescue resources, presented by the anticipated growth in
volume of tourism, in terms of both the number of vessels and
number of visitors, and in high-risk adventure tourism activities;
the need to consider cumulative impacts when assessing tourism
activities including those unauthorised or of non-IAATO members;
the desire to maintain wilderness values;
the importance of providing national authorities with the correct
legal instruments and tools to respond to unregulated or
unauthorised activities in the Antarctic;
the need to find additional mechanisms to improve the monitoring
of tourism;
the need to consider the implications of potential SAR burdens on
national programmes and personnel associated with increased
activities in Antarctica;
a further consideration of the understanding of the terms non-
permanent, semi-permanent and permanent in light of the EIA
provisions of the Environment Protocol;
the desirability of improving communications, in particular the
speed of communication, between Parties regarding tourism issues,
noting that the Competent Authorities Forum was helpful, but
potentially not sufficient, in this regard; and
the desirability of developing an interactive mapping tool on the
ATS website (based on the Geographical Information tool
demonstrated for the inspections database) that could help illustrate
visitation over time for sites covered by Site Guidelines.
The 42nd ATCM (Prague, Czech Republic, 1-11 July 2019) had a
rich and highly useful discussion on Antarctic tourism regulation
but the engagement with the term ‘strategic’ became somewhat
liminal. The term ‘strategic’ is conspicuous by its clear absence in
the relevant sections of the Final Report. This can be perceived
however as a strategic pause in the sense that most of the WG II
space was allotted to a review of tourism policies and a focused
discussion on ‘competent authorities’. Item 17 in the Final Report of
the Prague ATCM was titled as follows: ‘Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, including
Competent Authorities Issues.’ Final Report of the 42nd Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting, Prague, Czech Republic, 1-11 July
2019.
The United Kingdom presented WP 19 Antarctic Tourism
Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s
Summary and Key Recommendations and IP 11 Antarctic Tourism
Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s Report,
jointly with the Netherlands. The Meeting was informed that the
Antarctic Tourism Workshop was guided by work presented in IP 26
Proactive Management of Antarctic Tourism: Time for a Fresh
Approach (Netherlands, New Zealand), and the key impetus behind
the workshop was the ‘very significant growth in the number of
Polar Ships following the negotiations of the Polar Code and
IAATO’s projections that ship-borne tourism could so much as
double in the next few years.’ Ibid. Para 351. Significantly both the
workshop and the papers addressed three baskets of important
interrelated issues – growth in tourism, diversification, and
compliance – and resulted in important recommendations to the
ATCM under each category.
The Final Report of the 42nd ATCM noted that Rotterdam workshop
had recommended that the ATCM: (1) ‘strongly encourage those
Parties that had yet to do so to expedite the approval of Antarctic
Tourism regulations, notably Measure 4 (2004) and Measure 15
(2009); (2) work with COMNAP, SCAR and IAATO, and on the basis
of advice from the CEP, to ensure that guidelines relating to
conduct of visitors ashore were in line with current best practice
and presented in a format appropriate for all visitors, and that the
guidelines were easily identifiable on the ATS website; (3) and
explore the idea of levying an administrative fee on tourism
operators to support environmental monitoring work, including
through considering parallels with the administrative fees levied by
CCAMLR on fishing operators.’ As noted in the Final Report, the
Meeting agreed to the first two recommendations and with regard
to the third one, it was noted that: ‘Several Parties expressed
support for the introduction of an administrative fee on tourism
operators, but noted the importance of agreeing the rationale for
collecting such a fee. The Meeting agreed that further discussions
were needed to develop a deeper understanding of how fees could
be collected, administered, and used. Interested Parties were
encouraged to have further informal intersessional consultation and
to submit papers to ATCM XLIII containing concrete proposals
describing possible systems for levying fees and administering
resulting funds.’ This issue awaits further consideration by the
stakeholders.
Besides eminently deserved appreciation these recommendations
received some useful responses from all the three stakeholders;
Regulators, Organisers and Monitors. These included the need for
placing sufficient resources at the disposal of the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat to ‘provide oversight for all visitors as growth continues’
(UK); ‘establishing reference areas to which tourists would not be
able to enter’ and comparing them with ‘visited areas to better
assess tourism impacts’ (ASOC); ‘inclusion of seasonal limitations in
specific site guidelines’ (ASOC); and ‘developing and reviewing
Visitor Site Guidelines, recognising the importance of aligning these
with current best practice and making them widely available'
(IAATO).
On the complex and compelling challenge of tourism diversification
–marked by both new types of activities and activities happening in
a new ways or sites, it was pointed out that ‘operators may propose
new activities to be considered for permit or authorisation directly
to a competent authority without first obtaining peer review
through IAATO’ and ‘such actions could result in inconsistent
assessment of the new activity across competent authorities.’ In
order to effectively meet this challenge, the workshop Rotterdam
workshop had recommended that the ATCM: ‘develop a framework
to underpin greater consistency of standards between competent
authorities in assessing the potential safety and environmental
implications of new or novel activities.’
And on the final issue of ‘compliance’, the Rotterdam workshop had
recommended that ATCM: ‘invite Parties to identify a working level
competent authority contact, in addition to the senior responsible
official’; develop terms of reference for enhanced engagement
between Competent Authorities and establish an ongoing subsidiary
group; develop a proposal for an international tourism observer
scheme, building on national experiences and IAATO’s model;
continue to reach out to Non-consultative Parties whose operators
or nationals engaged in Antarctic tourism activities; continue to
encourage all Parties to ensure they regularly updated the EIES on
which tourism and non-governmental activities they have
authorised and ask the Secretariat to ensure that this information
was made clearer and more obviously locatable on their website;
encourage Parties to include inspections of tourism activities within
existing inspection regimes; and ask Working Group 1 to provide
advice on how those operating in Antarctica could most effectively
gather and share evidence of suspected non-compliance.’ No
surprise, as noted in the Final Report, the Meeting expressed overall
support for the general principles reflected in the recommendations.
WP 35, Permanent Facilities for Tourism and Other Non-
Governmental Activities in Antarctica, presented by the
Netherlands, 43rd ATCM (Paris, France, 12-24 June 2021), p. 1
The debate on tourism and other non-governmental activities at the
43rd ATCM (Paris, France, 12-24 June 2021) had a sharper focus on
policy and management. The meeting saw an important
intervention by Netherlands in WP 35, Permanent Facilities for
Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica. Ibid.
It was after a considerable gap that this complex issue-area had
been brought back on the agenda with such foresight and
farsightedness. It was stated early on in WP 35:
One of the questions that has received substantial attention within
the broader ATCM debate relates to the desirability or need to
prohibit or regulate possible future initiatives to erect permanent
facilities for tourism or other non-governmental purposes, such as
hotels in Antarctica and accommodation for tourist in or near
research facilities, in Antarctica. ATCM discussions on this topic
between 2004 to 2008 have not resulted in consensus on specific
policy responses, however, since then circumstances have changed.
The ATCM has made further steps in its considerations on Antarctic
tourism, including the adoption of the General Principles of
Antarctic Tourism in 2009, which constitutes a jointly agreed
framework for the adoption of more specific policy measures.
Furthermore, IAATO has adopted more explicit policy on this issue
and recently a number of developments in Antarctica has shown
that concerns relating to permanent
facilities for tourism or other non-governmental purposes should
not be considered theoretically.’ Ibid.
The Netherlands also sounded the following note of caution:
‘Permanent facilities for tourism and non-governmental activities
may challenge or threaten ATS principles and values in various
ways.’ Another important point made by the Netherlands was that
‘since the last intensive debates on the topic of permanent facilities
for tourism in Antarctica (2004-2008), circumstances have
changed’. Moreover, it was pointed out by the Netherlands: ‘The
COVID-19 crisis provides an unprecedented momentum for green
and inclusive economic recovery based on the principle of ‘building
back better’. It also underlines the importance of stepping up our
global climate ambition, ambitious carbon reduction targets and
active international promotion of the need for climate measures.’ In
light of these changed circumstances, WP 35 recommended the
ATCM to revisit this topic and invited Parties to: ‘exchange views
on the basis of this Working Paper; share information on past and
present initiatives to establish permanent facilities for tourism in
Antarctica and possible related concerns; agree to engage in
intersessional discussions on the question whether the ATCM should
take action relating to future plans for permanent facilities for
tourism in Antarctica and, if so, what action might be appropriate.’
Given the complex nature of this important concern related to
‘permanent facilities’ for tourism and non-governmental activities,
little surprise that WP 35 invoked a great deal of interest and
responses. The Final Report of the Paris ATCM noted Final Report
of the 43rd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Paris, France,
12-24 June 2021. that ‘IAATO reaffirmed that its members were not
interested in constructing or funding permanent facilities, such as
hotels, in Antarctica, noting that such activity would conflict with
IAATO bylaws, which provided that activities must have no more
than a minor or transitory impact, and would risk degrading the
very wilderness and aesthetic values that brought tourists to
Antarctica.’ Ibid. Para 225. Whereas ‘ASOC expressed support for
ongoing intersessional discussions under the proposed terms of
reference and noted that the ATCM had not adopted major
measures on tourism management since 2009, encouraging the
Meeting to show leadership on this issue. It also highlighted the
need to clarify which forms of land-based tourism support or uses
count as permanent tourism facilities and stressed the importance of
taking a precautionary approach to managing such activities.’ Ibid.
Para 226. And ‘Parties commented on concerns raised by WP 35
regarding possible future permanent facilities for tourism including:
environmental impacts; impacts on search and rescue capacity of
national Antarctic programmes; and the potential for abandoned
infrastructure should business circumstances change. A view was
expressed that ‘semi- permanent’ camps erected over multiple
seasons in the same locations could raise some similar issues, noting
that this could also be considered in the intersessional discussions.’
Ibid. Para 222. The Meeting agreed to establish an ICG on
permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental
activities in Antarctica, with the following terms of reference: To
share and collate information on past and present initiatives to
establish permanent facilities for tourism and other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica; To exchange views on the
desirability and possible content of a definition of permanent
facilities for tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica; To exchange views on possible concerns relating to such
facilities, including, for instance, environmental concerns and
pressure on the search and rescue capacity of national programmes;
To discuss the question of whether the ATCM should take action
relating to future plans for permanent facilities for tourism and
other non-governmental activities in Antarctica and, if so, what
action might be appropriate; and Depending on progress and
outcomes of discussions on the previous item, to develop a clear
proposal on the issue of permanent facilities for tourism and other
non-governmental activities in Antarctica that may be submitted to
ATCM XLIV.’ Ibid. Para 227. The Netherlands would act as
convener and report to the next ATCM on progress made in the ICG.
The terms of references graphically convey
the challenge involved in putting together the various building
blocks –with each building block having multiple concerns—in
pursuit of a strategic approach to effective regulation and
management of Antarctic tourism.
4. India’s Understanding of Strategic Vision of and Approach to
Antarctic Tourism
What does ‘Building Back –and forth- Better’ mean in case of
Antarctic tourism? Most likely –and quite understandably so--
different stakeholders –i.e., Regulators: ‘government representatives
directly involved in Antarctic policy’; Organisers: ‘tour operators
and industry representatives’; and (c) Monitors: ‘representatives of
environmental NGOs and Antarctic tourism researchers’— will not
have exactly the same answer. Yet, it is this diversity of
experiences, perspectives and policies that accounts for the
resilience and adaptability of the Antarctic governance model. What
makes these stakeholders a collective in the pursuit of a strategic
approach to regulating Antarctic tourism is their commitment to the
Preamble to the Antarctic Treaty: Recognizing that it is in the
interest of all mankind that Antarctica shall continue for ever to be
used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become the
scene or object of international discord.
It has been noted in a recent study Cajiao, D., Benayas,J.,Tejedo, P.,
Leung, Y.-F. Adaptive Management of Sustainable Tourism in
Antarctica: A Rhetoric or Working Progress? Sustainability 2021,
13, 7649. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13147649: “Growth and
diversification of tourism activities in Antarctica have not been
matched by proactive strategies for planning or management.” The
authors further point out that while they acknowledge that ‘full
implementation of an adaptive management approach is not easily
achievable due to the unique Antarctic regime’, they are of the view
‘that comprehensive site-specific and regional adaptive management
models could be applied as the first step for a more systematic
implementation. This incremental approach could contribute to
enhanced stakeholder participation and improved decision-making
processes, ultimately leading to a more proactive and effective
management of Antarctic tourism, essential for the conservation of
the continent.’
IP 104 had shown that many of the issue-areas related to the
regulation of Antarctic tourism have stayed on the ATCM agenda
over nearly five decades. Moreover the contexts in which various
‘enduring concerns’ were initially approached, analysed and
discussed have also changed. As the numbers of stakeholders and
their concerns continue to multiply a building-block approach to
the ‘Strategic Vision’ would need this institutional memory to avoid
the risk of repetitive discussions and duplication of efforts.
The term ‘Building Back Better’ has also been deployed for
‘reimaging tourism’ in the context of Covid-10 pandemic. Some
thoughts on this in Antarctica in Frame, B. and Hemmings, A.D.
(2020) Coronavirus at the end of the world: Antarctica matters.
Social Sciences & Humanities Open 2: 1-5. What does ‘post-
pandemic normal’ entail for various forms of tourism as it returns to
both the old and the new sites across the globe? To quote Anna
Spenceley et al., ‘Looking forward, there is much talk of ‘building
back better’. For tourism, this should not mean a return to business
as usual but planning for forms of tourism that address climate
change and biodiversity loss, and which are more inclusive,
equitable and integrated with sustainable development principles.
How can we learn from our experience with COVID-19 to ensure a
more resilient and sustainable future for this industry? Nobody can
predict how the pandemic will evolve, nor the recovery timeline,
but stakeholders can identify plausible scenarios and create plans
that work across these. Future directions need to build consensus on
more sustainable pathways through best practice environmental
management and encourage visitors to be more respectful of people,
wildlife and the receiving environment.’ Spenceley, A., McCool, S.,
Newsome, D., Báez, A., Barborak, J.R., Blye, C-J, Bricker, K., Sigit
Cahyadi, H., Corrigan, K., Halpenny, E., Hvenegaard, G., Malleret
King, D., Leung, Y-F, Mandić, A., Naidoo, R., Rüede, D., Sano, J.,
Sarhan, M., Santamaria, V., Beraldo Sousa, T. and Zschiegner, A-K
(2021) Tourism in protected and conserved areas amid the
COVID-19 pandemic. PARKS (27). pp. 103-118.
To state the obvious perhaps, the challenge, in view of steadily
expanding basket of concerns –many, if not most, of which are
interconnected in a complex pattern-- would be to be to envision,
conceptualize and operationalize the strategic vision –and strategic
approaches emanating from them—on this demanding
intersectionality. It is indeed encouraging to note the growing
appreciation in the ATCMs of the urgent need for a holistic strategic
approach that enables connecting the dots through an
acknowledgement of long standing, long discussed concerns related
to tourism in the ATCMs.
