Report from Asian Forum of Polar Sciences to the ATCM XLIV
Report from Asian Forum of Polar Sciences to the ATCM XLIV
Introduction
Since the establishment of the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences
(AFoPS) in 2004, AFoPS currently consists of six members – China,
Japan, India, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea and Thailand. The
AFoPS, an 18 year old Asian organisation dedicated to the
advancement of polar sciences among its members aims to
encourage and facilitate cooperation through human and
information exchange, research collaboration, and logistic
cooperation among Asian polar science institutions. This report is
prepared to update the new developments of the Asian Forum for
Polar Sciences (AFoPS) since the last ATCM.
Chair of AFoPS
The Chair of AFoPS is rotated among the members with a two-year
term of service. Malaysia has taken over the role as the Chair for
2021-2022 from Japan. The Chair of AFoPS hosts and organise the
Annual General Meeting (AGM) and any meetings needed to discuss
the matters of members’ common interests. The AFoPS Secretariat
from Malaysia has been tasked to strengthen information-sharing
among members, initiate collaboration with other international
organisations and facilitate its future planning.
AFoPS Webinar: Opportunities and Capacity Building
In conjunction with the 9th Malaysian International Seminar on
Antarctica (MISA9) and the 2021 AFoPS Annual General Meeting, a
webinar was held online on 25 October 2021 to introduce the
available opportunities and capacity building programs including
fellowship, scholarship, training, visiting scientist program and
collaborative projects. Seven speakers from the Korea Polar
Research Institute, the National Institute of Polar Research of
Japan, the National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research of India,
Polar Research Institute of China, Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research
Foundation, Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, and
International Arctic Science Committee have presented in the
webinar.
2021 AFoPS Annual General Meeting
The Annual General Meeting was held online on 28-29 October
2021. Due to the Covid-19 situation and travel restrictions, the
members met virtually for the two days meeting. Prof Azizan Abu
Samah, the Director of the National Antarctic Research Centre, as
the Chair of AFoPS opened the meeting and welcomed the
participants. 38 participants from AFoPS members countries along
with four representatives from the Australian Antarctic Division,
Iranian National Institute for Oceanography and Atmospheric
Science, and TÜBİTAK MAM Polar Research Institute as observers
attended the meeting. The members presented their national
reports, including updates on each national program. These include
the overview of the operational, logistics and their research plan.
Six researchers presented the recent development of their research
projects that are worthwhile to share with other members, followed
by the presentations by the observers on their polar science-related
activities. As usual, the meeting also covered sessions on the
exchange program, AFoPS publication, cooperation with other
international organisations and a closed business meeting to discuss
and deliberate important items.
Memorandum of Understanding between SCAR, IASC and AFoPS
At the 2021 AFoPS Annual General Meeting, the President of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Dr Yeadong
Kim, the President of the International Arctic Science Committee
(IASC), Prof Larry Hinzman and the Chair of AFoPS, Prof Azizan
Abu Samah, renewed the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
between the three organisations. Through the MoU, the
organisations recognise the common goal of working internationally
on polar
science and technology to increase understanding of Earth's Polar
Regions and their connections to the global system.
The purpose of the present MoU is to foster cooperation between
IASC, SCAR and the AFoPS members, and to lay the foundation for
a joint effort in developing international programs and initiatives
based on scientific priorities, scientific excellence and shared use of
Asian Antarctic and Arctic infrastructures for scientific and
technological purposes, as well as increasing the engagement of
Asian scientists in both IASC and SCAR activities. The MoU is for a
term of 5 years and follows the initial MoU between the
organisations, signed in 2016.
AFoPS Special Meeting at ASSW 2022
The AFoPS Special Meeting was held online on 28 March 2022
during the ASSW 2022 with 28 participants from six member
countries. The main agendas for this meeting were the updates on
each member's programs, ongoing AFoPS activities and future
plans, followed by a discussion on the main issues that need
decisions and deliberations from the members. It was announced in
the meeting that the next Annual General Meeting will be held in
Kuala Lumpur in October 2022.
Conclusion
The Asian polar research community has been growing and with the
expansion in the research infrastructure and investments among the
Asian polar programs, we hope this will further increase the
collaboration and cooperation with others. As an exclusive regional
group, AFoPS is determined to be part of the international
community and hope this will serve as a platform to further
enhance the networking and to be part of the global efforts of
addressing key scientific questions to contribute to polar sciences.
