Planning process for future capacity expansion of Petrel Base, Cape
Welchness, Dundee Island
Planning process for future capacity expansion of Petrel Base, Cape
Welchness, Dundee Island
Information Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
This document reports on the planning process under development
by the Argentine Antarctic Programme, linked to the capacity
expansion of the Petrel Antarctic base. Information is included on
the history and current situation of the base and on the current
tasks and future plans so that the base can enable the logistical
support capacities for this country’s scientific activities in Antarctica
to be expanded and improved, with a view to the future challenges.
Introduction
Petrel Base was founded on 22 February 1967, operating as a
permanently occupied base until 1976, when a fire completely
destroyed the main lodging house. Since then, the base has been
maintained until the summer of 2021/2022 as a temporary one,
housing summer working groups that carry out periodic
maintenance tasks, and providing support to scientists who conduct
research work on the island.
The Petrel Base facilities are located on a plain of loose stone
material, known as Cape Welchness (Latitude: 63°28'40''S,
Longitude: 56°13'37''W), the only sector of Dundee Island not
covered by the Rosamaria Glacier.
The sector of Dundee Island currently occupied by the Petrel
Antarctic Base is a small, triangular-shaped peninsula of
approximately 1.8 km 2 , with two differentiated plains, reaching a
height of 18 metres above sea level in the highest sector, and in its
eastern margin, extending from south to north, a chain of moraines
that rise to an elevation of 67 metres above sea level.
The facilities are located mainly on the northern sector of the
moraines, where the main house, a small workshop and a power
plant are located, and on the elevated plain there is a depot, a
hangar, a power plant, emergency housing, waste from old
constructions, tanks for storing Antarctic Diesel, an antenna array
and a cold room.
Condition of the Base
Two series of buildings are located in the area of the base. One
series consists of the hangar, the former power plant, the emergency
housing, the vehicle shed and the cold room. These are aligned
perpendicularly to the Punta Bajos headland. The other series is
made up of the main house, the power plant and a materials
enclosure , arranged in columns in reference to the moraine deposit
produced by past activity of the Rosamaría glacier. It is worth
noting that these two groups of buildings are at least 500 metres
apart.
These buildings date from the origins of the base and are currently
in need of major maintenance and repair work. This situation limits
the logistical support capacity for undertaking scientific projects at
the base.
Activities initiated and planned for the Base in the short term
In order to expand the capabilities of the Petrel Antarctic base, a
planning process has been initiated that involves, in addition to
analysis work, performing tasks at the base that contribute to this
planning process and the future plans for it.
In this regard, works essential for the planning process have been
initiated to study information at the base. Examples of these works
include the collection of baseline environmental information, the
study of meteorological and bathymetric information, and various
operational feasibility studies.
So that these studies could be conducted, it was necessary to plan
and execute maintenance tasks to make the base more habitable for
the personnel assigned to carry out these tasks.
In this context, given that more time needed to be devoted to these
tasks than the summer campaigns allow, it was assessed whether
the staff could remain throughout the year. To this end, as a
preliminary step, the environmental impact of continuing the
activity at the base throughout the year was assessed, something
which had not been done since 1976. In this way , the
corresponding Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) was prepared
by the Environmental Management and Tourism Programme of the
National Antarctic Directorate (DNA) for the activities to be carried
out in the 2021/2022 Summer Antarctic Campaign, and those to be
conducted during a crew’s first winter stay in many decades.
The activities assessed and now underway address the tasks related
to the improvement of the base, through the maintenance of the
current accommodation, the refurbishment of the emergency
housing, the fine-tuning of the base’s systems, and the removal of
the unused fuel tanks. The plan for the next campaign is to transfer
new tanks to be installed, and repair the hangar gate and its roof to
store the road machinery.
The IEE is available in the Electronic Information Exchange System
of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Future plans
The objective of the Argentine Antarctic Programme is to increase
the capabilities of the Petrel Antarctic base, in order to expand and
improve the logistical support capabilities for this country's
scientific activities in Antarctica, with a view to future challenges
for science.
The ongoing planning process is being sustained by the information
collected during the 2021/2022 summer, and by the analyses being
conducted in the various agencies of the Argentine Antarctic
Programme.
In this regard, the construction of new accommodation and new
laboratories, the reconditioning of the base’s original airstrip and
the construction of a dock are being assessed. This scheme seeks to
generate new capacities linked to scientific development in situ, and
to enable the logistical possibilities to be expanded.
As the planning stage progresses, the Parties will be informed of the
activities to be included in the final project.
Likewise, taking into account that it would be a comprehensive
modernisation activity, it is expected that it will be submitted to the
Global Environmental Assessment process provided for in Annex I
of the Madrid Protocol, to be considered by the other Parties to the
Antarctic Treaty System.
