Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
2021-22
Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
2021-22
Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
Introduction
The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
is pleased to report its activities to ATCM XLIV.
IAATO focuses activities in support of its mission to advocate and
promote the practice of safe and environmentally responsible
private sector travel to Antarctica. Further information on IAATO,
its mission, primary activities and recent developments can be
found at: www.iaato.org.
Overview
Over the last three decades, IAATO has been committed to the
promotion of safe and environmentally responsible private sector
travel. This commitment has been unwavering through two
previous major growth periods and, recently, the SARS-CoV-2
(COVID-19) pandemic.
IAATO’s membership totals 106 Members, comprised of 55
Operators and Provisional Operators and 51 Associates. IAATO’s
strength has been and continues to be its membership’s ability to
draw upon their own experience and the advice from other
stakeholders to address emerging challenges and evolve its
procedures and management when necessary.
After experiencing minimal activity in the 2020-21 season, the
2021-22 season saw a moderate resumption of operations though
COVID-19 challenges persisted. This modest restart did allow
Operators to deploy some new vessels; however, most Operators did
not run at full capacity.
IAATO’s Members expect the upcoming season will look very
different, with visitor numbers reaching a record level. IAATO has
invested in various tools during its history that will be further
leveraged to manage the challenges this growth may present.
Additional new measures, further detailed below, were recently
agreed during IAATO’s 2022 Annual Meeting and will continue to
enable IAATO and its membership to fulfill their commitment to the
promotion of safe and environmentally responsible private sector
travel to Antarctica, and to ensure activities have no more than a
minor or transitory environmental impact.
Further information on IAATO Operators’ activities can be found in
ATCM XLIV IPxx IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism: A
Historical Review of Growth, the 2021-22 Season and Preliminary
Estimates for 2022-23.
COVID-19 and the 2021-22 Season
When the 2019-20 season was curtailed due to global concerns
around COVID-19, IAATO responded by forming the IAATO
COVID-19 Steering Group (now the IAATO COVID-19 Advisory
Group). The purpose of this Advisory Group was to seek updates
from gateway ports, COMNAP, SCAR and other stakeholders and to
share this information regularly with the membership. During the
past two years, virtual Town Halls and informal virtual discussions
were hosted by IAATO to allow the membership to share
perspectives and lessons learned in order to develop industry best
practice in this new and unprecedented environment.
In July 2021, IAATO announced the following recommendations for
the 2021-22 season, which received overwhelming support from the
membership:
Passengers should be fully vaccinated before embarking from their
gateway departure point;
Crew members and staff should be fully vaccinated before
embarkation;
In some circumstances, if vaccination is not feasible or applicable,
individuals should have appropriate documentation regarding
recovery from COVID-19 or are quarantined following most recent
medical advice and/or relevant national requirements;
In addition to the steps listed above, operators should adopt an
effective testing scheme to detect the presence of COVID-19 and
take the necessary steps to reduce potential spread.
More than 65% of IAATO Operators and Provisional Operators
operated during the 2021-22 season. However, ship operators often
ran at reduced capacity, and many had to cancel trips due to the
challenges presented by the Omicron variant.
The total number of visitors in the 2021-22 season was 23,597.
Further information on IAATO tourism statistics, including activities
and nationalities, can be found in ATCM XLIV IPxx IAATO
Overview of Antarctic Tourism: A Historical Review of Growth, the
2021-22 Season and Preliminary Estimates for 2022-23. The
Membership Directory can be found at www.iaato.org.
IAATO Annual Meeting
IAATO’s 2022 Annual Meeting was held as a hybrid meeting, 25-28
April 2022. This hybrid meeting allowed members to attend either
live in Providence, Rhode Island, US or virtually. Actions at the
Annual Meeting included:
Committing to a Climate Change pledge, which included:
Taking the necessary steps to account for our greenhouse gas
emissions.
Reducing our greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% by 2050
compared with 2008
Implementing a meaningful climate strategy that includes target
setting and allocating resources.
Reaching Net Zero as soon as possible before 2050.
Strengthening the guidelines for submersible (HOV) activities
Establishing the requirement that additional office and field
personnel, including captains and certain senior officers, take and
pass the relevant IAATO Online Assessment.
Approving updates and enhancements to guidelines including
operations in the vicinity of fast and other ice and helicopter
guidelines following discussions with National Antarctic Programs;
and in line with previous decisions on RPAS and jet skis, the
meeting agreed to explicitly recommend against certain water
activities, including surf, kite, skim and wind boards.
It was also agreed that the Managing for Growth Working Group
will be broken into five subgroups that will focus on client
expectations, assessment of new activities, short-term and long-term
site management and IAATO’s mandatory observation scheme.
These subgroups will address immediate considerations for the
upcoming season and also strategic planning around anticipated
continued growth.
IAATO Support of Research & Conservation
IAATO encourages collaborative opportunities with scientific
organisations particularly where these enhance the Antarctic
community’s understanding of human activities in the region.
Projects include(d):
IAATO/COMNAP Fellowships – IAATO, in collaboration with
COMNAP, will continue to invest in the development of early-career
researchers by awarding its fourth US$15,000 Fellowship in 2022.
Suitable candidates are encouraged to apply. IAATO awarded a
2021 fellowship to early career researcher Ross Nichols from the
University of California, Santa Cruz, for work on whale activity
around the Antarctic Peninsula. See also ATCM XLIV- IP005 Early
Career Opportunities: Antarctic Fellowships & Scholarships.
IAATO/SCAR Systematic Conservation Plan – SCAR and IAATO are
undertaking a collaborative project to develop a systematic
conservation plan for the Antarctic Peninsula, aimed at facilitating
the concurrent management of biodiversity, science and tourism
(ATCM XLII - IP24; ATCM XL - IP166). Following the finalization of
stakeholder engagement workshops, initial analyses and scenarios
were created. During the review, it was identified that further
clarification on certain site-related data sets needed to be
incorporated. Dr Jasmine Lee was contracted on a short-term basis
by IAATO in late 2021 to address these. Upon finalization, IAATO
will discuss the results with its members and SCAR and report to
stakeholders, including the CEP.
SOOS DueSouth – Execution of the SOOS DueSouth and IAATO
collaboration to provide historical information regarding routes and
sites visited by IAATO Operators. This data will assist the scientific
community in determining future collaboration opportunities with
operators as well as possible transport assistance.
UN Southern Ocean Decade – IAATO is a member of the Southern
Ocean Task Force, coordinated by SCAR, which used a community
driven process to create an Action Plan in support of the UN Decade
of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development. See also ATCM XLIV
IP107 The Southern Ocean Contribution to the United Nations
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development.
Support in Antarctica – IAATO Operator expeditions during the
2021-22 season were able to provide support for various scientific
projects, such as the Antarctic Site Inventory - Oceanites and
Penguin Watch. Five IAATO Operators also provided air or vessel
support to National Antarctic Programs.
Other Work and Activities
IAATO also continues to prioritise activities that strengthen its
institutional structure and help position it as a reputable, valued
partner in the wider polar community. In addition to the work
described above, over the past year, IAATO has:
Developed tools to support field staff when delivering the Antarctic
Ambassadors message to clients and further executed on the
Antarctic Ambassadors strategy through public engagement in
events such as the inaugural Antarctic Ambassadorship Day.
Hosted webinars for Field Staff at the beginning and end of the
2021-22 season to discuss best practices and lessons learned.
Webinars will continue to be delivered to the field staff in advance
of the 2022-23 season.
Facilitated over 3,000 online assessments for field staff, crew &
office personnel which were successfully completed for the 2021-22
season.
In addition, IAATO Secretariat staff and Operator representatives
participated in internal and external meetings, liaising with Treaty
Party representatives, National Antarctic Programs personnel, and
governmental, scientific, environmental, and industry organisations,
including but not limited to:
COMNAP Annual Meeting, Online, July 2020 and July 2021
Association of Arctic Expedition Cruise Operators (AECO)
Conference & Annual Meeting, Online, October 2021
Tourism Incidents 2021-22
IAATO’s policy is to disclose incidents to ensure risks are
understood and appropriate lessons are learned for all Antarctic
Operators. There were no major incidents involving IAATO
Operators during the 2021-22 season.
With Thanks
IAATO appreciates the opportunity to work cooperatively with
Antarctic Treaty Parties, COMNAP, SCAR, CCAMLR, IHO/HCA,
WMO, ASOC and others toward the long-term protection of
Antarctica.
