Microplastic Pollution in the Southern Ocean
Microplastic Pollution in the Southern Ocean
Information Paper submitted by Switzerland
Summary
This paper summarizes the recent research activities, namely
pollution with microplastics, of scientists at the University of Basel
in the Southern Ocean and Antarctica.
Background
Microplastics (MP) pose an emerging threat to the global
environment. Wherever one searches, MP is found, albeit in
differing concentrations and constitutions. We study the occurrence,
distribution and pathway of microplastics, as well as the biofouling
of plastics, in the Southern Ocean and Antarctica.
Research Project
The research project addresses the questions of occurrence,
distribution, amount and constitution of microplastics found in the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica. We ask whether microplastics in
these areas originate from tourism, ship traffic or stations on land
or from the northern continents.  Can the strong Antarctic
Circumpolar Current, which isolates the Southern Ocean from the
northern oceans be penetrated by microplastics at the water
surface? To answer these questions, the surface water of the
Southern Ocean (Weddell Sea, Western Antarctic Peninsula and
Scotia Sea), and the snow were examined for the occurrence of
microplastics. Microplastics were analyzed and it was looked for
signatures to ascertain the importance of local in comparison with
more northern sources. As well, emperor penguins,
makrozoobenthos and fish of the Southern Ocean were studied to
see whether they ingested microplastics aiming at elucidating the
importance and pathways of microplastics in these pristine regions.
Further, we study whether biofouling –the colonization of particle
surfaces by microbes and multicellular organisms– acts as an
important pathway for removal of buoyant plastic from sea surfaces
through added density.
This project was started in 2017 and this year, it was performed as
a collaboration project of EWOS I (Pilot study for an Eastern
Weddell Sea Observation System- PI: Felix Mark, AWI).
This is a cooperation project of several research institutes: in the
project participated the Alfred-Wegener Institute (G. Gerdts, S.
Primpke, F. Mark), the Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research
NIOZ (L. Amaral-Zettler), and the Utrecht University (E. van
Sebille)
Conclusion
The research project provides first systematic data on (1)
microplastic pollution in the Southern Ocean, in particular the
Weddell Sea, and (2) in selected Antarctica and Southern Ocean
species, as well as (3) on microbial colonization of microplastics
under Southern Ocean conditions.
