Mapping SCAR affiliated research to climate change related science
needs identified by the CEP
SCAR affiliated research aligned with the climate change related
science needs identified by the CEP
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
In response to a request from the CEP’s Subsidiary Group on
Climate Change Response (SGCCR) in 2021, SCAR has conducted a
review of recent, current and forthcoming research being
undertaken by its subsidiary and affiliated groups that is of
relevance to the climate change related science needs identified by
the CEP. Research that will contribute to addressing most of these
needs is being undertaken across a broad range of SCAR’s physical,
biological and humanities/social science groups. SCAR provides
independent and objective scientific advice to the CEP and will
continue to provide information on climate change in response to
specific requests or needs, as well as highlighting other relevant
research. Maintaining effective communication between the CEP
and SCAR on science needs and objectives will help to ensure that
relevant research outputs continue to be made available in support
of the CEP’s work on climate change.
Background
The CEP’s Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP)
identifies science needs and knowledge gaps associated with each
climate-related issue. The CEP also lists science needs related to its
5-Year Work Plan priorities, with further needs highlighted in CEP
final reports and CEP manuals. In 2021, the CEP endorsed a
combined list of science knowledge and information needs (ATCM
XLIII WP14 Report of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change
Response (SGCCR) 2019-21 Attachment B Draft Science Needs; CEP
XXIII, paragraph 41), which was developed by the SGCCR to
facilitate communication of CEP science needs to researchers in a
succinct and easily understood manner. The climate change related
science needs considered here are extracted from this combined list.
A request for information on recent, current and forthcoming or
developing research aligned with the climate change related science
needs was sent to the leaders of all SCAR subsidiary and affiliated
groups. SCAR group reports to the 2021 SCAR Delegates Meeting
and the science and implementation plans for the three new
Scientific Research Programmes (available at: https://
www.scar.org/library/scar-meeting-papers/xxxvi-scar-
delegates-2021-online/) also provide information on research
objectives and future outputs.
The information provided in this paper is an update to the previous
review of SCAR affiliated research relevant to the CCRWP,
undertaken in 2017 in response to a request from CEP XIX (ATCM
XL IP69 Mapping SCAR affiliated research to the CEP’s Climate
Change Response Work Programme).
A full list of the SCAR groups for which details are provided can be
found in Table 1. Further information, including contacts, for all of
these groups is available on the SCAR website (www.scar.org).
Results
SCAR affiliated research covers all of the priority topics identified
in the CEP 5-Year Work Plan and the Climate Change Response
Work Programme (CCRWP) and has direct relevance to almost all of
the climate change related science needs identified by the CEP.
Details of how this research is aligned to specific science needs is
provided in Attachment A. This includes key
objectives from each group or project, together with upcoming
outputs or developments (and a timeframe for these outputs if
appropriate). Many groups have objectives and outputs that are
relevant to several science needs, and individual science needs are
in many cases being addressed by more than one group. Projects are
often interdisciplinary and may also overlap with research being
undertaken by National Antarctic Programmes.
SCAR’s three new flagship Scientific Research Programmes (SRPs)
were approved in 2020, and will focus research efforts on high
priority topics, including questions identified as part of the SCAR
Horizon Scan (Kennicutt et al., 2019). These programmes also have
a central objective to highlight key results to the bodies responsible
for governance and management of Antarctica.
Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation (Ant-ICON) will answer fundamental science
questions relating to the conservation and management of
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and focus on research to drive
and inform international decision-making and policy change.
INStabilities and Thresholds in ANTarctica (INSTANT) is a cross-
disciplinary programme looking at quantifying Antarctica’s
contribution to past and future global sea-level change, helping
decision-makers to better anticipate, manage, and adapt to sea-level
rise.
Near-term Variability and Prediction of the Antarctic Climate
System (AntClimnow) is investigating near-term Antarctic climate
variability and trends, understanding contemporary climate change,
and modelling future climate projections.
The SCAR Life Sciences group coordinates research on
understanding the impacts of past, current and predicted
environmental change on biodiversity and the consequences of
adaptation and function. Through multidisciplinary collaborations,
it is focused on understanding the complexities of the Antarctic
environment and predicting the consequences of change. The
objectives of the Antarctic Nearshore and Terrestrial Observation
System Expert Group (ANTOS), the Birds and Marine Mammals
Expert Group (EG-BAMM) and the SCAR Krill Action Group (SKAG)
are closely aligned with CEP science needs related to monitoring
change in the terrestrial and marine environments, and
understanding the effects of change on species and habitats.
The SCAR Physical Sciences group coordinates research on the role
of the Antarctic continent and the Southern Ocean in global climate
change, processes at the interfaces between ice, ocean, land and
atmosphere, predictions of global and local change, improved
understanding of the cryosphere and ice sheet dynamics, and
understanding of past climate.
Research being undertaken by Humanities and Social Science
Action Groups is focused on human engagement with the Antarctic,
including on heritage, tourism, protected areas, human impacts and
environmental governance, all of which are impacted by, and need
to respond to, climate change. Researchers in the Standing
Committee on the Humanities and Social Sciences (SC-HASS) are
exploring public and stakeholder understanding of climate change
and its impacts, and how the communication of information on
these topics can impact understanding, uptake and action.
SCAR meetings, including the 2022 SCAR Open Science Conference,
provide an opportunity for the dissemination of climate change
related research, as well as an opportunity for CEP representatives
to promote important issues, including those related to climate
change science needs.
The Antarctic Environments Portal aims to support the work of the
CEP by providing up-to-date information on relevant issues,
including the science needs identified in the CEP 5-year Work Plan.
New Information Summaries on sea ice, ocean warming, and the
impact of ocean acidification are in development and will be
particularly relevant in supporting the delivery of the CCRWP
(ATCM XLIV WP10 Antarctic Environments Portal).
Finally, the Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment decadal
synopsis report (ATCM XLIV IP72) makes recommendations on the
most significant and urgent research required for
the Antarctic region (ATCM XLIV WP31 Antarctic Climate Change
and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis. Research Imperatives).
These are based on the SCAR Horizon Scan and Scientific Research
Programmes, and are closely aligned with, and complementary to,
those listed in the 5-Year Work Plan and the CCRWP.
Conclusion
This research mapping exercise demonstrates that research aligned
with almost all of the climate change related science needs
identified by the CEP is being undertaken across a broad range of
SCAR’s physical, biological and social science groups. SCAR groups
are therefore well placed to contribute to the delivery of the
CCRWP and to continue addressing the science needs identified by
the CEP. SCAR will continue to communicate details of the CEP’s
climate change related science needs to its subsidiary and affiliated
groups, and to make relevant research outcomes from these groups
available to the CEP.
References
Kennicutt, M. C. et al. Sustained Antarctic research: A 21st Century
imperative. One Earth 1, 95-113 (2019).
Table 1: SCAR subsidiary and affiliated groups
Group/programme
Action Group on Intrinsic Value in Antarctica
AGIVA
Near-term Variability and Prediction of the Antarctic Climate
System (SRP)
AntClimnow
Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation (SRP)
Ant-ICON
Antarctic Tourism Action Group
Ant-TAG
Antarctic Near-Shore and Terrestrial Observation System Expert
Group
ANTOS
Antarctic Sea-ice Processes and Climate Expert Group
ASPeCt
Ice Thickness and Subglacial Topographic Model of Antarctica
Bedmap
Biogeochemical Exchange Processes at the Sea-Ice Interfaces Expert
Group
BEPSII
Earth Observation Action Group
EOAG
Expert Group on Birds and Marine Mammals
EG-BAMM
International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean
IBCSO
Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean
(ICED) programme (in conjunction with the Scientific Committee on
Oceanic Research (SCOR) and the International Geosphere-
Biosphere Programme (IGBP))
ICED
INStabilities and Thresholds in ANTarctica (SRP)
INSTANT
International Partnerships in Ice Core Science Expert Group
IPICS
Plastic in Polar Environments Action Group
Plastic-AG
Southern Ocean Observing System (in conjunction with SCOR)
SOOS
Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System
SC-ATS
Standing Committee on the Humanities and Social Sciences
SC-HASS
SCAR Krill Action Group
SKAG
