Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights 2021- 22
Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights 2021 - 22
Summary
Among various research activities carried out by the Japanese
Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) in the Japanese Antarctic
Syowa Station area, three topics are introduced; (1) High-resolution
observations of the Antarctic atmosphere with the PANSY radar and
complementary instruments; (2) Start of year-round observation of
precipitation in the vicinity of Syowa Station using precipitation
radar; (3) Demonstration of the Antarctic Mobile Base Unit during
the Antarctic winter.
Introduction
The headquarters of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
(JARE), Japan’s national Antarctic program, was established in
1955 by the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture (now the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, or
MEXT). The headquarters comprises departments and agencies of
various government ministries, including the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs; the Ministry of the Environment; the Ministry of Defense;
the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism; and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The scientific
research and observation programs of JARE are considered and
adopted as midterm research plans at general meetings of the
headquarters.
This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from
scientific projects carried out by overwintering and summer
members of the 62nd and 63rd JAREs, respectively, at and around
Syowa Station (69°00′ S, 39°35′ E) during the 2021 - 22 season.
Although there was a significant reduction in the number of
scientists and projects in the summer activities in the 2020-21
Antarctic season because of preventive measures against the
COVID-19 pandemic, the JARE 62nd wintering team is conducting
as many year-around science projects at Syowa Station as in
previous winters. The JARE 63rd summer activities in the 2021-22
Antarctic season were almost back to the pre-pandemic level.
Selected Research Highlights
Year-round observations have been carried out by overwintering
JARE personnel at and around Syowa Station. Seasonal observations
are also carried out by summer expedition personnel aboard the
Shirase of the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force for oceanographic
observations and in the vicinity of Syowa Station. In addition, the
small seasonal team was deployed by the air bridge provided by
DROMLAN. After completing the appropriate MIQ, all expeditioners
departed to the Antarctic, and no COVID-19 case was reported
throughout the 2021-22 Antarctic summer season.
High-resolution observations of the Antarctic atmosphere with the
PANSY radar and complementary instruments
A study on the global atmosphere system based on high-resolution
observations of the Antarctic atmosphere is subtheme 1 of the
prioritized project of JARE’s term IX (2016-2022) which was
planned and lead by the headquarters of JARE. This project aims at
understanding the atmospheric teleconnection in the vertical and
meridional (i.e., inter-hemispheric) through intensive observations
with the large-aperture atmospheric radar PANSY (Program of the
ANtarctic SYowa Mesosphere, Stratosphere, and Troposphere/
Incoherent Scatter [MST/IS] Radar), resonance scatter lidar,
millimeter-wave radiometer, etc. at Syowa Station and the
international observation network composed of radars, lidars,
imagers, etc. from the Antarctic to the Arctic.
The PANSY radar has continued its standard observation of the
troposphere, stratosphere, and mesosphere, which reached six years
with the full system and 10 years with the partial system. The 7th
Inter-hemispheric Coupling Study by Observations and Modeling
(ICSOM6; see http://pansy.eps.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/icsom/) campaign
was successfully conducted from January 22, 2022, to January 31,
2022. The ICSOM7 campaign was based on a combination of GCM
simulations and simultaneous observations by several MST/IS
radars around the world, including PANSY (Fig. 1), with some
complementary instruments at Syowa Station, such as medium-
frequency (MF) and meteor radars, lidars, imagers, etc. This
campaign was approved as a project for ROSMIC (Role Of the Sun
and the Middle atmosphere/thermosphere/ionosphere In Climate)
of the Scientific Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics (SCOSTEP)
under the International Science Council (ISC). International
collaborative studies based on the four ICSOM campaigns are
ongoing.
Figure 1. PANSY radar (left) and Global MST/IS radar network
participating in the ICSOM7 campaign (right).
Advanced balloon-borne observations of the Antarctic upper
troposphere and lower stratosphere
The first observation of atmospheric gravity waves using a super-
pressure balloon was conducted during the JARE 63rd summer
period. Atmospheric gravity waves are responsible for momentum
transport in the atmosphere and play an important role in
determining temperature and mass distribution in the stratosphere
and mesosphere. Super-pressure balloons can float at a fixed
altitude (18 km in this case) for more than ten days and can
quantitatively measure the momentum transport of gravity waves
over the entire frequency band and its horizontal distribution
through 2D wind speed and pressure observations. This time, three
super-pressure balloons were released from Syowa Station, and
observations were successfully made by levitating at a certain
altitude (level flight). Through these observations, we have
established the balloon release procedure and confirmed that the
observation equipment has sufficient performance and reliability.
Figure 2. Launching of a super-pressure balloon at the Syowa
Station.
Hot water drilling at Langhovde Glacier
During the 63rd summer, from December 16, 2021 to February 6,
2022, field observations were made at Langhovde Glacier, located
20 km south of Syowa Station. The project aims to elucidate the
glacier flow mechanism by using hydrothermal drilling of the ice
and observing the base and interior of the glacier. The team of an
average of six expeditioners spent about six weeks in the field and
conducted five drilling at three sites. In particular, the team
successfully drilled three times in the upper reaches where the
glacier is aground and installed equipment to measure ice flow and
water pressure on the 550-meter-thick glacier bottom. In addition,
the team measured ice flow using GPS and seismometers, conducted
ice thickness surveys using radio waves and obsearvations by
drones and automated cameras. This hydrothermal drilling has
allowed us to make measurements at the base of glaciers, which is
almost unprecedented in Antarctica. The results indicate that
glacier base hydraulic pressure fluctuates due to glacial melting and
ocean tides, affecting glacier sliding. These results are essential for
predicting future changes in the Antarctic ice sheet, losing ice due
to oceanic and atmospheric influences.
Figure 3. Hot water drilling (right) at Langhovde Glacier(left).
