Troll Observing Network (TONe) – A new research infrastructure
supporting Earth System science with data from Dronning Maud
Land
Troll Observing Network (TONe) – A new research infrastructure
supporting Earth System Science with data from Dronning Maud
Land
Submitted by Norway
Summary
Resolution 8 (2021) calls for Parties to support efforts to undertake
research about Antarctic climate change and its impacts. An
infrastructure project recently funded by the Norwegian Research
Council - the Troll Observing Network (TONe) – is a response to
this call. TONe is a comprehensive infrastructure which aims to
contribute significantly to observation and data gathering efforts,
centred at the Norwegian Antarctic research station Troll. Through
TONe the research community will contribute to answering
questions relating to climate change and sea-level change,
atmosphere dynamics, solid Earth structure, cryosphere dynamics,
space weather effects, robustness of communication networks,
quality of weather and climate models, and the effects of global
changes on marine ecosystems. The data collected through the
TONe observatories are in themselves part of the TONe research
infrastructure, and will be openly available to the entire science
community in line with Article III of the Antarctic Treaty.
Background
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have over the last decade on numerous
occasions underlined the importance of Antarctic climate change
and climate change research, For example, in 2021 the Parties
discussed the linkages between the observed and projected impacts
of global climate change in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean on
the Earth system and expressed their concerns about the
implications for Antarctica arising from a warming global climate.
The Parties agreed to urge their governments to support ongoing
efforts to undertake research about climate change and its impacts
(Resolution 8 (2021).
Antarctica and the surrounding Southern Ocean are key drivers of
Earth’s oceanic and atmospheric systems and are connected to the
rest of the world through oceanic and atmospheric circulations. For
our entire planet, atmospheric pressure, humidity, air temperatures
and wind patterns are interconnected and greatly influenced by
processes originating in the far south, and we will not be able to
fully understand how the Earth system works without
comprehensive knowledge of the physical, biological, chemical and
geological processes taking place within and above Antarctica and
its surrounding Southern Ocean. An extensive observation and data
gathering effort is required across the entire continent and its
surrounding ocean in order to gain the necessary knowledge
needed.
The new Norwegian initiative – Troll Observing Network (TONe) –
will be an important contribution to ongoing data gathering in
Antarctica, filling important gaps, and pave the way for substantial
and important knowledge production, in line with the call made by
Parties in Resolution 8 (2021).
The Troll Observing Network
The Troll Observing Network (TONe) is a comprehensive
infrastructure which aims to contribute significantly to observation
and data gathering efforts, centred at the Norwegian Antarctic
research Station Troll. The main aim of TONe is to provide data and
generate knowledge from the Dronning Maud Land (DML) region in
eastern Antarctica, one of the most
data-poor areas of the continent. TONe will in particular focus on
the transition zone between the coast and the high plateau, where
few other Antarctic stations are located.
Through TONe the research community will contribute to
answering questions relating to climate change and sea-level
change, atmosphere dynamics, solid Earth structure, cryosphere
dynamics, space weather effects, robustness of communication
networks, quality of weather and climate models, and the effects of
global changes on marine ecosystems.
TONe includes eight distinct observatories that each will provide
data relevant to study these key global processes. Through the
observatories we will gather data that are relevant to further our
understanding of inter alia:
The radiative effects of clouds and aerosols, which are two of the
largest uncertainties in global climate models, especially in the
polar regions (Integrated Cloud Observatory).
The atmospheric circulation and transport of pollutants into DML,
and through this provide inputs to large-scale models in the polar
regions (Atmospheric Composition Observatory)
The stratospheric polar vortex and disruptions to this important
circulation system, as well as elucidating atmospheric tides. Data
will also be utilised to detect and locate acoustic events and study
atmospheric gravity waves, which play an important role in the
transfer of middle atmospheric momentum and can influence the
dynamics of the upper atmosphere (Infrasound Array).
The upper atmosphere and space weather processes, which amongst
other can impact man-made systems, such as satellite-based
navigation and radio communications (Ionosphere Observatory)
The dynamics of the ice and solid earth in DML (Seismic Array),
The ice-shelf – ocean boundary layer structure and turbulence to
gauge melt parameterizations in models, important as ocean-ice
shelf interactions significantly influence Antarctica’s contribution to
sea-level rise (Fimbulisen Ice-shelf Observatory)
The physical, biogeochemical and biological properties in the
Weddell Gyre inflow/Antarctic Slope Front, off the DML coast in the
ocean area Kong Haakon VII Hav (Multidisciplinary Ocean Moored
Observatory).
The biology of important seabirds populations and through them
the health of the marine environment (Seabird Monitoring
Observatory)
TONe also includes a drone service open to all at cost-price to be
used for various research campaigns. The drones will have data
collection capability horizontally and vertically to cover large parts
of DML. Sensor packages include VHF radar for bedrock and
bounding line mapping, GHz radar for snow precipitation mapping,
aerial cameras for, e.g., seabird, marine mammal and sea-ice
mapping, sensors for meteorological, cloud and aerosol profile
measurements and hyperspectral sensors for measurements of
chlorophyll and primary production.
Finally, TONe will ensure wide and free access to the observational
data from the observatories and drone service to the entire national
and international research community to be used to acquire new
knowledge of societal importance. The Antarctic Treaty (Article III)
requires open data sharing in Antarctic science, a cornerstone of the
successful, international science collaboration in Antarctica. Open
data access is also a core principle in the Norwegian national
strategy for scientific data (Nasjonal strategi for tilgjengeliggjøring
og deling av forskningsdata). Making the most of collected data is
particularly important in Antarctic science, due to the extremely
costly nature of Antarctic operations. A common data infrastructure
and common data management policy are correspondingly
important parts of TONe, including a robust on-site infrastructure
for data management, and a unified data access
point. TONe metadata will be harvestable for Antarctic Master
Directory (AMD) and hence available to all users also through the
AMD interface.
The entire TONe concept is illustrated in Figure 1 and Figure 2.
Figure 1: TONe will provide access to data through a network of
multi-disciplinary scientific observatories for comprehensive long-
term observations based at and around Troll along with a drone
service that will support data collection on a campaign
basis.Together,this infrastructurewill contribute to and strengthen
the knowledge base required to understand Antarctica’s role in the
Earth system and its impact onglobal issues of societal importance.
Figure 2: The geographical location of the eightobservatories.
The TONe infrastructure project is managed by the Norwegian Polar
Institute with the University of Oslo, the University of Bergen, the
Norwegian Air Research Institute (NILU), the seismology research
instate NORSAR and the Norwegian Research Centre (NORCE) as
partners, as well as British Antarctic Survey (BAS), University of
Leeds and University of Washington.
In December 2021 the Norwegian Research Council (RNC) awarded
22 new applications for research infrastructure over the National
Financing Initiative for Research Infrastructure, allocating a total of
NOK 1.4 billion to the new projects. TONe was one of these 22
projects, receiving support in the neighborhood of NOK 160 million.
The TONe infrastructure will be built up over the next 5-year period
(2022-2027), and all parts of the infrastructure will be fully
operational from the second quartal of 2027.
NPI and partners will continue to look for opportunities to expand
the TONe concept in the future, in order to continue to build a
holistic observation system for the Norwegian and international
research community. The current first phase of TONe will provide
an extremely robust and attractive foundation for future
developments and expansions.
For further information or queries, contact the Norwegian Polar
Institute at postmottak@npolar.no.
