Population decline of Cape Petrel on Fildes Peninsula
Population decline of Cape Petrel on Fildes Peninsula
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Introduction
Seabirds and in particular specialist predators are valuable
indicators of the health of the ecosystem of which they are part
(Furness & Camphuysen, 1997; Thibault et al., 2019). Their
population trends provide information on their prey stocks and
hence reflect a variety of environmental parameters. This is of
particular importance in view of the current environmental changes
in the Antarctic and the surrounding Southern Ocean. The cape
petrel (Daption capense), a pelagic feeder, is considered as indicator
species within the Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) of the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resource (CCAMLR) as this
species is being likely to be affected by changes in the availability
of commercially harvested species (currently krill and fish).
However, no CEMP data about population trends of the cape petrel
in the Antarctic are currently available.
Based on ecological studies in the 1980s a long-term sea-bird
monitoring program on the Fildes Peninsula has been carried out
since 2003/04 (ATCM XXVII IP5 Research Project "Risk assessment
for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of
management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected
or Managed Areas" and ATCM XL IP37 Bird Monitoring in the Fildes
Region). As a result, information on the local cape petrel population
has recently been published (Braun, C. et al. (2021)). The data
presented give a valuable hint to changes in the Antarctic marine
environment. Moreover, this is the first known report of a
significant decline in a local Cape Petrel population in Antarctica.
Abstract
The Antarctic and the surrounding Southern Ocean are currently
subject to rapid environmental changes and increasing
anthropogenic impacts. Seabird populations often reflect those
changes and accordingly act as indicators of environmental
variability. Their population trends may provide information on a
variety of environmental parameters on the scale of years or
decades. The polar ornithology working group of the Institute of
Ecology and Evolution of the University of Jena (Germany)
therefore collects and evaluates long-term data on the cape petrel
population from a long-term monitoring program on Fildes
Peninsula, South Shetland Islands, Maritime Antarctic, an area of
considerable long-lasting human activity.
Fig. 1 Number of breeding pairs of cape petrel (Daption capense) on
the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island in the southwest of King
George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Year refers to
time of chick fledging (source: Braun, C., Esefeld, J., et al. (2021))
The data presented, covering a period of 36 years, indicate some
variability, but no clear trend in the number of breeding pairs
between the breeding seasons 1985 and 2006 (see fig. 1). However,
beginning in the 2008 season when 179 breeding pairs were
observed, the population declined significantly and reached a
minimum in the 2020 season with only one breeding pair. The
mean annual decrease between 2008 and 2020 was 10.6%. In the
study, possible causes of this strong negative population trend were
discussed. Anthropogenic disturbance only affects a few breeding
sites in the area and therefore cannot, on its own, explain the
consistent population decline at all the breeding sites studied. It
might be more likely that reduced food availability was the main
reason for the drastic decline in the cape petrel population.
Concluding remarks
The significant decline in the local cape petrel population at Fildes
Peninsula, which follows a long period without a clear population
trend, shows the unpredictability of such developments and that the
causes of population declines are not always obvious at first sight. It
would be particularly interesting to gather further information on
local petrel population trends in other areas to see whether parts of
the Fildes Peninsula population have moved to other nesting sites or
if similar declines in breeding pairs can be observed elsewhere,
which could provide valuable insights into the extent and possible
causes for the decline in the marine food web. Finally, the observed
population decline underlines the high importance of local long-
term monitoring programs.
References
Braun, C., Esefeld, J., et al. (2021): Population decline of the cape
petrel (Daption capense) on King George Island, South Shetland
Islands, Antarctica. Polar Biol. 44, 1795-1801. https://
link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00300-021-02914-4
Furness, R.W. & Camphuysen, K.C.J. (1997): Seabirds as monitors
of the marine environment. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 54, 726-737.
Thibault, M., Houlbreque, F., et al. (2019): Seabirds: Sentinels
beyond the oceans. Science 366, 813-813.
