Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP
Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP
The 40th Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR)
was held online from 11 to 15 October 2021. The full report of the
meeting, including the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each
Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-40, is available from the
CCAMLR website:
https://www.ccamlr.org/en/sc-camlr-40
The Chair of the Scientific Committee, Dr D. Welsford, noted the
challenging year of virtual meetings of the Scientific Committee and
its working groups, a but also the great progress made in some key
topic areas, especially in progressing the krill management
approach and the record-breaking amount of engagement and
participation that the virtual format has enabled.
Reports of the current information on CCAMLR fisheries are
available at https://www.ccamlr.org/en/publications/fishery-
reports
SC-CAMLR capacity building
At its October 2021 meeting the Scientific Committee further
developed its science capacity by agreeing new terms of reference
for the General Science Capacity Fund, supporting research on
CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) indicator species,
monitoring sites, by expanding the CEMP camera network. In
addition, CCAMLR coordinated its Scholarship opportunity with
SCAR, COMNAP, and IAATO to improve awareness of these
opportunities for Antarctic researchers.
Strategic planning
At its October 2021 meeting the Scientific Committee agreed to
hold a special two-session informal symposium in February 2022 to
review and develop a five-year strategic plan. The symposium
comprised more than 120 participants focussed on two aspects of
strategic planning:
1 Identification and scheduling of focussed work topics, and
2. identification of cross-cutting themes that would improve the
overall functionality and efficiency of the Scientific Committee’s
processes in the longer-term.
A draft convener’s report has been tabled to the SC-CAMLR working
groups with the intent that the recommendations and strategic plan
will be further refined by Members and agreed at SC-CAMLR- 41 in
October 2022.
The remainder of this report focuses on the five issues of common
interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in the first joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a. Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b. Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine
environment
c. Antarctic species requiring special protection
d. Spatial marine management and protected areas
e. Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
a. Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
The Scientific Committee integrates the effects of climate change
into its discussions during many agenda items as a cross-cutting
theme, although discussions in 2021 were limited by the time
constraints of the online meeting format.
The SC noted the designation in June 2021 of the newly exposed
area adjacent to Pine Island Glacier as a Stage 1 Special Area for
Scientific Study under Conservation Measure 24-04 and encouraged
research to understand how the ecosystem in that area may change
given the 22% reduction in the area of the glacier compared to
2017.
The CCAMLR scholarship awarded to Zephyr Sylvester for 2021 will
have a focus on the impacts of climate change on krill ecology
through potential impacts to phytoplankton and zooplankton
composition and distribution in the Southern Ocean.
The Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) was discussed as a
mechanism to support the design and implementation of ecosystem
and climate change monitoring to complement CEMP and SCAR
monitoring systems.
b. Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine
environment
The Scientific Committee considered a range of issues pertaining to
biodiversity within the spatial marine management and protected
areas agenda item. The CEP remains the lead body on the issue of
non-native species.
c. Antarctic species requiring special protection
The Scientific Committee encouraged further contributions by
Members to the Specially Protected Species Action Plan for emperor
penguins developed by the CEP.
The Scientific Committee discussed the selection process to
nominate Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs) through an
international collaboration including scientists from SCAR, IUCN
and the French Biodiversity Agency (OFB). The IMMAs were
determined using a set of criteria supported by data on critical
aspects of marine mammal (seals and cetaceans) biology, ecology
and population structure and are designed to inform policy makers
about processes influenced by management.
d. Spatial marine management and protected areas
The Scientific Committee discussed progress with the Domain 1
MPA proposal (Antarctic Peninsula), the Weddell Sea Phase 1 and 2
proposals, and monitoring activities within the Ross Sea region
MPA. Proponents of the Weddell Sea MPA proposals summarised
the progress made in synthesis of knowledge for these areas and
invited collaborators to an international workshop to be held 14-16
June 2022 to further progress the phase 2 proposal.
In the Ross Sea region, the Scientific Committee discussed
monitoring mechanisms for emperor penguins in support of the
Ross Sea region MPA Research and Monitoring Plan and
encouraged Members to coordinate their activities on this subject.
e. Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
The total annual catch of krill in 2021 was lower than the 2020
catch, but was similar to the highest historical catches in the early
1990’s. The Scientific Committee welcomed significant progress in
developing a risk-based management framework for the krill
fishery. This included the development of a modelling approach to
estimate appropriate exploitation rates for krill, progress in
developing spatial distribution layers for krill-dependent predators,
progress in modelling recruitment of krill, and progress in analytical
techniques for acoustic data for estimation of krill biomass.
Anticipating additional progress and scientific advice in the short
term for Subarea 48.1, the Scientific Committee recommended a
rollover of CM 51-07 for one year to provide time to consolidate the
revision of the krill management approach in Subarea 48.1, with
additional time expected to provide advice on other subareas.
Furthermore, the Scientific Committee developed a detailed work
plan to progress the krill management strategy through
consideration of its working groups.
The Scientific Committee noted that monitoring of the effects of the
bottom longline toothfish fishery in the Ross Sea on bycatch species
has been progressed through studies of stock structure and biology
of grenadiers and skates, including abundance estimation through
surveys for grenadiers and a tagging programme for skates. An
updated data collection plan for fisheries data collection to support
the Ross Sea region MPA Research and Monitoring Plan will be
developed through a CCAMLR workshop in 2022.
Three humpback whales and 16 seals were recorded as bycatch in
the krill fishery in 2022 and the Scientific Committee reconvened
the Incidental Mortality Associated with Fishing (IMAF) working
group to consider causes and mitigation approaches to minimise
mortalities of marine mammals. IMAF will also consider issues
associated with flying bird mortalities resulting from warp or net
monitoring cable strikes or from longline interactions. The Scientific
Committee will also work with experts from the International
Whaling Commission (IWC) and the Agreement on the Conservation
of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) to further understand and address
these issues.
