Tourism monitoring in Antarctica - Development of a concept for
the analysis of the impacts of tourism on the assets to be protected
in the Antarctic
Tourism monitoring in Antarctica - Development of a concept for
the analysis of the impacts of tourism on the assets to be protected
in the Antarctic
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
Rising tourist numbers and the diversification of tourist activities
potentially have an increasing impact on the Antarctic environment.
The sensitive Antarctic ecosystem - already severely threatened by
climate change - is exposed to increasing pressure from human
visitors, the consequences of which is unknown and can hardly be
assessed. A comprehensive knowledge base on the environmental
impacts of tourism and therefore on the effectiveness of different
management measures is lacking. The German Environment Agency
(UBA) therefore initiated a research project to develop a monitoring
concept to investigate and monitor the long-term impacts of tourism
in Antarctica.
Background
Antarctic tourism has rapidly increased in quantity in the last
decades. Tourist numbers reached a new peak in the 2019/2020
season with nearly 75,000 tourists visiting Antarctica. The upward
trend is expected to continue in the coming decade due to new
cruise ships coming into service and the climate change induced
extension of the travel season. Besides, new tourism activities are
emerging with the diversification of Antarctic tourism. The
Antarctic ecosystem is highly sensitive due to the isolation of the
Antarctic continent and the extreme conditions under which flora
and fauna evolved. Human activities in Antarctica therefore have
the potential to affect and damage the sensitive ecosystem or some
individual components. While some human impacts are well
studied, such as changes in penguin and seabird populations or
individual effects on specific species, others remain un- or
understudied. Due to the lack of a systematic and comprehensive
long-term monitoring program, the overall impacts of human
activities are poorly understood.
The risks of a further increase in tourism are thus almost
incalculable. For many years, Antarctic Treaty Parties have been
discussing ways to manage Antarctic tourism efficiently and
sustainably. However, this is hardly feasible without a solid data
basis on the concrete impacts of tourism activities. In particular,
cumulative or indirect effects cannot be identified or specified
without long-term monitoring. The tourism study of the Committee
on Environmental Protection (CEP) of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM) of 2012 already gives the
recommendation (Recommendation 6):
"Consideration should be given to establishing an ATCM-approved
on-site monitoring program to i) assess the effectiveness of the Site-
specific Guidelines and ii) monitor impacts."
To date, however, the Parties have not been able to agree on such
monitoring.
The Antarctic Treaty System forms the legal basis for all human
activities in the Antarctic. In Germany, the protection of the
Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems
is stipulated in Article 1 of the Act implementing the Protocol of
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (AUG). Despite
the exceptional importance of tourism compared to other human
activities in Antarctica, targeted regulations for tourist activities are
still lacking. Therefore, UBA commissioned a research project with
funding from the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature
Conservation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection to develop a
relevant concept.
Aim and subject of the project
In this project, the effects of Antarctic tourism on the assets to be
protected as defined in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) will be investigated and a
comprehensive long-term monitoring concept for frequently used
tourist sites in the Antarctic will be developed.
UBA, as representative of Germany in the CEP, will make the results
of this project available to the community of Antarctic Treaty
Parties and thus contribute to the further development of
international environmental protection in the Antarctic.
Planned work
The project entails the following work packages:
Research and summary of monitoring projects already carried out
on the environmental impact of Antarctic tourism. Existing
knowledge on the impacts of tourism activities on the Antarctic
environment and, in particular, on the assets to be protected
according to Article 3, para. 2 b of the Protocol should be
systematically compiled and evaluated. In addition, citizen science
projects should be included in the research and evaluated
accordingly.
Planning and holding of two international workshops. Within the
framework of the project, two workshops are to be planned and
carried out to involve stakeholders from science, competent
authorities, the tourism industry and NGOs. The aim of the
workshops is to jointly discuss possibilities for establishing a
systematic and Antarctic-wide monitoring from the perspective and
with the respective experience of the stakeholders, in order to
identify, at an early stage, realistic options and to involve later user
groups in the planning of the monitoring concept.
Developing a comprehensive monitoring concept on the
environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism. The focus of the
project will be on this work package in order to compile a toolkit of
monitoring measures specifically adapted to Antarctica. The toolkit
is to be suitable for systematically identifying and assessing the
possible effects of tourism activities on the assets to be protected in
the Antarctic in the long term. All forms of tourism are to be
considered. Discussions and results of the two workshops are to be
included in the development of the monitoring concept.
Firstly, suitable indicators that represent different assets to be
protected in the Antarctic and are verifiable across Antarctica are to
be identified. In the next step, methods are to be selected according
to the identified indicators, with which the state of the environment
can be determined and permanently verified. The spectrum of
monitoring methods is to be kept intentionally broad. Remote
sensing methods such as satellite or drone technology, camera
monitoring, sampling, on-site inspections, citizen science projects,
etc. are to be included in the considerations. The analysis of
acquired data and how it could be made generally accessible should
also be considered. In addition, different user groups (scientists,
expedition personnel of the tour operators or tourists themselves)
can be involved in the collection of data, which has to be
considered for the development of a monitoring concept.
Furthermore, suitable sites with different visitor numbers as well as
reference areas should be suggested for monitoring. Moreover, a
cost calculation for the individual measures should be integrated
into the monitoring concept.
Timeframe
The project has started in September 2021 and will end in
September 2024.
All parties are invited to participate in the project. The first of two
workshops will take place on 28 May 2022 during the ATCM.
Further information can be obtained at the following website:
https://tourism-monitoring-antarctica1.fresh-thoughts.eu/.
References
IAATO, 2019: IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism: 2018-19
Season and Preliminary Estimates for 2019-20 Season
IAATO, Website, 2021: https://iaato.org/information-resources/
data-statistics/
Silja Vöneky, Daniel Wisehart; 2016: Analyse und
Weiterentwicklung vorhandener rechtlicher Instrumente –
Handlungsbedarf zur Anpassung an die aktuellen Entwicklungen
des Tourismus in der Antarktis; UBA- Texte | 05/2016 https://
www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/analyse-
weiterentwicklung-vorhandener-rechtlicher
Tin et al.; 2009: Impacts of local human activities on the Antarctic
environment; Ant-arctic Science 21 (1), 3-33; doi:10.1017/
S0954102009001722
Michaela Mayer, Beate Lange, Klaus Lucke, Max Schuster, Karen
von Juterzenka, Hans-Peter Reinthaler; 2017: Nutzung aktueller
Erkenntnisse aus der Polarforschung für die Antarktis-
Umweltschutzaufgaben; UBA- Texte | 76/2017 https://
www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/nutzung-aktueller-
erkenntnisse-aus-der
J. Regel, K. Pütz; 1997: Effect of human disturbance on body
temperature and energy expenditure in penguins. Polar Biology 18,
246-253 (1997) doi: 10.1007/s00300005018.
CEP Tourism-Study; 2012: https://documents.ats.aq/ATCM35/att/
ATCM35_att067_e.doc
