Progress of glaciological research activities at the Dome Fuji station
and its vicinity
Progress of glaciological research activities at the Dome Fuji station
and its vicinity
Summary
Ice cores from the Antarctic interior have provided valuable
information on past climate changes. After the completion of deep
ice coring at the Dome Fuji station in the 2000s, the Japanese
Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) has completed the
transportation of all the ice core samples to Japan, providing
samples for paleoclimatic studies over the last 720,000 years. JARE,
in collaboration with international partners, has also been
conducting field studies for locating a new drilling site for the
oldest ice core in the Dome Fuji area. This information paper
describes the recent field research and associated activities at the
Dome Fuji station and its vicinity.
1. Introduction
In January 1995, the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
(JARE) established the Dome Fuji Station (77° 19′  S, 39° 42′  E,
3,810 m above sea level) on the highlands of Dronning Maud Land.
In the following three years, the expedition teams overwintered at
the station and performed deep ice core drilling to a depth of 2,503
m; this project is referred to as the First Dome Fuji Project. Starting
in 2002, the National Institute of Polar Research carried out another
deep coring, referred to as the Second Dome Fuji Project, at the
Dome Fuji station, to a depth of 3,035 m by 2007.
The next deep drilling (the Third Dome Fuji Project) is planned, and
preparatory activities for locating old ice, including international
collaborations, have been ongoing in the vicinity of the Dome Fuji
station. The Third Dome Fuji Project aims to collect a deep ice core
reaching back more than 1 million years to reconstruct past
Antarctic environments and atmospheric greenhouse gases
concentrations. It will provide crucial information on the
mechanisms for the dominant periodicity of glacial-interglacial
cycles, which was much shorter than that over the past
approximately 800,000 years. The project is intended to be a direct
contribution to the IPICS Oldest Ice Core Project, which states the
need for multiple ice cores going back in time into the shorter
glacial cycles. IPICS, the International Partnership in Ice Core
Sciences, is an Expert Group of SCAR Physical Science Group, and is
also supported by Future Earth PAGES (Past Global Changes) and
IACS (International Association of Cryospheric Sciences).
Implementation of this project is also directly connected to the
SCAR Horizon Scan (5. How did the climate and atmospheric
composition vary prior to the oldest ice records?) (Kennicutt et al.,
Nature, 2014).
2. The Dome Fuji station
Transportation of a part of the second Dome Fuji ice core was
carried out in the 2018 - 2019 Antarctic summer season. With the
success of this mission, all the Dome Fuji ice cores are now stored in
Japan, mainly at the National Institute of Polar Research in Tokyo,
and they will be provided for various paleoclimatic studies by ice-
core communities, including international collaborations. Also, an
extension of the casing in the second Dome Fuji deep borehole will
be carried out in the 2020 - 2021 summer season, in order to
maintain access to the precious 3,035-m-deep borehole for the
future observations. The Dome Fuji station currently stores ice chip
samples from the last deep drilling, and the station will continue to
serve as storage for new ice cores, tools, and supplies for research
activities around Dome Fuji. On the other hand, the current drill
trench and living quarters of Dome Fuji station will not be suitable
for the subsequent deep ice coring - the IPICS Oldest Ice Core
project - because the melting of the ice-sheet bed at the site makes
the collection of older ice core virtually impossible at the station
and its immediate surroundings.
3. Ice and snow observations, and preparatory activities for the
subsequent deep drilling in the vicinity of Dome Fuji station
Analyses of the Dome Fuji ice cores have provided vital information
on the Antarctic and global paleoclimate, such as accurate ice-core
chronology and atmospheric CO2 concentrations for multiple
glacial cycles (Kawamura et al., Nature, 2007), surface temperature
histories of Antarctic interior and Southern Ocean (Uemura et al.,
Nature Commun., 2018), the so-called bipolar seesaw in multiple
glacial periods (Dome Fuji Ice Core Project Members, Sci. Adv.,
2017; Buizert et al., Nature, 2018), and past variations of aerosols
and biological activities (Iizuka et al., Nature, 2012; Goto-Azuma et
al., Nature Commun., 2019; Oyabu et al., J. Geophys. Res., 2020).
The studies of the Dome Fuji ice core have also revealed that the
base of the ice sheet has been melting, and this is the reason for the
bottom age of the second Dome Fuji ice core (approximately
720,000 years) being significantly younger than expected under the
assumption of a frozen bed. On the other hand, recent modelling
studies have suggested that ice of over 1 million years may exist in
the Antarctic interior, including areas around Dome A, Dome C, and
Dome Fuji (e.g., Fischer et al., 2013). This, together with the
advantage of the existing Dome Fuji ice core with the known depth-
age relationship, makes the Dome Fuji area appropriate for further
glaciological surveys using contemporary techniques combined with
ice-sheet modelling, for mapping old ice.
Toward these goals, JARE has conducted surveys around Dome Fuji
in two consecutive summer seasons (59th JARE in the 2018 - 2019
season and 60th JARE in the 2019 - 2020 season). The JARE 59th
Dome Fuji field team, consisting of ten personnel and six snow
vehicles with sleds, started a ground traverse from Syowa Station in
early November, and conducted three months of activities that
included a ground-based deep sounding radar survey over a total
distance of nearly 3,000 km, and shallow ice coring at three
locations, within a radius of about 100 km around the Dome Fuji
station. Installation of an automatic weather station, and in situ
observation and sampling of surface snow along the routes, were
also conducted.
After the analyses of the JARE 59th field data, the target area for
further surveys was narrowed to the southern side of the Dome Fuji
station, where the ice sheet is found to be thinner, and the surface
mass balance is found to be smaller than at Dome Fuji. The JARE
60th Dome Fuji field team, consisting of ten personnel (five
scientists and five logistics personnel) and six vehicles, hosted the
Japan-U.S.-Norway international glaciological survey, in which two
scientists from Norwegian Polar Institute and high-resolution ice
radars from two U.S. universities joined the JARE team at about the
midpoint toward Dome Fuji, using a Twin Otter aircraft operated by
the British Antarctic Survey (the incoming and outgoing flights
were both funded by the Beyond EPICA project). The international
team put a base camp about 50 km south of the Dome Fuji station,
and its activities included detailed ground-based radar surveys, a
142-m ice coring with firn air sampling to approximately 100 m,
and in situ snow observations. The data collected during the two
field seasons will be analyzed in collaboration with international
collaborators, including those in the United States, Norway, and
France, and the outcomes and ice-sheet modelling results will be
combined to make the decision on the Oldest Ice Core drilling site
in the vicinity of the Dome Fuji station.
All JARE 64th inland activities during the 2021 - 2022 season were
unfortunately cancelled because of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
next Dome Fuji field activity was carefully planned in JARE 63rd
(the 2021 - 2022 season) to recover the delay. It successfully
conducted two traverses to Dome Fuji, extended the casing pipe of
the Dome Fuji borehole as explained above, carried out an ice radar
survey for finalizing the drill site selection, and transported fuel and
materials to the Dome Fuji station.
In JARE 64th (the 2022 - 2023 season), the Dome Fuji field team
will make a trench for deep drilling and ice-core processing, which
are in the design stage but have the same basic structures
as those for the last two Dome Fuji projects. It is a 3-m-deep, 4-m-
wide trench with a length of several tens of meters, with a tentlike
ceiling above the snow surface where the deep drill sites, and a flat
ceiling elsewhere. The drilling site will have living and sleeping
modules, a workshop module, and a generator housing, all on sleds.
Drilling of a shallow ice core, reaming of the shallow hole, and
installation of casing pipes will also be conducted if time allows
after the construction of the drill trench.
4. Next deep drilling (the Third Dome Fuji project)
The third Dome Fuji deep drilling will be carried out between 2023
and 2027. Deep drilling, bedrock sampling, deviation drilling, and
borehole logging will be performed in the four consecutive summers
starting in the 2023 - 2024 summer. Each summer activity at the
drilling site is expected to last for about two months. For the deep
drilling, an electromechanical drill will be used with borehole liquid
to prevent borehole closure.
