Hydrographic and Cartographic Activities of Brazil in the Antarctic
Region carried out during the last two campaigns of the Brazilian
Antarctic Program (OPERANTAR XXXIX e XL)
Hydrographic and Cartographic Activities of Brazil in the Antarctic
Region carried out during the last two campaigns of the Brazilian
Antarctic Program (OPERANTAR XXXIX e XL)
Summary
This report presents the recent work of the Directorate of
Hydrography and Navigation (DHN), which represents Brazil in the
International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), in and for the
Antarctic Region during the last two campaigns of the Brazilian
Antarctic Program (OPERANTAR XXXIX e XL). This work involves
carrying out bathymetric and hydrographic surveys, updating
nautical publications, and updating nautical charts.
Introduction
Brazil has committed itself as full member of the IHO Hydrographic
Commission on Antarctica (HCA) to carry out hydrographic surveys,
to produce and update International Nautical Charts (INT Charts),
Raster Navigational Charts (RNCs) and Electronic Navigational
Charts (ENCs), and to cooperate with other Hydrographic Offices in
the Antarctic Region.
DHN has been actively participating in the Brazilian Antarctic
Program (PROANTAR), since 1982, with the operation of its polar
vessels, used to support the logistics to the Brazilian Antarctic
Station and scientific field activities in the Antarctic Region. Polar
vessel "Barão de Teffé" was operational until 1994 when it was
replaced by polar vessel "Ary Rongel" in 1994. Later, DHN started to
count on polar vessel "Almirante Maximiano", from 2014.
The first hydrographic survey of Brazil in Antarctica was carried out
in 1983, which led to the publication of the first edition of a
nautical chart of the Admiralty Bay on King George Island (South
Shetland Islands). Since then, the Brazilian hydrographic office has
issued 6 paper nautical charts, 4 of which are INT Charts, 6 RNCs,
and 5 ENCs. It is important to emphasize that the III Brazilian
Nautical Cartographic Plan integrates Brazil's needs for nautical
cartography for the Antarctic Region.
INT Charts produced and updated by Brazil can be obtained via the
website of the company EMGEPRON's (https://
cartasnauticasbrasil.com.br/cartas-nauticas-geral/cartas-
nauticas-2.html).
ENCs issued by Brazil are distributed by IC-ENC or by EMGEPRON,
working as a reseller of VAR PRIMAR
(www.cartasnauticasbrasil.com.br/geoportal/web/niceindex.html).
RNCs published by Brazil are currently available at no cost for the
entire maritime community (https://www.marinha.mil.br/chm/
dados-do-segnav/cartas-raster).
During the campaigns of the Brazilian Antarctic Program from 2020
to 2021 (OPERANTAR XXXIX) and from 2021 to 2022
(OPERANTAR XL) the Brazilian polar vessels collected
meteorological and oceanographic data and occasionally carried out
bathymetric and hydrographic surveys.
Cartographic Activities
Cartographic updates to the nautical charts produced by Brazil in
the Antarctic Region have been made from bathymetric and
hydrographic surveys carried out by the Brazilian polar vessels
during the campaigns of the Brazilian Antarctic Program.
The following nautical charts received updates in the last two years:
INT Chart 9127 - SHERRATT BAY (KING GEORGE ISLAND)
INT Chart 9126 - KING GEORGE BAY (KING GEORGE ISLAND)
INT Chart 9125 - ADMIRALTY BAY (KING GEORGE ISLAND)
ENC BR425119 - SHERRATT BAY (KING GEORGE ISLAND)
ENC BR425120 - KING GEORGE BAY (KING GEORGE ISLAND)
ENC BR425121 - ADMIRALTY BAY (KING GEORGE ISLAND)
RNC 25115 - ELEPHANT ISLAND
RNC 25119 (INT Chart 9127)
RNC 25120 (INT Chart 9126)
RNC 25121 (INT Chart 9125)
RNC 25122 - MAXWELL BAY (KING GEORGE ISLAND)
Hydrographic Activities
Last two campaigns of the Brazilian Antarctic Program carried out
bathymetric and hydrographic surveys especially in the region of
the planned INT Charts 9151 and 9152 (scale 1:200,000).
During OPERANTAR XXXIX (2020/2021), polar vessel “Ary Rongel”
collected bathymetric data for GEBCO program in the way to the
Antarctic Peninsula. Also surveyed south of Nelson and Robert
Islands and in Bransfield Strait, in survey area H4, as shown in
Figures 1 and 2.
During OPERANTAR XXXIX, polar vessel “Almirante Maximiano”
also collected bathymetric data for GEBCO program in the way to
the Antarctic Peninsula and carried out a hydrographic survey in
Bransfield Strait, in survey area I4, as shown in Images 1 and 2.
Image 1: Location of survey areas H4 and I4
Image 2: Areas surveyed during OPERANTAR XXXIX (2020/2021),
including GEBCO bathymetric lines
During OPERANTAR XL (2021/2022), polar vessel Almirante
Maximiano carried out a hydrographic survey in survey area H4
and polar vessel Ary Rongel has conducted bathymetric surveys in
survey areas J4 and J5, as shown in Figure 3.
Image 3: Location of survey areas J4 and J5
Conclusion
During 40 years of existence of the Brazilian Antarctic Program
(PROANTAR), the Directorate of Hydrography and Navigation has
collaborated and contributed to the collection of bathymetric data
and to the production of nautical cartography for Antarctica, as a
consequence of the commitment assumed with the International
Hydrographic Organization and the Hydrographic Commission on
Antarctica, in favor of the safety of the navigation and the
protection of the marine environment in this region.
The Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF) was installed in
the Admiralty Bay in the summer of 1984, has been continuously
occupied since 1986 and had its new facilities inaugurated in
January 2020. There are also other structures maintained by Brazil
in Antarctica, such as refuges in the Peninsula region and the
Cryosphere Module 1, which, together with the temporary camps
stablished in the Peninsula region, make it possible to carry out
scientific activities in different Antarctic sites. The Brazilian Air
Force flights transport material and personnel, from Brazil to
Antarctica, as well as airdrop delivery of fresh food and other items
to the Ferraz Station staff during the winter period. The Polar Ship
Almirante Maximiano and the Oceanographic Support Ship Ary
Rongel carry out, during the summer seasons, scientific activities on
board, transport for installation of equipment and collection of
samples on land, and logistical support for the maintenance of
Brazilian infrastructure in the White Continent.
