Update: Managing the Effects of anthropogenic noise in the
Antarctic – Steps towards the development of an underwater noise
protection
concept for Antarctica
Update: Managing the Effects of anthropogenic noise in the
Antarctic – Steps towards the development of an underwater noise
protection concept for Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Introduction
One of the key pollutants created by human activities in the
Antarctic is underwater noise, which is primarily caused by ship
traffic, but also by research activities (e.g. seismic surveys) or
logistic activities. Concern about potential impacts of anthropogenic
noise in the Southern Ocean was first raised at the ATCM in 2000.
However, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has
not discussed impacts of underwater noise in Antarctic waters since
2007 (see ATCM XXIX WP 41, SCAR Report on Marine Acoustics
and the Southern Ocean or ATCM XXX IP 80, Taking Action on
Marine Noise in the Southern Ocean), though SCAR provided
Updates on Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern Ocean in 2012
(ATCM XXXV IP21) and 2019 (ATCM XLII WP 68 and BP 03, also
published as SCAR Bulletin 204 (2021).
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(the Protocol) provides for comprehensive protection for native
birds and mammals (Article 3 Annex II to the Protocol) and
specifies that the impacts of activities must undergo a prior
assessment according to Annex I of the Protocol (Article 8 para. 1 of
the Protocol). New tools such as the Animal Audiogram Database
can aid this assessment process (see also ATCM XLIII, BP 06).
Nevertheless, gaps in knowledge on the effects of anthropogenic
underwater noise on Antarctic marine mammals make the
assessment of such activities difficult and it is still unresolved which
noise exposure limits and noise mitigation measures need to be used
for Antarctic marine mammals and birds in order to ensure the full
level of protection pursuant to the Protocol. Further, there is no one
standard on how to implement the Protocol by each of the Treaty
Parties when evaluating activities in the Antarctic organised in their
country or proceed from their territory, leading to different
assessment methodologies of such activities.
The SCAR Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan
undertaken in 2014 identified "How will organism and ecosystems
respond to a changing soundscape in the Southern Ocean?" as one
of the 80 most pressing questions regarding the future of Antarctica.
In its recent update on Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern Ocean
(ATCM XLII BP 03 and SCAR Bulletin 204 (2021): ‘Anthropogenic
Noise in the Southern Ocean: an Update’), as a first step of a
qualitative assessment of the state of knowledge, SCAR polled a
committee of experts on the current status of underwater noise.
According to the SCAR-experts, the state of knowledge of potential
impacts on cetaceans (and marine mammals in general) and the
understanding of the sources and types of anthropogenic noise
present in Antarctic marine waters is fair to good.
Germany reported in ATCM XLIII, IP 19 on a research project
commissioned by the German Environment Agency (UBA) with
funding from the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature
Conservation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection that will run
from January 2020 to May 2023. This project was based on a 2018
workshop that aimed to determine the current state of knowledge
on the effects of noise on marine mammals in Antarctica (results
presented in ATCM XLII IP 31 and Erbe et al. 2019). The
participating international experts on marine mammals highlighted
a variety of research and management needs. The management
need with the highest score was a refinement of noise exposure
criteria for the Antarctic: the participating experts recommended
that a series of focused international expert workshops should be
held in order to develop a criteria matrix specifically for Antarctic
marine mammal species and the main anthropogenic sound sources
as the basis for an underwater noise protection concept for
Antarctica.
Short Project Overview
The objective of the current project “Managing the Effects of
anthropogenic noise in the Antarctic – Steps towards the
development of an underwater noise protection concept for
Antarctica” is to develop a criteria matrix that specifically addresses
the 24 native Antarctic marine mammal species and the three main
sources of anthropogenic underwater noise: seismic airguns,
hydroacoustic research equipment and vessels.
To achieve this, a series of short studies and three workshops will
be conducted, two of which will aim to identify maximum sound
exposure values that will prevent 1) auditory injury and 2)
harassment by anthropogenic sound. However, the large number of
species and sound sources constitute a considerable challenge, as
there are still several uncertainties involved that might not be
solved in the short-term. The project will therefore approach this
task using the process of Expert Elicitation (EE).
EE is a heuristic process typically used in situations with a scarcity
of empirical data but a need for conservation or management
decisions (Martin et al. 2012). It should build on and use the best
available research and analysis. It should be undertaken only when
the state of knowledge will remain insufficient to support timely
informed assessment and decision making (Morgan 2014). The
outcome of EE will be a probabilistic distribution that reasonably
represents the opinion of an external observer, based on the
estimate and the confidence of the estimate from all experts
participating in the EE. It quantifies scientific uncertainty and
minimizes inadvertent bias in the elicited information.
Short studies detailing the sound sources to be considered, the
distribution of marine mammals in the Antarctic, current
knowledge of auditory injury and behavioural response to noise will
support the EE process.
The two 3-day EE workshops are running from 20th to 22nd April
(auditory injury) and 3rd to 5th May 2022 (behavioural response)
in Berlin, Germany. For each workshop, eight international experts
are invited to participate. In two preceding webinars, participants
were introduced to the expert elicitation process and the topics, and
the relevant definitions, scenarios and questions were outlined and
discussed. It was decided that in order to develop a criteria matrix,
marine mammal species will be divided into groups of similar
hearing abilities and sensitivities and considered in hearing groups
similar to those proposed by Southall et al. (2019), and evaluated
against the following sound sources: vessel, seismic airguns and
hydroacoustic research equipment. Noise thresholds will then be
elicited for:
auditory injury being defined as “significant damage to the physical
integrity or health of an animal, which can be a temporary/
reversable impairment”, and
harassment defined as “all actions and activities that either have an
impact on individual fitness, a physiological impact or result in
disruption to or interference with an organism’s behavioural pattern
or life processes, or that have a negative impact on the
psychological well-being of the animal”.
In a third workshop, an evaluation matrix for mitigation measures
will be determined. The aim will be to make recommendations on
which mitigation measures are most suitable for various Antarctic
regions (e.g. coastal waters, offshore) and the marine mammal
species inhabiting these regions. This workshop is in planning and
will run shortly after the EE workshops, with around 15 invited
experts. The final results of the workshops will be summarised in
reports and presented in a closing conference in November/
December 2022 in Berlin and at ATCM XLV.
The results of the project are also intended to inform the evaluation
of activities within the framework of the German permitting
procedures and for presentation at future ATCMs.
References
ATCM XXIX WP41, SCAR Report on Marine Acoustics and the
Southern Ocean
ATCM XXX IP80, Taking Action on Marine Noise in the Southern
Ocean)
ATCM XXXV IP21, Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII WP 68, Anthropogenic Noise in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII BP 03, Anthropogenic Noise in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII IP 31, Results from the international workshop “The
Effects of Noise on Marine Mammals in Antarctica” held in
November 2018 in Germany
Booth, C.G., Sinclair, R.R. and Harwood, J. (2020). "Methods for
Monitoring for the Population Consequences of Disturbance in
Marine Mammals: A Review." Frontiers in Marine Science 7.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00115
Erbe C, Dähne M, Gordon J, Herata H, Houser DS, Koschinski S,
Leaper R, McCauley R, Miller B, Müller M, Murray A, Oswald JN,
Scholik-Schlomer AR, Schuster M, Van Opzeeland IC and Janik VM
(2019). Managing the Effects of Noise From Ship Traffic, Seismic
Surveying and Construction on Marine Mammals in Antarctica.
Front. Mar. Sci. 6:647. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.00647
Kennicutt, MC, Chown, SL, Cassano, JJ, Liggett, D, Peck, LS,
Massom, R, . . . Sutherland, WJ (2015). "A roadmap for Antarctic
and Southern Ocean science for the next two decades and beyond."
Antarctic Science 27(1): 3-18.
Martin, T. G., Burgman, M. A., Fidler, F., Kuhnert, P. M., Low‐Choy,
S., McBride, M., & Mengersen, K. (2012). Eliciting expert
knowledge in conservation science. Conservation Biology, 26, 29–
38. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2011.01806.x
Morgan, MG (2014). "Use (and abuse) of expert elicitation in
support of decision making for public policy." Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 111(20): 7176-7184. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1319946111
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (2021). "Anthropogenic
Noise in the Southern Ocean: an Update". SCAR Bulletin 204, 43 pp.
https://scar.org/scar-library/reports-and-bulletins/scar-
bulletins/5589-scar-bulletin-204/file/
Southall, B., J. J. Finneran, C. Reichmuth, P. E. Nachtigall, D. R.
Ketten, A. E. Bowles, W. T. Ellison, D. Nowacek and P. Tyack
(2019). "Marine Mammal Noise Exposure Criteria: Updated
Scientific Recommendations for Residual Hearing Effects." Aquatic
Mammals 45(2): 125-232.
