General overview regarding
the “XXXII Meeting of Managers of Latin American Antarctic
Programs” (RAPAL)
English version provided by the authors
General overview regarding the “XXXII Meeting of Managers of
Latin American Antarctic Programs” (RAPAL)
Information Paper submitted by Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador,
Peru, Uruguay, Colombia and Venezuela
Summary
The Meeting of Managers of Latin American Antarctic Programs,
RAPAL, is the main forum for coordination at the Latin American
level on scientific, logistical and environmental issues, as well as for
the exchange of points of view and, as appropriate, collaboration at
the educational, socio-cultural and communicational levels of
relevance in the Antarctic area. This paper presents a general report
of the XXXII Meeting of Managers of Latin American Antarctic
Programs (XXXII RAPAL) to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.
Overall, the 2021 meeting was a positive space thanks to the
participation of all its members. In that edition Uruguay was the
host country, which was responsible for holding the meeting
between September 28 and 30, in virtual format, at which two
Recommendations were adopted.
The next meeting will be held in Ecuador, representing in this sense
the effort of the Managers of Latin American Antarctic Programs
(APALs) to continuously share and exchange their experiences,
efforts and knowledge about the Antarctic continent.
Background
RAPAL was the result of different meetings between the directors of
the Antarctic Institutes of Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, held in
Buenos Aires (1987), Santiago (1988) and Montevideo (1989). In
1990, the operators of the Antarctic Programs of Brazil, Peru and
Ecuador joined the group, and over the years Colombia and
Venezuela were incorporated as Observer Members.
Each meeting promotes cooperation and mutual support in
scientific, technical, logistic and environmental aspects among Latin
American countries with Antarctic activities, in order to join and
coordinate efforts, optimizing the use of resources, in accordance
with the principles and objectives established in the Antarctic
Treaty System.
We advanced our collective understanding of Antarctic issues
through the work of the Plenary and the two working committees
focused on: (a) issues such as infrastructure, international
cooperation on logistics and operational actions (Operative and
Logistic Affairs Committee CAOL); and (b) issues related to the
environmental impact of Antarctic research, scientific cooperation,
new scientific projects (Committee on Scientific, Environmental and
Technical Affairs, CACAT).
RAPAL XXXII, presentations and discussions
The RAPAL Plenary started established the meetings authorities, in
this edition they were:
Chair, Brigadier General (Av), Fernando Colina, President of
Uruguayan Antartic Institute;
Vice chair, Ms. Patricia Ortúzar, Director of National Directorate for
Antarctic;
Moderator, Ms, Ángela Quartarolo, Secretariat Director from
Uruguayan Antarctic Institute;
CAOL: Coordinator Mr. Ernesto Danzov, Logistic Director from
Uruguayan Antarctic Institute;
CACAT: Coordinator Ms. Susana Pecoy, Infrastructure and
Technology Director from Uruguayan Antarctic Institute.
RAPAL worked on a broad agenda that covered topics related to the
2020 and 2021 Antarctic campaign, the covid-19 control and
management experience, educational, cultural and outreach issues,
as well as Antarctic training practices for manning support.
Aspects related to SCAR, COMNAP, ATCM and CPE activities were
also exchanged.
In total, more than 70 participants attended (virtually) RAPAL
XXXII, each APAL member presented their information, vision and
proposals according to the agenda item. 67 documents were
presented to the meeting, including 3 working papers that were
discussed in the plenary meetings.
This information can be found on the official RAPAL website, where
the final reports are available http://www.rapal.org.ar/
INFFIN.HTM .
Recommendations
Within the framework of the exchange, two recommendations were
adopted:
RECOMENDATION XXXII-1:
1) Accept the RAPAL virtual dissemination activity proposal on
December 1st
2021, Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty.
2) Urge APALs to publicize the event.
3) Include as a topic on the agenda of the next RAPAL a brief report
of the
virtual meeting.
The recommendation is a proposal for a virtual activity for
December 1, 2021 on the occasion of commemorating a new
Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. It was a
successful event for APAL members and their promoters Argentina
and Colombia. The ATCM can find more information in the IP
Nº034 where the event is detailed.
RECOMENDATION XXXII-2:
1) Within the framework of the Latin American Antarctic
Communication, Education and Culture Network, considering the
different dissertations of the APAL members
and by virtue of the values, ideas and realities inherent in each
community,
urges the APALs to generate a first space for joint dialogue, to build
in common agreement, the Education Forum.
2) Encourage coordination towards a first contact in February 2022.
3) Urge APALs to identify a focal point within each of their
programs.
The recommendation is a proposal to generate a space for joint
dialogue, which build by common agreement, an “Education
Forum”, in order to share, Antarctic education practices among the
countries. This forum is already working with representatives from
each of the APALs.
In conclusion
RAPAL continues to prove to be a space for exchange and
promotion of each Antarctic knowledge areas among the countries
of the region. In this sense, each meeting means an opportunity to
deepen the work together, and to enhance, throughout its 32
meetings, the work and commitment of the Managers of Latin
American Antarctic Programs to the principles of the Antarctic
Treaty.
