An Overview on the Legal Framework on Antarctic Specially
Protected Species and Its Application
In support of WP 24
An Overview on the Legal Framework on Antarctic Specially
Protected Species and Its Application
Summary
This IP provides supporting information for WP 24 An Overview on
the Legal Framework on Antarctic Specially Protected Species and
Its Application, submitted by the Delegation of China to the ATCM
and the CEP meeting.
Background
As per Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (hereinafter as “the Protocol”), Antarctic Specially
Protected Species (hereinafter as “ASPS”) are a category of species
that require special protection in comparison with other native
Antarctic fauna and flora (Article 3 (4), Annex II). The ASPS was
first devised in the 1964 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
the Antarctic Flora and Fauna (the Agreed Measures) and then
incorporated in 1991 into Annex II to the Protocol. Since then, the
Guidelines for CEP Consideration of Proposals for New and Revised
Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected Species under Annex II
of the Protocol (hereinafter as “the Guidelines”) was adopted in
2005, de-designation of Fur Seals and Ross Seals and designation of
Southern Giant Petrel were considered from 2005 to 2007, and
Annex II to the Protocol was revised in 2009. These discussion and
practices offer precious opportunities to test the application of the
rules. Some general agreements have been reached and are worth
highlighting for the current discussion on Emperor Penguins.
1. The evolution of the legal framework on ASPS
The mechanism of ASPS was built on under the umbrella of Annex
II to the Protocol. In 1999, the CEP noted its work on intersessional
consideration of ASPS had shown that improvements could be made
to the Annexes of the Protocol, and decided to conduct a rolling
review the Annexes, starting at CEP V in 2002 with Annex II
(paragraph 6, CEP II Report).Based on the consideration of CEP II/
WP 24 Specially Protected Species in Antarctica presented by the
UK in 1999, CEP III/WP 17 Considerations about the protection of
native Antarctic flora and fauna presented by Argentina in 2000,
and XII SATCM/WP18 Specially Protected Species presented by
SCAR, the CEP noted that Article 8 of Annex II of the Protocol
requires Parties to keep under continual review measures for the
conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna, that Article 3 of Annex II
needs clarification in relation to the nature of the special protection
afforded by designation as an Antarctic Protected Species
(paragraph 57, CEP III Report), and agreed established a ICG to
analyse the candidate species, criteria and mechanism that could be
used in the designation of ASPS (paragraph 58, CEP III Report) led
by Argentina.
In 2002, after six rounds of discussions in 2 inter-sessional periods,
Argentina presented the Final Report (ATCM XXV/WP38) to the
CEP with the findings of the ICG and 10 recommendations
(paragraph 39, CEP V Report,). The ICG agreed to support the use
of IUCN criteria as a basis for assessing the need for special
protection in the Antarctic continent, while if gaps existed in the
IUCN criteria, specific Antarctic criteria may need to be developed
(page 3, ATCM XXV/WP38). The specific criteria of “Vulnerable” or
higher within the IUCN Red List scheme was recommended for
designating Antarctic ASPS. The ICG also recognized that species
facing different level of threat (vulnerable, endangered, or critically
endangered) are likely to require different measures of management
or protection (page 4, ATCM XXV/WP38), and identified 3 general
elements that are key to different options of management/
conservation: 1) identify causes of decline and possible measures to
reverse such declines; 2) increased restrictions on taking or harmful
interference as the level of endangerment increases; 3) more
intensive review of the ASPS status as the level of endangerment
increases (page 6, ATCM XXV/WP38).
The CEP agreed that the findings of the group provided a sound
basis for resolving the matter (paragraph 40, CEP V Report), and
that the IUCN Red List should be used as the basis for SCAR’s
assessment of the status of species in Antarctica (paragraph 43, CEP
V Report). The ATCM adopted Resolution 1 (2002) requesting SCAR
to review the current status of all species which occur in Antarctic
Treaty Area in a stepwise approach, taking into account that the
CEP has noted the need to assess the status of native species to
justify designation as ASPS, on the basis of IUCN criteria used to
evaluate designation as at least Vulnerable in the IUCN Red List
Scheme.
In 2005, The Proposal to List a Species as a Specially Protected
Species under Annex II (ATCM XXVIII/WP034) submitted by SCAR
to ATCM/CEP proposed that the IUCN internationally agreed
criteria for endangerment should be used for the selection of species
to be considered for special protection. and that species assessed to
be in the Critically Endangered, Endangered and Vulnerable
categories should be considered as at high risk of extinction within
three generations and therefore suitable for designation as ASPS;
species considered Near Threatened should be considered for
monitoring initiatives (Recommendations b-d, ATCM XXVIII/
WP34). The SCAR paper also proposed that a recommendation to
the ATCM for designation of ASPS would initiate the development
of an Action Plan for the species (Recommendation e, ATCM
XXVIII/WP34). To ensure that proposals for ASPS are handled in a
consistent manner, the CEP developed the Guidelines (paragraph
122, CEP VIII Report), which was then endorsed by ATCM
(paragraph 82, ATCM XXVIII Report).
In 2002, Argentina presented another important working paper
(ATCM XXV/WP7) Annex II： Reasons for a Review, identifying
issues of Annex II needed to be addressed, e.g. what Antarctic
species are protected? from what (human activities/actions that
might become a threat) is it protected? How (what mechanism) is it
protected? The CEP then decided to establish an ICG in 2002 to
advance the review of Annex II to the Protocol, and agreed in its
review of Annex II it would take into account the final report and
recommendations in ATCM XXV/WP8 of the ICG on ASPS. After
years of intensive review, negotiation and practices, including on
the ASPS, the ATCM finally adopted an amendment of Annex II to
the Protocol in the form of Measure 16 (2009). The new version of
Annex II includes a more detailed rules and procedure for the
designation and implementation of ASPS, which entered into effect
on December 8, 2016.
2. Legal Framework on ASPS
1) Legal Framework provided for in Annex II of the Protocol
Article 3 of Annex II Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora to
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
provided for the legal framework for the designation and
implementation of ASPS.
Pursuant to Annex II to the Protocol, taking or harmful interference
with native fauna and flora shall be prohibited, except in
accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national
authority and under a limited number of circumstances (Article 3
(1-3), Annex II).
Annex II allows for the designation of Antarctic Specially Protected
Species (Article 3 (4), Annex II). A permit shall not be issued to take
an ASPS unless it is for a compelling scientific purpose and will not
jeopardise the survival or recovery of that species or local
population (Article 3(8)). Furthermore, the use of lethal techniques
on Specially Protected Species shall only be permitted where there
is no suitable alternative technique (Article 3 (9), Annex II). All
taking of native mammals and birds shall be done in the manner
that involves the least degree of pain and suffering practicable.
Annex II also provides for the criteria and procedure for the
designation of ASPS. The designation of a species as an ASPS shall
be undertaken according to agreed procedures and criteria adopted
by the ATCM (Article 3 (5), Annex II). The CEP shall review and
provide advice on the criteria for proposing native mammals, birds,
plants or invertebrates for designation as an ASPS (Article 3 (6),
Annex II). Any Party, the CEP, SCAR or CCAMLR may propose for
designation by submitting a proposal with justification to the ATCM
(Article 3 (7), Annex II). Proposals for the designation of a species
as an ASPS shall be forwarded to the CEP, SCAR and, for native
mammals and birds, the CCAMLR, and as appropriate, ACAP and
other organisations. In formulating its advice to the ATCM on
whether a species should be designated as an ASPS, the CEP shall
take into account any comments provided by the SCAR, and, for
native mammals and birds, the CCAMLR, and as appropriate, the
ACAP and other
organisations (Article 3 (10), Annex II). Each Party shall make
publicly available information on prohibited activities and ASPS to
all those persons present in or intending to enter the Antarctic
Treaty Area with a view to ensuring that such persons understand
and observe the provisions of this Annex (Article 5, Annex II).
2) the agreed procedures and criteria contained in the Guidelines
In 2005, the CEP adopted the Guidelines (Annex 8, CEP VIII
Report), which provide that proposals for new designations of
species as ASPS should include scientific justification and a draft
Action Plan using the attached template as a guideline, to the extent
possible with available data and knowledge (paragraph 1, the
Guidelines).
On receipt of a proposal, the CEP should invite SCAR to assess the
status of the species, using the most up-to-date IUCN criteria to
assess the risk of extinction of the species (paragraphs 2 and 3, the
Guidelines). If SCAR’s assessment determines that the species is at
significant risk of extinction (e.g., the conservation status is
determined to be “vulnerable” or higher), then the CEP should
recommend ASPS designation to the ATCM and initiate a process to
finalise the Action Plan for the species, in accordance with the
guideline (paragraph 4(a), the Guidelines).
The CEP should determine whether other authorities or
organisations have a role in protective action and should consult
accordingly. For species of interest to CCAMLR or ACAP, the CEP
should forward the proposal and the draft Action Plan, and any
advice from SCAR, to CCAMLR or ACAP for advice on practical
measures to provide special protection. The Action Plan should be
finalised taking account of advice from any authority or
organisation as appropriate and reported to the next meeting.
The guidelines provide useful information concerning the proposed
assessment process for species proposed for designation, revision or
de-listing as an ASPS. The guidelines also contain a Guideline
template of an Action Plan for a species proposed for designation as
an Antarctic Specially Protected Species, which provides useful
guidance for the preparation of an Action Plan. The template
presents a mechanism to provide special protection to ASPS
consisting of a guiding overall goal, several specific objectives and
actions, which mainly focus on downgrade of the threatened status/
degree of endangerment by quantifying, reducing and managing
threats, targeted research and monitoring of populations, review
and revise the Action plan every 5 years, etc.
3) inconsistency between Annex II and the Guidelines
There is some inconsistency between the Guidelines adopted in
2005 and the new version of Annex II amended in 2009 and entered
into effect in 2016. For example, Annex II to the Protocol requires
that the designation of a species as an ASPS shall be undertaken
according to agreed procedures and criteria adopted by the ATCM,
e.g. the Guidelines. Proposals for designation of native mammals
and birds as ASPS shall be forwarded to the CCAMLR, and as
appropriate, the ACAP, and the CEP shall take into account the
comments provided by the SCAR, and the CCAMLR, ACAP in
formulating its advice to the ATCM on whether a species should be
designated as an ASPS. While the Guidelines require the CEP to
forward the proposal and the draft Action Plan, and any advice
from SCAR, to CCAMLR or ACAP for advice only on practical
measures to provide special protection. Although it is clear that the
Annex II will prevail on such matters, the existence of inconsistency
will still cause problems in its application. Therefore, review and
harmonization are needed to avoid conflict before any future
designation.
3. Practices on the Antarctic ASPS
The ATCM had considered the status of several species drawing
upon the recommendations from the CEP as well as scientific
advices from SCAR, since the adoption of the Guidelines in 2005. As
a result, the ATCM de-listed Antarctic Fur Seals (genus
Arctocephalus) by adoption of Measure 4 (2006), maintained the
status of Ross Seals (Ommatophoca rossii) as ASPS, and adopted
Resolution 4 (2007) and Resolution 2 (2007) with respect to
continuation of the research and review of the status of the
Southern Giant Petrel. Such practices provided valuable precedents
and experiences for the future consideration of ASPS status.
1) The application of IUCN criteria in the designation of ASPS
SCAR has emphasized the application of 4 critical characteristics for
assessment of the degree of threat or endangerment for all species it
proposed with the use of IUCN Red List criteria, in accordance with
the assessment process outlined for listing or de-listing species in
the Guideline (Annex 8 of the Report of CEPVIII): (a) how large is
the population and is it, either globally or regionally, increasing or
decreasing? (b) is the geographic spread increasing or decreasing?
(c) is the breading population sufficient to ensure breading success
each year? (d) are there any known threats to the stability of the
population? (paragraphs 12-15, ATCM XXIX/WP39; paragraphs
15-19 ATCM XXIX/WP38; paragraphs 9-14, ATCMXXX/WP27)
SCAR also reiterated the following scientific perspective in the
designation of ASPS in its proposal to list the Southern Giant Petrel
(paragraph 9-11, ATCM XXIX/WP38), echoing to its previous
general proposal (paragraphs 9-1, ATCM XXVIII/WP34,) and the
findings of the ICG on ASPS on the use of IUCN criteria to designate
ASPS (page 4, ATCM XXV/WP38): (a) it is considered appropriate
on conservation grounds to be able to designate species in all three
threatened categories (Critically Endangered, Endangered and
Vulnerable) as ASPS, and to establish monitoring schemes for those
species evaluated as Near Threatened in order to provide early
warning of possible worsening conservation status; (b) The ASPS
category should be applied for the whole Antarctic population of
any species. The species not endangered at a global level but show
regional decreases within the Antarctic, may be protected by
practical local means instead of designation as an ASPS; (c)
Designating ASPS in cases where not enough information is
available (the precautionary approach applied for Data Deficient
species) is not considered appropriate, such concern for these
species should initially trigger new efforts to obtain the necessary
information on the distribution, abundance, and where possible,
trends in extent and population, upon which an informed
judgement can be based through the application of the IUCN
criteria. The regular review of all Antarctic bird species will provide
a timely indication of which species are in need of urgent study.
2) the de-listing of Antarctic Fur Seals (genus Arctocephalus)
All Antarctic Fur Seals was designated as ASPS because they had
been previous hunted almost to extinction in accordance with the
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of the Antarctic Flora and
Fauna in 1966, and be automatically incorporated into the list of
ASPS in Annex II to the Protocol (paragraphs 2-3, ATCM XXVIII/
WP33). After the Guidelines was adopted in 2005, SCAR presented
to the ATCM the Proposal to De-list Antarctic Fur Seals as Specially
Protected Species (ATCMXXIX/WP39), noted Fur Seals are not on
the IUCN Red List, recommended that Special Protection for a
species is normally used as a temporary designation to allow for
special measures for the recovery of the population under threat,
and proposed to remove them from the list of ASPS under Annex II
to the Protocol on the basis of population estimates, the continuing
upward trend for the population, the continuing extension of the
geographical area inhabited and the lack of any threats to the
stability of the populations. SCAR provided an estimated sizes and
trends of Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic Fur Seal population on the
basis of each main habitat sites, and analyzed the threat to the fur
seals as following:
(for Antarctic Fur Seal) There are no identifiable threats to the
species vitality although changes in krill availability linked to ENSO
have been observed to cause significant pup mortality in occasional
years. Commercial fishing activities have recorded mortalities of fur
seals in nets of less than 10 per annum and there are occasional
cases reported of entanglement in marine debris, which may lead to
death. Changes in the marine ecosystem linked to global climate
change may force foraging and breeding changes in the next 100
years but these cannot yet be predicted. (for sub-Antarctic Fur Seal)
There are no significant threats to this top predator. Very small
numbers may die by entanglement in fishing nets or in marine
debris but insufficient to have any effect of the population growth
(Appendix A and Appendix B, ATCM XXIX/WP39).
The CEP considered that the scientific advice outlined in WP39 was
comprehensive, consistent with the Guidelines adopted at CEP VIII,
and sufficient to inform a decision to propose delisting (paragraph
143, Report of CEP VIX). The ATCM decided to de-list fur seals
(Measure 4 (2006)), recognizing that fur seals would continue to
receive the comprehensive general
protection afforded to all seal species under the Protocol, and that
they would not be exposed to any potential threat of commercial
exploitation in the future as a result of their delisting (paragraph
85, ATCM XXIX Report).
3) the maintenance of the status of Ross Seals as the ASPS
The Ross Seals was designated as ASPS in 1966 because they
appeared to be exceptionally rare and very little was known about
them, and be then automatically incorporated into the list of ASPS
in Annex II to the Protocol (paragraph 2-3, ATCM XXVIII/WP33). In
2007, SCAR presented ATCMXXX/WP27 Current Status of the Ross
Seal (Ommatophoca rossii): A Specially Protected Species under
Annex II, noted the Ross Seal was listed as Lower Risk, Least
Concern on the IUCN Red List, and recommended its status as an
ASPS unchanged but further information should be collect. SCAR
accepted that a change in a species’ protection status should only
take place where sufficient data are available on which to base such
a decision, and considered that the de-listing should also only be
considered where data on which to base such a decision are
sufficient (paragraphs 8, 11 and 15, ATCMXXX/WP27). The CEP
agreed that the status of Ross Seal remain as an ASPS. The species is
now still categorized as Least Concern (LC) on the IUCN Red List
based on the latest assessment in 2014 (IUCN Red List website).
4) the consideration of Southern Giant Petrel
In 2006, SCAR presented ATCM XXIX/WP38 Proposal to List
Southern Giant Petrel as a Specially Protected Species under Annex
II, noted that the Southern Giant Petrel was globally listed as
Vulnerable on the Red List by Birdlife International, and
recommended that Southern Giant Petrel be considered for
designation as an ASPS. SCAR noted that such a listing requires the
preparation of a Protection Action Plan in accordance with the
Guideline, and that a similar management plan drawn up by
Australia could be used as an initial basis for the development of a
draft. SCAR analyzed the threat to the fur seals as following:
A significant threat to Southern Giant Petrels is mortality via long-
line fishing. 'Incidental catch (or by-catch) of seabirds during
oceanic long-line fishing operations' is an increasingly important
source of loss in many Southern Ocean bird populations. On some
of their breeding islands, Southern Giant Petrels are threatened by
predation from Feral Cats and Black Rats, and by habitat
degradation from introduced Reindeer, Sheep and Rabbits. Human
disturbance, both from tourism, science and logistic operations also
results in breeding failure. Environmental changes potentially
exacerbate the impact of threats to the Southern Giant Petrel. A
recent southerly shift in the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone has
resulted in increased sea and air temperatures and may have altered
up-welling patterns and hence marine prey availability (Appendix
1, ATCM XXIX/WP38).
The ATCM noted that the CEP is keeping under review of the status
of Southern Giant Petrel, recognized that the species was globally
listed as Vulnerable by the IUCN, recalled SCAR’s advice that the
species meets the IUCN criteria for it to be listed as Critically
Endangered in the Antarctic Treaty Area, noted the recent data on
the species at South Orkney Island indicating a larger global
population may prompt a reappraisal of the IUCN status category,
and recalled that the CEP Guidelines adopted in 2005 provided for
assessment of the status of species at a regional or local level,
recommended that SCAR undertake a further review of the status of
Southern Giant Petrel, and activities in Antarctic should be planned
to avoid negative impacts on Southern Giant Petrel, in particular on
the breading colonies (Resolution 4 (2006)).
In 2007, SCAR withdrawn its working paper, because the
complexity over the scarcity of data, the lack of review of data that
are available, and the inability of experts to reach consensus, meant
that SCAR could not offer the CEP a clear, scientifically defensible
statement about the status of the regional population of the
Southern Giant Petrel (paragraph 235-237, CEP X Report). ATCM
recalled again that the Guidelines adopted in 2005 provided for
assessment of the status of species at a regional or local level, and
further recognized that Southern Giant Petrel was down listed from
Vulnerable to Near Threatened by IUCN, then Recommended that
all parties are encouraged to make available existing scientific data
and results to SCAR and to implement new research, and SCAR to
complete a review as soon as practical in collaboration
with other relevant bodies such as CCAMLR (Resolution 2 (2007)).
The species has been further downgraded as Least Concern (LC) on
the IUCN Red List in 2009, and maintained this status so far based
on the latest assessment in 2018.
4. Observations and recommendations:
1) Observations
By reviewing the legal framework and examining the ATCM and the
CEP practices, the following observations on the practices, inter
alia, are evident:
(a) the conservation status of Vulnerable or higher using the most
up-to-date IUCN criteria is a threshold for potential designation on
which basis the ATCM and the CEP will consider to list or de-list a
species as an Antarctic ASPS, e.g. proposal to de-list Fur Seals,
proposal to list Southern Giant Petrel.
(b) being or not being listed as Vulnerable (or higher) in the IUCN
Red List is a prerequisite but not a sufficient condition to list or de-
list a species as ASPS. A species would not be automatically listed as
an ASPS because it is been categorized as Vulnerable in the IUCN
Red List (e.g. Southern Giant Petrel), or be de-listed because it has
been categorized as Lower Risk/Least Concern (e.g. Ross Seal). The
ATCM and the CEP decision-making and consultation process is
independent from IUCN and will consider more scientific and
management elements (e.g. both species above), as well as the
interest of other organizations.
(c) the effects of long-term climate change have been considered in
the threat analysis, but has not been considered a sufficient
condition or determining elements to list or de-list a species (e.g.
Fur Seals and the Southern Giant Petrel). In the past practices, only
the observed population trends and the threats from human
activities (e.g. commercial exploitation of Fur Seals) have been used
as the determining condition for listing or de-listing species.
(d) Special Protection for a species is normally used as a temporary
designation to allow for special measures for the recovery of the
population under threat, once the species is no longer endangered
or threatened the designation is removed (e.g. Fur Seals).
(e) the general protection already afforded by Annex II to the
Protocol, and/or by other Annexes of the Protocol or international
treaties, is a legitimate consideration for listing or de-listing ASPS.
(f) the ASPS category should be applied for the whole Antarctic
population of any species, in which case a thorough assessment at
the regional level (Antarctica) on sound scientific evidence is
critical. Any change in a species’ protection status should only take
place where sufficient data are available on which to base such a
decision (e.g. Ross Seal); monitoring schemes should be established
for those species evaluated as Near Threatened (e.g. Southern Giant
Petrel), and new research efforts should be triggered for data
deficient species, in order to provide early warning by obtaining
necessary data and information.
(g) Species facing different level of threat (vulnerable, endangered,
or critically endangered) are likely to require different measures for
management or protection. To quantify and reduce threats, a
potential action-focused Species’ Recovery Plan would better to
consider the following elements: 1) identify causes of decline and
possible measures to reverse such declines; 2) increased restrictions
on taking or harmful interference as the level of endangerment
increases; 3) more intensive review of the ASPS status as the level
of endangerment increases.
2) Recommendations:
It is recommended that the ATCM and the CEP:
1) re-confirm the importance of designating ASPS in consistent with
Annex II to the Protocol and the Guidelines, particularly the
conservation status of Vulnerable or higher as the threshold for the
consideration of the potential designation, and the procedure for
consideration of ASPS proposals, including the consultation
procedure with other related organizations:
2) align the future designation of ASPS with the previous the ATCM
and the CEP practices, particularly on the application of criteria and
approach on the basis of adequate scientific information;
3) encourage SCAR to assess the risk of extinction of the species
that have the potential to be designated as ASPS, using the most up-
to-date IUCN criteria in consistent with its previous practice;
4) review and harmonize the inconsistency between the Guidelines
and the Annex II to the Protocol.
Reference:
Argentina, Annex II: Reasons for a Review, ATCM XXV/WP7, 2002.
Argentina, Final Report of the Inter-sessional Contact Group on
Specially Protected Species in Antarctica, ATCM XXV /WP38, 2002.
SCAR, De-listing Antarctic Specially Protected Species, ATCM
XXVIII/WP33, 2005.
SCAR, Proposal to List a Species as a Specially Protected Species
under Annex II, ATCM XXVIII/WP34, 2005.
SCAR, Proposal to List Southern Giant Petrel as a Specially
Protected Species under Annex II, ATCM XXIX/WP38, 2006.
SCAR, Proposal to De-list Antarctic Fur Seals as Specially Protected
Species, ATCM XXIX/WP39, 2006.
SCAR, Current Status of the Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossii): A
Specially Protected Species under Annex II, ATCMXXX/WP27,
2007.
IUCN Red List website, at <www.iucnredlist.org/
species/15269/45228952>, visited on April 5, 2022.
