Current situation of the impact of climate change on the Sweden
Refuge on Snow Hill Island (HSM No. 38)
English version provided by the author
Current situation of the impact of climate change on the Sweden
Refuge on Snow Hill Island (HSM No. 38)
Information Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
The “Sweden Shelter”, located in Snow Hill Island, was built by the
Swedish Antarctic Expedition of Doctor Otto Nordenskjöld in
February 1903, and used as a winter station until November 1903,
when they were rescued by the corvette ARA Uruguay of the
Argentine Navy. At present, this refuge is severely threatened by the
impact of climate change that puts its structure at risk due to
temperature changes and soil erosion, among other threats. This
document summarizes what was observed during the last Antarctic
campaign by researchers of the National Antarctic Programme of
Argentina.
Introduction
The Swedish Shelter was built on Snow Hill Island by the Swedish
Antarctic Expedition of Doctor Otto Nordenskjöld in February 1903,
being used as a winter station until November 1903, when the
expedition members were rescued by the corvette ARA Uruguay of
the Argentine Navy. Nordenskjöld wintered in that refuge together
with four others Swedish expeditionaries and the then Argentine
Navy Ensign José María Sobral. In 1953, on the 50th anniversary of
the rescue, the Argentine Republic got engaged in the refuge and in
1980 the National Directorate for Antarctica (DNA) and the
Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) began the restoration of the
shelter, with archaeological and conservational remedial works.
The Sweden Shelter is protected by the Antarctic Treaty System as
Historic Site and Monument No. 38, as well as by Argentine
legislation that designates it as a National Historic Site. It is one of
the few Antarctic shelters of the "heroic era" whose original
structure still remains, being key to the study and exploration of
Antarctica. Therefore, as administrators of the HSM, ensuring its
preservation for future generations is an unavoidable responsibility.
Impacts of Climate Change
The impacts of climate change and future threats from climate
change have significant effects on facilities and particularly on
historic sites and monuments. For this reason, climate change in
Antarctica and its associated impacts are a matter of concern for the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and especially for the
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). In the case of the
Snow Hill Refuge, mitigation measures to minimize the impacts of
climate change and ensure the stability of the Refuge have been
studied and implemented for several years (see CPA VI - IP057, CPA
XIII - IP021 and CPA XIV - IP130).
The Refuge has been impacted by the increase of the average
annual temperature in the area, especially during the southern
hemisphere summers. This causes an increase in thermokast and
thermoreosion processes due to a rise in seasonal thawing and
melting of subway ice (Silva Busso and Yermolín, 2017). Thus, the
hut is exposed to these hazards. In particular, growing ground
instability put in danger the proper stability of the Refuge. This
situation is due to the vulnerable location of the hut on a natural
embankment with ice-rich permafrost in its interior that is affected
by changes in temperature.
Mitigation background
Since the 1990s the effects of climate change caused an acceleration
in the erosion of the permafrost hill on which the refuge is located,
which forced the DNA-IAA to carry out shoring and filling of the
land to ensure the survival of the refuge.
In 2018 these works were paused to analyze the progress of the
erosion process, while the conservation and preservation works of
the heritage continued. In 2019 DNA-IAA initiated a cooperation
with several Swedish research institutions to carry out these studies
in order to deepen and survey the Antarctic heritage of the
Nordenskjöld expedition. Four Swedish scientists took part in the
DNA-IAA camp at the site during the 2019/20 campaign, carrying
out a 3D laser digital survey at submillimeter level of the refuge, as
well as orthophotography and drone mapping of the terrain at
centimeter level. Also, automatic sensors were installed at different
depths in the surrounding permafrost, plus an automatic weather
station and humidity and temperature sensors inside the refuge.
DNA-IAA continued with the survey and heritage conservation work
at the site, and currently possesses two years of data from the
sensors, as well as new surveys that can be compared with the
previous ones to assess the progress of erosion and resume the work
of shoring up the land with greater precision. During the last
Antarctic campaign, the Argentine scientists who camped at the site
observed a pronounced acceleration in the erosion of the hill, which
corresponds with the temperature records, having also recorded
rainfall at the site. The advanced state of erosion of the permafrost,
both due to the increase in temperatures, accompanied by the
retreat of the adjacent glacier, as well as the fluvial erosion of the
streams whose flow has increased considerably, means an imminent
risk for the refuge, making it extremely necessary to resume the
shoring tasks in order to avoid the loss of the Refuge due to the
collapse of the terrain on which it is located.
Future Plans
In view of this situation, DNA-IAA plans to resume the shoring work
in the 2022/23 Antarctic campaign with an extended camp. We
consider that these measures are of an urgent nature and that all
necessary management measures should be taken to ensure the
integrity of the structure.
On the other hand, the CEP seeks - within the work programme on
climate change - the identification of the potential impacts of
climate change on historic sites and the subsequent preparation of
the "Guideline for the evaluation and management of heritage in
Antarctica" that provide possible solutions to this problem. In this
regard, Argentina, New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom
have recently submitted a working paper (WP026 - Assessing the
risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage values) to the
ATCM, which aims to study proposals to advance the assessment of
the risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage values and
also to seek the development of a climate change risk assessment
tool.
Actions aimed at the management and conservation of the SHM
have been sustained over the last decades. As a result of this policy,
the Site now has management tools such as the Guidelines for Sites
Receiving Visitors, updated in 2019 (CPAXXII - WP063), as well as
internal guidelines of the National Antarctic Program of Argentina
for the management of camps at the site. In that sense, based on the
above considerations and the aforementioned Guidelines, and apart
from the urgent actions of shoring up already mentioned, Argentina
plans to develop a Management Plan for the site that will
encompass the different aspects of the management, that is
logistical, environmental, tourism and heritage conservation, with a
view to improve conservation.
Bibliography
Busso, A. S., & Yermolin, Y. Características geológico-geotécnicas y
propuestas para la preservación del Sitio y Monumento Histórico n
38, Cabaña de Nordenskjöld, Antártida.
RCTA XXVI - CPA VI Madrid (2003) IP057 CPA 4(g) - Activities
associated to the Historic Site and Monument No.38: Nordenskjorld
Hut, Snow Hill Island.
RCTA XXXIII - CPA XIII Punta del Este (2010) IP021 CPA 7b -
Enhancement activities for HSM 38 “Snow Hill”.
RCTA XXXIV - CPA XIV Buenos Aires (2011) IP130 CPA 7b - Update
on enhancement activities for HSM 38 “Snow Hill”.
RCTA XLII - CPA XXII Praga (2019) WP063 CPA 9c - Revision of
Site Guidelines to Snow Hill Hut.
