New methodology for the quantitative assessment of the
environmental impacts of the Argentine Antarctic Programme
New methodology for the quantitative assessment of the
environmental impacts of the Argentine Antarctic Programme
Information Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
Environmental impact assessments are the mechanism required by
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to
determine the degree of impact that the development of an activity
will have on the Antarctic continent. Article 8 of the Protocol
establishes three categories of impacts: less than a minor or
transitory impact, a minor or transitory impact, or more than a
minor or transitory impact. An important aspect is that an objective
methodology must be available to identify the environmental
impacts of the activities through the quantitative assessment of the
attributes that characterise them. Based on the guidelines of Annex
I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection and Resolution 1
(2016) "Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica", a new methodology has been designed for the activities
of the Argentine Antarctic Programme to carry out the quantitative
assessment of the impacts of the activities that are carried out on
the Antarctic Continent and that are part of Argentina's Annual
Antarctic Plan with the aim of having a more precise analysis of the
effects of the mitigation measures implemented.
Objective
The objective was to design a new procedure that allows a
quantitative evaluation of the environmental impacts of the
activities evaluated by the Environmental Management and
Tourism Programme (PGAyT) of the National Antarctic Directorate
(DNA) and that also considers the effects of the mitigation
measures. This methodology has been developed in the course of
2021 and has begun to be implemented in the initial environmental
impact assessments that are currently under development for the
next Summer Antarctic Campaigns.
General technical specifications
In Resolution 1 (2016) “Guidelines for Environmental Impact
Assessment in Antarctica” it is established that an activity is an
event or process that results from (or is associated with) the human
presence in Antarctica or that can lead to that presence. In addition,
each activity should be analysed considering all the actions that
each phase involves (for example, construction phase, operation
phase and decommissioning phase). One of the important issues
highlighted in this document is that understanding the ways in
which a proposed activity may interact with the environment (i.e.,
its environmental aspects) is an important step in identifying and
addressing potential environmental impacts.
According to the general guidelines for carrying out an
environmental impact assessment, a procedure must be followed
that can be summarised in five stages: 1) Considering the activity,
2) Considering the environment, 3) Analysis of Impacts, 4)
Comparison of Impacts 5) Measures to minimise or mitigate
impacts. The new procedure contemplates these 5 mentioned
points. An activity will not result in an impact to an environmental
value or resource if there is no process of interaction, or 'exposure'.
Characterisation of the Impacts
The identification of environmental impacts consists of
characterising all the changes in the environmental values or
resources resulting from an activity. Only when the impact is
identified can an assessment of its significance be made. In the case
of this new methodology proposed for the Argentine Antarctic
Programme, each impact will be identified by the following
characteristics in a summarised manner:
Activity (1): Set of actions within a process that are carried out to
fulfil a specific stage of the process. The name of the activity that
contains the aspects and impacts to be valued must be stated,
together with the process in which it is included.
Exposed Environmental Component (2): including the physical and
biological features that could be directly or indirectly affected.
Environmental Aspect (3): environmental aspects (synonym =
cause) are those elements or derivatives of activities with a possible
impact on the environment.
Environmental Impacts (4): an environmental impact (synonym:
effect) is a change in the values or resources of the environment
that can be attributed to human activity. It is the consequence of an
interaction between an activity and the environment, and not the
interaction itself.
Type of impact (5): establishes whether an impact is direct or
indirect according to the following characterisations. A direct
impact is the change in environmental values or resources as a
result of the consequences of the interaction between the exposed
environment and an activity or action. An indirect impact is a
change in environmental values or resources due to the interaction
between the environment and other impacts, both direct and
indirect.
Analysis and Evaluation of Impacts
Once the actions that constitute the activity have been determined,
the significance value of the environmental impacts surveyed is
established. With the information collected or supplied, the extent,
intensity, duration, probability and legal aspects are valued
according to the following Table 1:
Table1: rating scale from 1 to 4 for each of the elements analysed to
identify an impact.
Once the matrix of actions has been assessed, the Level of
Significance without mitigation that each particular action will
have is established. To do this, the following mathematical formula
is used:
Significance = extent x intensity x duration x probability x legal
aspects (a)
Thus, the significance of the impact is obtained by multiplying the
impact score of each characteristic (for example, 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 =
32).
The overall impact score range is between 1 and 1024, considering
that a score of all the minimums in each evaluation criterion is
equal to one (that is, 1 x 1 x 1 x 1 x 1 = 1) and a maximum score is
equal to 1024 (that is, 4 x 4 x 4 x 4 x 4 = 1024). This provides a
simple means of comparing impacts, the higher the value, the
greater the environmental impact.
Once the impact analysis has been carried out, the prioritisation of
the risk area or original Risk is determined, which allows us to
determine which actions require immediate treatment. There are
three levels of impact significance (Low, Medium and High) that
correspond to those described in Article 8 (1) of the Protocol (Table
2):
Table2: impact significance levels.
Table2: impact significance levels.
Table3: matrix with impact analysis. The coloured columns
correspond to the previous impact analysis methodology (table for
the purpose of showing an example).
Table3: matrix with impact analysis. The coloured columns
correspond to the previous impact analysis methodology (table for
the purpose of showing an example).
If a given action presents a Medium or High level of significance, it
will require the implementation of Mitigation Measures. That is, the
use of practices, procedures or technologies in order to minimise or
prevent the impacts associated with the proposed activities. The
modification of some component of the activity (and, therefore, the
consideration of environmental aspects and impacts), as well as the
establishment of supervision procedures, are effective forms of
mitigation.
Table4: matrix with impact analysis. The initial and subsequent
analysis are observed, where the effects of the mitigation measures
are taken into account.
Table4: matrix with impact analysis. The initial and subsequent
analysis are observed, where the effects of the mitigation measures
are taken into account.
After this first analysis, the mitigation measures are considered in
the matrix, and from these measures the Level of Significance with
mitigation is calculated, which is the result of the mathematical
formula of the rating (a) with the new values of extent x intensity x
duration x probability x legal aspects, but after taking into account
the mitigation measures applied. With this new calculation, the
Mitigated Risk is obtained, the significance level of the impact after
the application of the mitigation measures and the one that is
compared again with...
Figure1: Graphic summary of the analysis and quantitative
evaluation of environmental impacts.
Figure1: Graphic summary of the analysis and quantitative
evaluation of environmental impacts.
Conclusions
The new methodology implemented to assess the environmental
impact of the activities within the Argentine Antarctic Programme
allows for a more precise analysis of the environmental impacts
and, in particular, allows for the incorporation of the expected
effect of the established mitigation measures. To validate it, a
comparison was made with respect to other methodologies of this
type used by some member countries of the Antarctic Treaty.
Preliminary results indicate that the characteristics analysed and
their categorisation are consistent with those used in Antarctica and
that therefore the procedure adequately applies the required
guidelines.
Bibliography
“Construction and operation of Belarusian Antarctic research station
at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land.  Final Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation” (2015). National Academy of Sciences
of Belarus. State scientific institute for nature management. State
scientific and production amalgamation the scientific and practical
centre for bioresources. State institution the Republican Centre for
Polar Research.
“Final Comprehensive environmental evaluation for continuation
and modernization of McMurdo Station Area activities” (2019).
Environment National Science Foundation. Office of Polar
Programs.
“Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica”.
Resolution 1 (2016) Annex 1. Final Report of ATCM XXXIX.
“Proposed Construction and Operation of the New Chinese Dome A
Station Dome A, Antarctica (2008). Final Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation” (2015). Chinese Arctic and Antarctic
Administration.
“Rothera Wharf Reconstruction & Coastal Stabilisation. Final
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation” (2018). British Antarctic
Survey. Natural Environmental Research Council.
"Scott Base Redevelopment. Draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation” (2020). Policy, Environment and Safety Team.
Antarctica New Zealand.
