Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Forty Fourth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting
Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Forty Fourth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting
CCAMLR-40 (October 2021)
1. The Fortieth Annual Meeting of the Commission for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR-40)
met online from 18 to 29 October 2021. It was chaired by Dr J.
Granit (Sweden).
2. The Report of the Meeting is in the public domain.
3. The Standing Committee on Implementation and Compliance
(SCIC) and the Standing Committee on Administration and Finance
(SCAF) met online in the week of 18–22 October. The Scientific
Committee met online in the week of 11–15 October.
Implementation of Convention objectives
4. The Commission discussed a number of issues under this item
and adopted a Declaration on the occasion of its fortieth annual
meeting to reaffirm its commitment to achieving the objective of
the Convention (Annex 1).
Implementation and compliance
5. The Commission noted that SCIC had been unable to adopt a
Provisional Compliance Report but had instead included the
Summary Compliance Report as Appendix I to the SCIC report with
additional notes to reflect the discussion as it proceeded in SCIC.
The Commission further noted that most compliance rates were
greater than 92% in this thorough assessment.
6. The Commission added the Nika to the Non-Contracting Party
IUU list, and the El Shaddai to the Contracting Party IUU list.
Administration and Finance
7. The Commission adopted its budget for 2022 and new terms of
reference for the General Science Capacity Fund.
8. The Commission adopted changes to the English and Spanish
language versions of the Rules of Procedure of the Commission and
Scientific Committee to make them gender inclusive.
Management of marine resources
9. The Commission noted that up to 31 July 2021 the total catch of
krill reported for the 2020/21 fishing season was 320 014 tonnes.
The total catch of toothfish was 9 265 tonnes and of icefish was
360 tonnes.
10. The Commission welcomed the significant amount of focused
work that has been undertaken by the Scientific Committee and its
working groups in 2021 on developing the revised krill
management strategy. It endorsed the work plan to provide advice
on the revision of Conservation Measure (CM) 51-07 in October
2022. It agreed to extend CM 51-07 to apply to the end of the
2021/22 fishing season.
11. The Commission agreed to revise the conservation measures
relating to toothfish and icefish fisheries in the Convention Area.
However, the Commission was unable to agree a catch limit for the
fishery for Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) in
Subarea 48.3. Noting the lack of consensus advice on research on D.
mawsoni in Division 58.4.1, the Commission agreed that this fishery
would not take place in 2021/22.
12. The Commission noted the issue of seabird strikes on warps and
net monitoring cables in the krill fishery as well as seal and
humpback whale by-catch events. The Commission approved the
reconvening of the Working Group on Incidental Mortality
Associated with Fishing (WG-IMAF) to address this issue. It also
extended the derogation for use of net-monitoring cables in CM
25-03 for one more year, with additional requirements for research
by vessels using these devices.
Spatial management
13. The Commission discussed the general issue of marine protected
areas (MPAs) in the Convention Area, the Ross Sea region MPA
research and monitoring plan (RMP), and proposals for an East
Antarctica MPA, a Weddell Sea MPA and an Antarctic Peninsula
Region MPA.
14. The Commission encouraged Members to hold workshops on
individual MPA proposals and noted that a special session of the
Commission could be valuable to promote a constructive discussion
among Members to reach consensus on how to progress MPA
design, designation, implementation and the establishment of RMPs
on the condition that the situation of the pandemic allows an in-
person meeting and the terms of reference for such a session have
been agreed by the Commission. The Commission is currently
discussing preliminary terms of reference for such a meeting
prepared by the Chair and the Secretariat.
Climate change
15. The Commission noted that in June 2021, the UK notified all
Members that the area of the Pine Island Glacier had reduced by
22% since 2017, thus meeting the criteria for designation of a
Special Area for Scientific Study. The Pine Island Glacier area
became a Stage 1 designation on 12 June 2021. Under CM 2404,
paragraph 24, the attention of ATCM is drawn to the details of the
Stage 1 designation, and ATCM is encouraged to consider whether
to take any appropriate steps to complement and facilitate scientific
study within the area.
16. The Commission considered but could not reach agreement on a
revised resolution on climate change. Many Members expressed
regret that the revised resolution was not agreed and adopted. The
Commission recalled Resolution 30/XXVIII, recognising that global
climate change is one of the greatest challenges facing the
Convention Area, and agreed to reconsider the proposed revision of
the resolution at CCAMLR-41.
Next meeting
17. Sweden (Dr J. Granit) will Chair the Commission for the 2022
meeting. Argentina will continue to serve as Vice-Chair.
18. The 41st Meeting of the Commission will be held in Hobart,
Australia, from 24 October to 4 November 2022.
Annex 1
Declaration on the Occasion of the Fortieth Meeting of the
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources
The Members of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), meeting virtually in October
2021, on the occasion of the fortieth Meeting of the Commission;
Recalling that the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CAMLR Convention) entered into force on
7 April 1982;
Further recalling that the first Meeting of CCAMLR was held in
Hobart, Australia, from 25 May to 11 June 1982;
Conscious that the objective of the CAMLR Convention is the
conservation of Antarctic marine living resources;
Aware that for the purposes of the Convention, the term
conservation includes rational use;
Further aware that any harvesting and associated activities in the
Convention Area shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Convention and with the conservation principles
set out in Article II.3;
Mindful that the CAMLR Convention is an integral part of the
Antarctic Treaty System;
Also mindful that Contracting Parties to the CAMLR Convention
which are not party to the Antarctic Treaty acknowledge the special
obligations and responsibilities of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties for the protection and preservation of the environment of
the Antarctic Treaty area, including seas surrounding Antarctica;
Welcoming the Paris Declaration on the occasion of the Sixtieth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty and on
the Thirtieth anniversary of the signing of the 1991 Madrid Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted on 23
June 2021;
Reaffirming the importance of safeguarding the environment and
protecting the integrity of the ecosystem of the seas surrounding
Antarctica;
Noting the concentration of marine living resources found in
Antarctic waters and the ongoing interest in the possibilities offered
by the utilisation of these resources as a source of protein;
Acknowledging that illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU)
fishing in the Convention Area continues to be a threat to the
conservation of Antarctic marine living resources while recognising
CCAMLR’s efforts and achievements in effectively combatting IUU
fishing;
Recognising the success of the Commission in drastically reducing
seabird mortality in the Convention Area;
Acknowledging the importance of an effective Scheme of
International Scientific Observation to support the monitoring of
operations of fishing activities on board vessels engaging in
harvesting of Antarctic marine living resources and related scientific
research activities;
Recognising the importance of the implementation of the CCAMLR
System of Inspection as an essential tool to verify compliance with
conservation measures;
Recalling that the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources
calls for international cooperation with due regard for the
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and with the active involvement
of all States engaged in scientific research and/or harvesting
activities in the seas surrounding Antarctica;
Reaffirming the belief that it is in the interest of all humanity to
preserve and conserve the seas surrounding Antarctica for peaceful
purposes only and to prevent their becoming the scene or object of
international discord;
Reaffirming that the function of the Commission is to give effect to
the objective and principles set out in Article II of the Convention;
Noting with concern the effects of global environmental change,
including climate change and ocean acidification, for the Antarctic
marine living resources, their environment, and dependent and
associated marine ecosystems and biodiversity;
Recalling that international cooperation in Antarctica and its
surrounding seas is essential to effectively study the effects and
impacts of global climate changes and that CCAMLR provides a
framework to facilitate this cooperation;
Recalling that CAMLR Convention Article IX sets out the function of
the Commission;
Acknowledging that the Scientific Committee provides a forum for
consultation and cooperation concerning the collection, study and
exchange of scientific information with respect to marine living
resources, and has a crucial role in submitting scientific
recommendations to the Commission regarding measures and
research to achieve the objective of the Convention;
Reaffirming the Commission’s commitment to developing an
effective system of instruments, including a representative system of
marine protected areas (MPAs), with the aim of conserving marine
biodiversity within the Convention Area in accordance with the
Convention;
Determined to further address the effects and impacts of climate
change on Antarctic marine living resources, taking into account
international research and reports, including the 2018 Food and
Agriculture Organization State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture
(SOFIA) report, the IPCC Special Report on the Oceans and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, the Global Assessment Report on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services of the Intergovernmental
Science–Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services;
Noting the necessity of adequately managing and protecting
vulnerable marine ecosystems (VMEs), including seamounts,
hydrothermal vents, cold-water corals and sponge fields;
Highlighting CCAMLR’s achievements in protecting VMEs from
adverse impacts and threats from bottom fishing through specific
measures that have been introduced to protect benthic
communities;
Recognising the importance of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring
Program (CEMP) that seeks to serve as a basis for the conservation
of Antarctic marine living resources; and distinguish between
changes due to harvesting of commercial species and changes due
to environmental variability, both physical and biological;
Acknowledging the value of performance reviews as well as
dialogues such as the Valdivia and Santiago symposiums, held in
2005 and 2015 respectively, in evaluating the effectiveness of the
Commission in achieving the Convention’s objective and in
supporting continuous improvement in that regard, including
through the incorporation of best
practices into the work of the Commission and in achieving the
objective and implementing the conservation principles of the
Convention;
Acknowledging the essential role of the CCAMLR Secretariat in
supporting the functions of the Commission, the Scientific
Committee and their subsidiary bodies;
Hereby:
1. Reaffirm their strong and unwavering cooperation and
commitment to the objective of the CAMLR Convention;
2. Decide to further strengthen their efforts to ensure the
conservation of marine living resources in the Convention Area
while ensuring that harvesting and associated activities do not
irreversibly impact the Antarctic marine ecosystem;
3. Also commit to ensure that the harvesting of marine living
resources and associated activities in the Convention Area are
managed in accordance with the objective of the Convention and
conservation principles;
4. Confirm that the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on
Environmental Protection ensure the effective and enduring
international governance of Antarctica, providing for Antarctica’s
use only for peaceful purposes, free from measures of a military
nature, guaranteeing freedom of scientific investigation and
cooperation to that end, and designating Antarctica as a natural
reserve devoted to peace and science;
5. Commit to ensure that CCAMLR remains at the forefront of
efforts to develop an ecosystem-based management regime as a key
component of the Antarctic Treaty system and continues to make
decisions based on the precautionary approach;
6. Reaffirm their commitment to the conservation of Antarctic
marine living resources, where conservation includes rational use,
based on the best scientific evidence available in accordance with
the Convention;
7. Reaffirm their commitment to protect VMEs, including
seamounts, hydrothermal vents, cold-water corals and sponge fields,
including from bottom fishing activities that can have significant
adverse impacts on such ecosystems;
8. Also commit to ensure that challenges and impacts on Antarctic
marine living resources arising from global environmental change,
including climate change, are duly considered and addressed in
Commission decisions;
9. Reaffirm their determination to establish a representative system
of MPAs within the Convention Area, and to continue making best
efforts to scientifically design, designate, implement, monitor and
review effectiveness of MPAs in accordance with the Convention;
10. Commit to developing and integrating science-based dynamic
management measures, in which information from ongoing
ecosystem monitoring is used for updating management provisions
at regular intervals, to improve the Commission’s ability to achieve
the objective and conservation principles of the Convention, in the
context of a changing marine environment;
11. Reaffirm their strong commitment to monitoring and controlling
Contracting Party compliance with the Convention and
conservation measures in force, and eliminating IUU fishing from
the Convention Area;
12. Commit to continuing engagement with relevant non-
Contracting Parties to ensure they cooperate fully with CCAMLR
and the effectiveness of CCAMLR conservation measures is not
undermined;
13. Reaffirm their commitment to prevent market access to
products of IUU fishing taken from the Convention Area;
14. Also reaffirm their continued commitment to ensure compliance
with conservation measures and deter the involvement of their
nationals in IUU fishing activities and where they do, take effective
action;
15. Reiterate their will to enhance and reinforce the CCAMLR
System of Inspection and the Scheme of International Scientific
Observation, for respectively ensuring compliance with CCAMLR
conservation measures and supporting scientific research activities
through responsible and sustainable harvesting, that lead to
improved conservation and better management;
16. Commit to ensure CCAMLR maintains a close collaboration with
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and other
relevant bodies of the Antarctic Treaty System on matters falling
within their competence, bearing in mind its particular importance
in accordance with the CAMLR Convention, as well as other
relevant bodies of the Antarctic Treaty System, including the
Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP), as well as the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and others;
17. Further reaffirm their commitment to continue to collaborate,
as appropriate, with the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization, relevant regional fisheries management organisations
and arrangements, particularly those that manage areas adjacent to
the Convention Area, as well as appropriate intergovernmental and
non-governmental organisations which can contribute to the work
of the Commission;
18. Reaffirm their commitment to provide the Secretariat with the
necessary means and support to carry out the work entrusted to it
by the Commission;
19. Reaffirm the important role of the Scientific Committee
including the collection, study and exchange of information with
respect to the marine living resources and in formulating its
scientific advice to the Commission in accordance with Article XV
of the Convention;
20. Further reaffirm their determination to take decisions based on
the best scientific evidence available;
21. Reaffirm their determination to work collectively and
constructively in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty System to
continue to enhance the functioning of the Commission with a view
to achieving the objective of the Convention;
22. Reaffirm their determination to ensure the ongoing
conservation of Antarctic marine living resources which form part
of the Antarctic marine ecosystem, including in response to the
effects and impacts of global climate change.
Adopted on 29 October 2021
