Exploring the possibilities for the designation of Barrientos (Aitcho)
Island as an ASMA
Exploring the possibilities for the designation of Barrientos (Aitcho)
Island as an ASMA
Summary
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), are designated for
improving coordination of activities, enhance collaboration among
Parties and stakeholders and minimise potential negative
environmental impacts that could be caused by human use. As seen
in Deception and Admiralty Bay, ASMAs could include tourist sites
which could benefit from coordinated efforts and management.
Barrientos (Aitcho) Island is among the 15 most visited sites in the
Antarctic Peninsula Region. Since 2010, Ecuador has been
conducting research and tourism monitoring activities in this island.
These activities have been possible due to the proximity of the
Ecuadorian research station “Pedro Vicente Maldonado” to
Barrientos and the continued interest of the country in this site.
Results of monitoring activities developed with Spain, have allowed
the implementation of management measures and the presentation
of IP and WP to the ATCM. Grounded on a science-based approach,
Ecuador wants to explore the possibilities for designating Barrientos
as an ASMA area. Ecuador is confident that this designation will
benefit coordinated research activities, the implementation of long-
term monitoring programs and will enhance collaboration among
Parties.
Background
According to article IV of the Annex V of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Antarctic
Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), could be designated in areas
where activities are or could be conducted with the aims “to assist
in the planning and coordination of activities, avoid possible
conflicts, improve cooperation between Parties or minimise
environmental impacts”. Management plans, constitute the tool that
contributes to their management by providing, among others,
specific guidance on human activities.
Deception Island (M3, 2005) and Admiralty Bay, King George Island
(M2, 2006) are examples of ASMA areas that have been managed
through the collaboration and assistance of different Parties. These
ASMAs have been declared because of their outstanding
environmental, historical, scientific, and aesthetic values. Moreover,
both ASMAs include areas of intense tourist use, that have benefited
from coordinated efforts and clear guidance that have been
established in their management plans. Barrientos (Aitcho) Island is
among the 15 most visited sites in the Antarctic Peninsula Region.
Its location, access, and the possibilities for developing different
tourist activities have contributed to its popularity. Complementary,
the island constitutes an interesting site for conducting research
activities, including experimental designs, census, and inventories.
Since 2010, Ecuador has been conducting research and tourism
monitoring activities in this island. These activities have been
possible due to the proximity of the Ecuadorian research station
“Pedro Vicente Maldonado” to Barrientos and the continued interest
of the country for supporting research and management actions.
Research has included biodiversity assessments, vegetation
inventories, soil sampling, and experimental designs to assess the
influence of human activities in wildlife species. Drone and satellite
image analyses have also been completed producing high quality
resolution maps and images of this area.
Results of research activities have contributed to complete
ecological characterization of the island (Cajiao et al., 2020) and
the generation of science-based management proposals (Cajiao et
al., 2022). On the other hand, because of tourism monitoring,
Ecuador and Spain have presented two IP and four WP to the ATCM
recommending management measures for the island with the aims
to avoid long-term impacts due to human use. Therefore, during
ATCM XXXIV, Ecuador submitted IP 0126, Manejo turístico para la
isla Barrientos (Buenos Aires), expressing its interest
in “undertaking tourism monitoring activities on Barrientos Island
during the Antarctic summer season”. Two years later, at ATCM
XXXV Ecuador and Spain submitted WP059, Revised Visited Site
Guidelines: Aitcho Islands (Hobart), in which both Parties
recommended “the replacement of the designated route crossing
Closed Area B, in order to favour the recovery of the vegetation
cover close to the track, and as a precautionary measure”. During
ATCM XXXVI Ecuador and Spain presented WP055, Recovery of
moss communities on the tracks of Barrientos Island and tourism
management proposal (Brussels), recommending that for the
reopening of paths the “implementation of measures will be
important to allow for adequate guidance of groups”.
At ATCM XXXIX Ecuador and Spain presented WP045, Assessment
of moss communities nearby the tracks of Aitcho Island (Santiago),
and during ATCM XLI both Parties presented IP054, Recovery status
of moss communities near the trails of Barrientos Island (Aitcho
Islands) (Buenos Aires), recommending to “continue the long-term
follow-up of the recolonisation process, attempting to identify
possible changes in morphology and flora that may occur in plant
communities”
The research results and policy papers developed demonstrate the
importance of collaboration among Parties and the need of long-
term monitoring if the aim is to contribute to conservation and
management. Considering the purpose of an ASMA designation and
the importance of tourism activities in Barrientos, Ecuador is keen
to explore the possibilities for the designation of Barrientos Island
as an ASMA. This designation will benefit coordinated research
activities, the implementation of long-term monitoring programs
and will enhance collaboration among Parties.
References
Cajiao, D., Albertos, B., Tejedo, P., Muñoz-Puelles, L., Garilleti, R.,
Lara, F., … Benayas, J. (2020). Assessing the conservation values
and tourism threats in Barrientos Island, Antarctic Peninsula.
Journal of Environmental Management, 266, 110593. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.JENVMAN.2020.110593
Cajiao, D., Leung, Y.-F., Tejedo, P., Barbosa, A., Reck, G., &;
Benayas, J. (2022). Behavioural responses of two penguin species to
human presence at Barrientos Island, a popular tourist site in the
Antarctic Peninsula region. Antarctic Science, 13, 1–13. https://
doi.org/10.1017/s0954102021000559
P. Tejedo, J. Benayas, L.R. Pertierra, D. Cajiao, G. Reck, M. Andrés-
Abellán, C. Wic, M.J. Luciáñez, N. Enríquez, B. Albertos, F. Lara &
A. Justel. How to correctly manage human impacts on Antarctica?
Learned lessons from Barrientos Island. The Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research. New Zeland, 2013.
P. Tejedo, J. Benayas, L.R. Pertierra, D. Cajiao, G. Reck, M. Andrés-
Abellán, C. Wic, M.J. Luciáñez, N. Enríquez, B. Albertos, F. Lara &
A. Justel. How to correctly manage human impacts on Antarctica?
Learned lessons from Barrientos Island. XIth SCAR Biology
Symposium. Barcelona, España. 2013.
Pablo Tejedo, Belén Albertos, Daniela Cajiao, Laura Muñoz,
Francisco Lara, Luis R. Pertierra, Javier Benayas, Temporary
closures of Antarctic tourist sites as a possible management tool to
address the impacts on vegetation by trampling. 5th International
Polar Tourism Research Network. Raufarhöfn, NE Iceland, 29
August - 2 September 2016
