Turkish Polar Science Workshops
Turkish Polar Science Workshops
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents information on the annual National Polar
Science Workshops in Turkey carried out since 2017.
Background
The understanding of polar regions and their relationship with
climate change has grown in Turkey, especially in the past decade,
as reflected by the increase in the number of polar research
publications. This also brought a common need for the Turkish
polar science community to showcase the studies and extend
networking and collaboration.
Within the scope of the National Polar Science Program of Turkey,
the National Polar Sciences Workshops have been taken into place
to create a platform to exchange information on conducted projects,
to evaluate the result of the scientific expeditions, and to discuss the
advances in polar research. The fifth annual National Polar Sciences
Workshops was organized in 2021.
2017-2021 Activities
The very first National Polar Sciences Workshop has been organized
on 12-13 April 2017 at Istanbul Technical University in Istanbul
with 250 participants across Turkey. Organizing the first workshop
increased the awareness of the polar research in Turkey and
encouraged both early career researchers to pursue their studies in
polar regions and also helped senior scientists to engage with a
wider community. The National Polar Science Program of Turkey
was created within the workshop with more than 100 stakeholders
from 44 national institutions.
Since 2017, the National Polar Sciences workshops were held
annually. In the first three workshops, the coordination was carried
out by Istanbul Technical University (ITU) Polar Research Center
(PolRec), while the 4th and 5th workshops were conducted by The
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK)
Marmara Research Center (MAM), Polar Research Institute (PRI).
The fourth workshop was organized on an online platform due to
the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020, which hosted over 800
participants.
The 5th National Polar Science Workshop was held on 30
November 2021. The event was organized at Gebze Technical
University which hosted over 500 participants. More than 100
abstracts were submitted from approximately 80 institutions across
Turkey. Along with the opening speeches of H.E. Mustafa Varank
(the Minister of Industry and Technology) and Prof. Hasan Mandal
(the President of TUBITAK), Dr. Josabel Belliure (University of
Alcalá, Spain), Dr. Yeadong Kim (the President of SCAR), Dr
Antonio Quesada (the Chair of COMNAP), Dr. Jakob Granit
(CCAMLR chair) and Prof. Paul Arthur Berkman (Chair of Fulbright
Arctic) contributed to the workshop with their valuable speeches in
the special sessions. The sessions were also broadcasted online and
viewed by more than 2000 people.
Conclusion
The National Polar Science Workshops play a significant role in not
only creating a deeper insight between polar regions and climate
change but also improving the capacity to work in those disciplines.
The workshops are planned to be annually organized by TUBITAK
MAM Polar Research Institute. It is observed that the impact and
efficiency of these workshops grow as the number of participants
increases each year. In this way, the growth of the polar research
community is supported and the interest in the polar research is
kept alive.
