Feedback on a monitoring conducted on a tourist vessel according
to Resolution 9 (2021)
English version provided by the author
Feedback on a monitoring conducted on a tourist vessel according
to Resolution 9 (2021)
Information paper submitted by France
English translation provided by the author
Summary
In March 2022, the French National Competent Authority (NCA)
conducted a monitoring mission according to the framework set up
by Resolution 9 (2021), to assess the effectiveness of the framework
in the field. It turned out that R9 (2021) provides an effective tool,
enabling NCAs to better understand the activities implemented
under their jurisdiction, and to monitor compliance with the
relevant national and international instruments. It also appeared
that a monitoring mission can be organized in a short time, at low
cost. A few areas for improvement were identified, and are
presented in this information paper.
Context
The 43rd ATCM adopted Resolution 9 (2021), recommending that
Parties conduct, on a voluntary basis, monitoring missions of tourist
vessels under their jurisdiction operating in the Antarctic Treaty
area, based on the mechanism proposed by the Resolution. The
Resolution further calls on Parties to cooperate in this framework.
France, through its National Competent Authority (NCA), the
Prefect of the Terres australes et antarctiques françaises (TAAF),
conducted a first monitoring mission according to R9 (2021) during
the 2021/2022 season. It was carried out on board the
Commandant Charcot, from the company Ponant, between March
17 and 31, 2022. The north-east of the Antarctic Peninsula
(Weddell Sea) and the South Orkney Islands were visited within the
Treaty area.
The monitoring was carried out in accordance with the “Monitoring
Checklist” set up by R9 (2021). With respect to financial issues, left
open by the Resolution, the TAAF monitor was received free of
charge by the operator. The TAAF covered the monitor's
transportation costs, as well as his salary.
On this basis, this information paper proposes a critical feedback of
this framework and the Resolution that supports it.
Feedback
Mission planning
The monitoring implemented by the French NCA was organized
within a very short time (3 weeks between the ANC's request to the
operator and the validation of the monitor’s mission order). Several
factors made this possible:
The choice made by the NCA to designate as a monitor one of its
agents meeting the profile established by R9 (2021). This made it
possible to avoid a specific recruitment process, as well as an
additional salary.
The pre-existing administrative relations between the TAAF and
Ponant, in regular contact within the framework of the national
procedures conducted in application of Annex I of the Madrid
Protocol.
The pro-active attitude shown by Ponant, quickly accepting the
principle of a free boarding, and the acceptance of the TAAF to take
charge of the transport costs, avoiding financial issues.
Subject to the choices made by the NCA, and the stakeholders’
willingness, it appears that R9 (2021) offers possibilities to set up a
monitoring mission in a short time, with few formalities and
procedures.
Monitoring implementation
Respective roles and responsibilities of the monitor and the
operator
R9 (2021) lists the documents and materials that must be provided
to monitors by the mandating authority. While the transmission of
the listed documents presents no difficulty, it can be difficult to
equip the monitor with the identified items (satellite phone,
camera, clothing). In the present case, the monitor did not have a
satellite phone, nor did he have any supplies that would allow him
to write in wet weather conditions. This had no impact on the
course of the mission.
The tasks and responsibilities assigned to operators by the
Resolution appear adapted. The crew showed total cooperation,
accepting all the interviews requested by the monitor, providing
him with appropriate assistance, and allowing a complete visit of
the vessel. The monitor was provided with the documents required
by R9 (2021) before departure, and was able to participate in the
activities offered to the passengers without restriction.
It should be noted that for operational reasons, the monitor was
unable to participate in all the meetings of the Expedition team.
This point of the Resolution can be delicate to respect according to
the organizational constraints weighing on the teams.
With the exception of the points identified above, the provisions of
points 6 “Tasks and responsibilities assigned to the state Party,
including the issues related to the appointment of monitors” and 7
“Tasks and responsibilities assigned to the operators as part of a
national framework” of the annex to R9 (2021) appear coherent
and realistic.
Tasks to be carried out by the monitor
R9 (2021) entrusts the monitor with the main task of completing
the Monitoring checklist set up as part of the framework. This
checklist is a key tool of the mechanism, guiding the
implementation of the monitoring and ensuring that it covers all the
points of attention to be considered.
This checklist appears to be complete and allows the monitor to be
effectively guided towards each of the points to be evaluated.
Objectives set by R9 (2021)
The objectives set by the Resolution are generally to strengthen the
NCA’s understanding of the activities they authorize, and to
monitor compliance with the regulations of the Antarctic Treaty
System.
The mission carried out on board the Commandant Charcot
confirms that these objectives are appropriate.
The monitoring has concretely made it possible to facilitate the
administrative processes between the TAAF, Ponant headquarters,
and the crew and expedition team on board the Commandant
Charcot. It allowed the French NCA to understand the concrete
modalities according to which the activities deployed by the
operator are implemented in the field, to exhaustively assess
compliance by the operator with the applicable rules, and to make
recommendations, with the limits explained below.
While a single monitoring may not be enough to fully meet the
mechanism's objectives in the long term, regular monitorings could
make a significant contribution.
Limits of the framework
Conduct of the monitoring
It appears, first of all, that the monitoring must be based on the
interviews conducted on board, with limited possibility for the
monitor to tangibly verify some of the information communicated
by the crew. This is particularly true for the technical aspects of the
vessel (waste and sewage management, ballast water, etc.). While it
is possible to visit the installations, the way in which they are used,
and ultimately, the issues related to the vessel discharges, for
example, can only be addressed by the monitor through the
statements of the crew. This is also the case for certain rules
governing site visits, such as the maximum number of 100
passengers on land at any one time.
Moreover, a single monitor is not able to observe all the passengers
on land at the same time. For instance, compliance with the guide/
passenger ratio rules, as well as compliance with the guidelines for
site visits can only be partially monitored. On these points, it is best
to conduct a "sampling" exercise, reporting on the group that the
monitor is joining.
Writing the monitoring report
The Monitoring checklist annexed to R9 (2021) provides a
framework to support the writing of the monitor’s report. Although
it appears to be complete, there are some redundancies. The
different parts of the report (compliance with the national permit,
compliance with the environmental impact assessment, compliance
with the rules of the ATS) overlap, and imply unnecessary
repetitions.
An introductory section, inviting the monitor to present the context
of his or her mission (presentation of the cruise, the company, the
monitor, the NCA mandating him or her, the size of the vessel, the
national legislation implemented, etc.) could be added. A summary
listing the observed non-compliances and the suggested corrective
measures could also be added, allowing direct access to the
essential data of the report.
Proposals
France is at the disposal of other Parties to share its experience
further, and calls on voluntaries Parties to implement R9 (2021).
This will contribute to opening the way to the international
collaboration called for by the text.
No proposal to amend the annex of R9 (2021) is proposed at this
stage. It appears to be globally coherent, and allows for the
implementation of effective monitoring. An update based on further
feedback may be considered at a later stage, in particular from
missions carried out by other NCAs.
