Effects of climate change on Antarctic marine food webs: new
evidence from squid
Effects of climate change on Antarctic marine food webs: new long-
term evidence from squid
An Information Paper submitted by Portugal and the United
Kingdom
Summary
This paper provides scientific evidence of the effects of climate
change on Southern Ocean squid. Results from analyses on squid
beaks collected between 1976 and 2016 showed that the
distribution of four (out of five) of the squid species changed over
the last 50 years with the trophic levels of all squid species similar
across decades. We highlight the need for studies on the long-term
effects of climate change on Southern Ocean marine food webs and
promote the development of long-term monitoring programs for
Antarctic species relevant to Antarctic policy.
Introduction
There is a growing desire within the ATCM to discuss and identify
strategic science priorities, particularly in relation to climate change
(as stated in the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan, CEP Five-
year Work Plan and CEP Climate Change Response Work
Programme (CCRWP); see ATCM XL (Decision 1 (2017), ATCM XLII
WP21, ATCM XLII WP36), as well as increase understanding of the
implications of climate change to inform management within the
Antarctic Treaty area (ATCM XLII WP 1, ATCM XLII IP 129, ATCM
XLII IP 136). Indeed, the impacts of climate change on Antarctica
and the Southern Ocean were identified as a priority area by the
ATCM intersessional contact group on future Antarctic Science
challenges (ATCM XLII WP32). Such information on climate change
research and monitoring is essential to improve the basis for
decision making (ATCM XLII Final Report (para 48)). However,
long-term research using biological data from the Southern Ocean is
rare.
Here we report the long-term changes in distribution (i.e. habitat)
and trophic level (i.e., where a species is positioned within the food
web, related to their diet) in squid from the Southern Ocean (Abreu
et al. 2020). Squid are short lived marine organisms (generally with
a 1-2 year life span), occur across the Southern Ocean and are
preyed upon by a wide range of top predators, thereby providing
them with the capacity to respond to environmental changes.
Long-term changes in distribution and trophic level of squid of the
Southern Ocean
Between 1976 and 2016, squid beaks from five important Southern
Ocean squid species (Taonius notalia, Gonatus antarcticus,
Galiteuthis glacialis and Histioteuthis atlantica) were collected from
diet samples of wandering albatrosses. Stable isotope ratios were
measure in the beaks to assess distribution (using Carbon (δ13C))
and trophic level (using Nitrogen (δ15N)). During the study period,
environmental conditions changed due to increases in the strength
and frequency of the Southern Annular Mode and Southern
Oscillation Index. The results show that the distribution of four (out
of five) of the squid species changed over the last 50 years.
However, the trophic levels of all squid species did not significantly
change across decades (Abreu et al. 2020).
As the majority of the studied squid species changed their habitats
with changing environmental conditions over the last 50 years but
maintained similar trophic levels, cephalopods are likely to remain
important prey for top predators in Southern Ocean food webs,
despite ongoing climate change (Abreu et al. 2020). Indeed, adult
squid may move southwards with climate change, possibly
impacting top predators living in Southern Ocean northern islands
(Queirós et al. 2021). Overall, this advances our knowledge on the
long-term effects
of climate change on Southern Ocean marine food webs and
emphasizes the importance of long-term monitoring programs of
Antarctic populations to inform management actions.
Figure 1. Galiteuthis glacialis is a common squid in the Southern
Ocean, being present in the diet of numerous predators, include in
the study by Abreu et al. (2020).
References
Abreu, J., R. A. Phillips, F. R. Ceia, L. Ireland, V. H. Paiva, and J. C.
Xavier. 2020. Long-term changes in habitat and trophic level of
Southern Ocean squid in relation to environmental conditions. Sci.
Rep. 10:15215.
Queirós, J. P., A. Hilário, D. Thompson, F. R. Ceia, G. Elliott , K.
Walker, Y. Cherel , and J. C. Xavier. 2021. From hot to cold waters:
new insights in the habitat and trophic ecology of Southern Ocean
squids during their life cycle. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 659:113-126.
