WMO Unified Data Policy and the Global Basic Observing Network
(GBON)
WMO Unified Data Policy and the Global Basic Observing Network
(GBON)
Introduction
Awareness that the international exchange of information is
essential for understanding and predicting the weather is as old as
the scientific discipline of meteorology itself. Under the WMO
umbrella, data exchange gradually became more formalized, first
via the WMO World Weather Watch (WWW), which covered
operational activities, and the Global Atmospheric Research
Programme (GARP), which supported scientific development. Both
were established in 1967 and provided increased recognition of the
socioeconomic benefits of weather forecasting and the potential
commercial value of meteorological data. In the mid-nineties the
WMO community reaffirmed and reinforced its commitment to free
and unrestricted international exchange of meteorological data with
the adoption by the World Meteorological Congress of Resolution
40 (Cg-XII, 1995) – ‘WMO policy and practice for the exchange of
meteorological and related data and products, including guidelines
on relationships in commercial meteorological activities’.
Resolution 40, which dealt primarily with weather data, was later
complemented by adoption of Resolution 25 (Cg-XIII, 1999),
promoting the free and unrestricted exchange of hydrological data,
and Resolution 60 (Cg-17, 2017), doing the same for climate data.
Over recent decades, steady progress in scientific understanding,
complemented by development of new and better algorithms for
modeling and data assimilation, progress in satellite observing
technologies and access to vastly expanded computational
capabilities, all helped to dramatically improve the quality and
temporal range of weather prediction products. These
improvements helped further stimulate the demand for
meteorological data from all sectors, and for regions of the globe
where the human presence has increased, including in the polar
regions. Therefore, meteorological data users and data providers
today comprise a large and heterogeneous group that includes,
government agencies beyond the National Meteorological Services,
national and international research programs, commercial
companies, non-profit entities from a variety of sectors, and
academic institutions. In parallel with these developments, growing
concerns about observed climate change and its anthropogenic
nature triggered large-scale investments in climate observations and
climate research. This led to a broader recognition of the fact that
Earth’s climate must be studied and understood as an integrated
system, encompassing not only the atmosphere but also the ocean
and the land surface, and the interactions between them, as well as
the need to better reflect the role of polar regions in the global
climate system. The WMO community therefore began to expand its
data exchange to areas beyond weather, climate and water data to
include domains such as atmospheric composition, oceanography,
the cryosphere and space weather. These developments, combined
with the practical need to ensure reliable and robust access to
weather and climate data for all nations, rich and poor, led to a
growing realization that it was becoming necessary to review and
update WMO’s data policy. As a result, in early 2020 WMO
launched an intense 18-month study of existing practices and needs,
and a broad consultation process that led to the adoption on
October 18, 2021, of the WMO Unified Data Policy as Resolution 1
of the Extraordinary Session of the World Meteorological Congress.
In keeping with the WMO’s strategic focus on adopting an
integrated Earth system approach to monitoring and prediction, the
Unifies Data policy integrated all WMO-relevant Earth system
discipline and domain areas under a single umbrella policy
statement.
WMO Unified Data Policy: what does it do?
The main text of Resolution 1 establishes the purpose, scope and
intent of the data exchange, while the annexes to the resolution
establish the practice to be followed by WMO members in
its implementation. Full implementation of the WMO Unified Data
Policy holds the promise of large benefits for all WMO stakeholders
and the entire global community.
Key characteristics of the new policy include:
• Integrated Earth system data policy. Encompassing all WMO-
relevant Earth system data: weather, climate, hydrology, ocean,
atmospheric composition, cryosphere and space weather.
• Clear commitment to free and unrestricted data exchange.
Clarifying the explicit and literal interpretation of the term ‘free and
unrestricted’ exchange and expressing clear organizational
commitment to it as the core principle of the policy.
• Expanded scope and purpose. Introducing new terminology on
data, replacing ‘essential’ and ‘additional’ data (Resolution 40) with
‘core’ data (standard practice, shall be exchanged) and
‘recommended’ data (best practice, should be exchanged). The
scope and purposes of core and recommended data, respectively,
are described in general terms for each domain or discipline.
• Call for subsequent implementation of policy via regulatory
material. Specific details of what data is to be considered core and
recommended will be included, and regularly updated, in the WMO
Technical Regulations.
Implementation
Full implementation of the sweeping intent behind the new data
policy will take years of commitment and dedicated effort. Once it
is fully implemented, the landmark Unified Data Policy will help all
WMO members to greatly expand and improve their monitoring and
prediction capabilities. A key innovative feature of the policy is its
focus on ensuring that WMO members in developing countries will
be able to reap the full benefits of the improved model products
that will result from the increased exchange of observational data.
Implementation of the WMO Unified Data Policy will offer members
a critical tool to help them meet some of the major challenges of
the 21st century, giving them vastly improved and much more
timely and reliable weather, climate, water and related
environmental data and information, in the context of Earth system
modeling, monitoring, and prediction. This in turn will support
informed decision making at all levels, which will help save lives,
protect property and foster economic prosperity, by providing a
better understanding of rapid changes in the global climate system
and their impact at different scales.
Global Basic Observing Network (GBON)
Whilst many regions provide a reliable feed of observational data,
some areas under-report or have a sub-optimal observing network
density. Recognizing the essential role played by these observations,
the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) decided to proceed
with the design of a Global Basic Observing Network (GBON),
which was approved by WMO members at the Extraordinary World
Meteorological Congress in 2021, as Resolution 2.
The provisions within the GBON design are based on up-to-date
observational requirements for global Numerical Weather
Prediction (NWP). Drawing on 20 years of NWP observational data
impact studies coordinated by WMO, the provisions specify – in
clear, quantitative terms – the obligations of WMO Members to
acquire and exchange these critically needed observations: which
parameters to measure, how often, at what horizontal and vertical
resolution, and which measurement techniques to use.
All of today’s quantitative weather forecast and climate analysis
products – even down to the finest local scales and immediate
“nowcasting” time ranges – ultimately rely on global-scale NWP.
This therefore acts as a backbone for everything that a modern
weather and climate service does.
Overall, the most significant impact of GBON is expected to be a
major strengthening of global observational data availability, with
all that will follow in terms of availability of better products
and services at global, regional, national and local levels. However,
with GBON come new, or at least more clearly articulated
obligations that will require additional effort by some WMO
Members. The sustained access to observations taken from stations
operated under the Antarctic Treaty System is an integral
component of meeting the goals of robust global NWP systems, and
WMO is committed to continue its support to facilitating the access
and the necessary engagements.
For further information please contact Rodica Nitu (rnitu@wmo.int)
in the first instance.
