Malaysia’s activities and achievements in Antarctic research and
diplomacy
Malaysia’s activities and achievements in Antarctic research and
diplomacy
Introduction
Malaysia is extremely honoured to be part of the 44th Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Berlin, Germany. This
meeting marks the eleventh (11th) time whereby Malaysia makes
its presence at this prestigious meeting since being a member of the
Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) in 2011. Malaysia is also pleased to
share the progress of its activities and achievements in its Antarctic
research and diplomacy.
Progress
To date, the Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation (SMARF),
which was established in July 2012 has disbursed and awarded:
36 Research Grants to Malaysian scientists;
13 Fellowships to young Malaysian scientists; and
12 Antarctic Berth Support to Malaysian scientists.
These awards are in line with the Foundation’s objective to promote
scientific research programmes in the Polar regions and to provide
as well as manage funding for research grants, post-graduate studies
and fellowship in scientific research in the Polar regions among
Malaysian scientists. Other than providing research grants,
fellowship and berth support, the Foundation continues to
undertake awareness programmes to promote the importance of the
Antarctic among school children and Malaysian public. The
programmes include Antarctica exhibitions, sharing sessions with
polar scientists, and various contests.
Through the grant and research support provided by SMARF, three
(3) Malaysian scientists have carried out field works in the
Antarctic as part of their research activities at the following
facilities during the 2021/2022 summer season as follow:
Field research at the Chilean facilities in Antarctica;
Field research at the United Kingdom facilities in Antarctica; and
Field research at the Korean facilities in Antarctica.
Field research at the Chilean facilities in Antarctica
One (1) Malaysian researcher visited and carried out field work at
the Bernardo O’Higgins Station in Antarctica for the third time to
continue her previous project. Her visit this time was made possible
under the collaboration between Universidad de Magallanes, Chile
and Centro de Investigación y Monitoreo Medio Ambiental
Antártico (CIMAA). Malaysia would like to thank Chile for the
opportunity given and continuous support to work at the Chilean
facilities in Antarctica. The collaborative project that our scientist
worked on was:
Scientist/Researcher
Research Title
Expedition Date
Station
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Siti Aqlima Ahmad
Third Stage of Bioreactor Design for Cold-adapted Bioremediation
of Antarctic Soils Contaminated with Diesel Hydrocarbons
2 March – 20 March
2022
Bernardo O’Higgins
Field research at the British Antarctic Survey facilities in Antarctica
One (1) Malaysian researcher visited and carried out field work at
the Rothera station in Antarctica. His visit was made possible
through the collaboration between the Foundation and British
Antarctic Survey (BAS) through the renewed Memorandum of
Understanding between both parties for another five (5) years
(2019-2024). During this field work, he collected some soil samples
and to be couriered to Malaysia for further analysis. Malaysia would
like to thank United Kingdom for the opportunity given to these
scientists to work at the British Antarctic Survey facilities in
Antarctica. The collaborative project that our researcher worked on
was:
Scientist/Researcher
Research Title
Expedition Date
Station
Dr. Wan Lutfi Wan Johari
Multi-omics Analysis of the Impacts of Climate Change and
Pollution on Nitrogen-fixing Microbial Communities.
16 February –
9 March 2022
Rothera
Field research at the Korean Polar Institute facilities in Antarctica
One (1) researcher from Malaysia visited and carried out field work
at the King Sejong Station in Antarctica. He is under co-supervision
of a researcher that received the KOPRI Antarctic Science
Fellowship 2019 which worked on the same project and was in the
same station in 2020. Malaysia would like to thank Korea for the
opportunity given to these scientists to work at the KOPRI facilities
in Antarctica. The collaborative projects that our scientists worked
on were:
Student
Research Title
Expedition Date
Station
Mr. Sulaiman Ali Mohammad
Understanding the Correlation Between Lightning Activities in
Antarctica Peninsula and Climate Change Effect
4 Feb – 1 March 2022
King Sejong
Diplomacy & Collaboration
The Chairmanship of Asian Forum on Polar Sciences (AFoPS) was
officially handed over to Malaysia on 1 November 2020. The term
of Chairmanship is for two years (2021-2022). Malaysia chaired the
Annual General Meeting (AGM) of AFOPS virtually in October 2021
and chaired a special meeting of AFoPS on 28 March 2022 that was
virtually held as business meeting under Arctic Science Summit
Week 2022 (ASSW). The meeting deliberated on the several items
including the update on expedition and operational plan, research
highlights, cooperation between other international organizations
and AFOPS, cooperative projects and research collaboration.
Through AFOPS, a Malaysian scientist benefited from Korea Polar
Research Institute (KOPRI) Antarctic Science Fellowship Program in
2020 and he is expected to undertake his field work at KOPRI
research station in 2021/2022 summer season as the expedition for
2020/2021 was cancelled due to Covid-19 pandemic. Next AGM of
AFoPS will be held on 20 October 2022 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
This will be the last AGM to be chaired by Malaysia before the
Chairmanship be transferred to Thailand for term of 2022-2023.
Malaysia is also honoured to inform at this meeting that in
conjunction with the 10th anniversary of the establishment of
SMARF, SMARF with the support from Ministry of Environment and
Water, Malaysia will organize a Polar Research Symposium on
18-19 October 2022 in Kuala Lumpur which will be held back-to-
back with AGM of AFoPS. This symposium will bring together local
and international Polar researchers to highlight latest findings and
achievements in Polar research and provide the platform to
promote scientific cooperation at regional level. The theme of the
symposium will be “Polar Regions as Legacy of Scientific
Cooperation.”
Malaysia, as an Observer of Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Program (COMNAP) will be participating at the
upcoming   XXXIV COMNAP AGM 2022. As a member of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Malaysia will
also be attending the 37th (XXXVII) SCAR Open Science Conference
from 1-10 August 2022 (to be held virtually) and SCAR Delegates’
Meeting from 5-7 September 2022 in Hyderabad, India.
National Governance
On the governance front, in order to implement its international
obligations under the Antarctic Treaty and Madrid Protocol,
Malaysia is in the final stages of drafting its national legislation on
Antarctica. The Antarctic Bill will be tabled in Parliament once the
necessary legal scrubbing process concludes.
Conclusion
Malaysia looks forward to a continuous active engagement in the
Antarctic Treaty development process.
