Research to inform CEP discussions about further development of
the Antarctic protected area system
Research to inform CEP discussions about further development of
the Antarctic protected area system
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Australian researchers are undertaking work to inform ongoing
discussions in the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP)
on further developing the Antarctic protected area system. The
work includes using relevant continent-wide scientific datasets and
contemporary conservation planning software to develop a suite of
example scenarios for how a series of terrestrial protected areas
might address the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V. Australia
will be pleased to keep the Committee updated on this work.
Background
Article 3.2 of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol states that
‘Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-
geographic framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas’ (ASPAs), areas with specified
characteristics and values. In accordance with Article 12(g) of the
Protocol, the CEP is responsible for providing advice and
formulating recommendations to Parties on ‘the operation and
further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Area system’.
The CEP has regularly expressed its desire to move towards a more
systematic and holistic approach to the further development of the
Antarctic protected areas system. It has recognised the importance
of drawing on the best available scientific information to inform its
work, and the important role played by the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR) in providing high quality, independent
scientific advice.
To support discussion and collaboration on these matters, SCAR and
the CEP held a joint workshop prior to CEP XXII (2019), on Further
Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System. A report on the
workshop outcomes was provided in ATCM XLII/WP70 and ATCM
XLII/IP165.
In its discussion of the workshop outcomes, the Committee
encouraged Members, SCAR and other Observers and Experts to
‘prioritise and support further research that will build on the
existing body of scientific evidence to support the further
development of the protected area system in accordance with
Article 3.2 of Annex V’ (CEP XXII Final Report, para. 182). The
workshop report lists datasets and other scientific information
identified during the workshop that might be drawn on to support
such work (Attachment B to ATCM XLII/IP165).
Outline of the research
Australian researchers are undertaking work intended to inform
CEP discussions about further developing the Antarctic protected
area system. This work is being undertaken by teams at the
Australian Antarctic Division, Monash University, the Queensland
University of Technology, and through the new Australian Research
Council Special Research Initiative Securing Antarctica’s
Environmental Future See https://arcsaef.com/ .
The research aims to identify a suite of example scenarios for how a
series of terrestrial ASPAs might address the provisions of Article
3.2 of Annex V. It involves acquiring and analysing relevant
scientific datasets, by using conservation planning software The
conservation planning software being used for this work is open
source and known as prioritizr. It is designed to help build and
solve conservation planning problems, by formulating a
mathematical optimisation problem and then solving it to generate
a solution. In this case, prioritizr is being used to identify possible
approaches to developing a series of ASPAs that address the
provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V. Further information about
prioritizr is available at: https://prioritizr.net/. to run optimisation
processes with a variety of input settings.
Continent-wide datasets being considered for use in the analyses
include:
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
Wauchope et al. (2019)
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions
Terauds et al. (2012); Terauds & Lee (2016)
Important Bird Areas
Harris et al. (2015)
Ice-free areas
Antarctic Digital Database; Lee et al. (2017)
Lakes and streams
Antarctic Digital Database
Human footprint
Brooks et al. (2019)
Wilderness and inviolate layers
Derived from Leihy et al. (2020)
Type Locality data
Phillips et al. (2022)
Geothermal hotspots
Fraser et al. (2014)
Biodiversity groups represented by species distribution modelling
data
Terauds et al. (in preparation 1)
Biodiversity groups represented by occurrence records
Terauds et al. (in preparation 2)
Ecosystem typologies, representing ‘habitats’ delineated by a suite
of environmental parameters
Toth et al. (in preparation)
The scenarios generated through the analysis will provide insight
into the influence of specific spatial layers (and the values they
represent) on the distribution and extent of potential future
protected areas.
Australia will be pleased to keep interested Members updated on
this work and, as appropriate, will bring forward further
information to future CEP meetings.
References
Antarctic Digital Database (https://www.add.scar.org/)
Brooks, S. T., Jabour, J., Van Den Hoff, J., & Bergstrom, D. M.
(2019). Our footprint on Antarctica competes with nature for rare
ice-free land. Nature Sustainability 2, 185-190.
Fraser, C. I, Terauds, A., Smellie, J., Convey, P., and Chown, S. L.
(2014) Geothermal activity helps life survive glacial cycles.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 111, 5634-5639.
Harris, C. M., Lorenz, K., Fishpool, L. D. C., et al. (2015) Important
Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015. Birdlife International and
Environmental Research and Assessment Ltd, Cambridge, UK.
Lee, J. R., Raymond, B., Bracegirdle, T. J., Chades, I., Fuller, R. A,
Shaw, J. D. & Terauds, A. (2017) Climate change drives expansion
of Antarctic ice-free habitat. Nature 547, 49-54.
Leihy, R. I., Coetzee, B. W. W., Morgan, F., Raymond, B., Shaw, J.
D., Terauds, A. Bastmeijer, K. & Chown, S. L. (2020) Antarctica’s
wilderness fails to capture continent’s biodiversity. Nature 583,
567-571.
Phillips, L. M., Leihy, R. I., & Chown, S. L. (2022). Improving
species‐based area protection in Antarctica. Conservation Biology
e13885, https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13885.
Terauds, A., & Lee, J. R. (2016) Antarctic biogeography revisited:
updating the Antarctic conservation biogeographic regions.
Diversity and Distributions 22, 836-840.
Terauds, A., Chown, S. L., Morgan, F., Peat, H. J., Watts, D. J., Keys,
H., Convey, P., & Bergstrom, D. M. (2012) Conservation
biogeography of the Antarctic. Diversity and Distributions 18,
726-741.
Terauds et al (in preparation 1) Drivers of biodiversity in Antarctica
Terauds et al (in preparation 2) Antarctic Biodiversity Database
Wauchope, H. S., Shaw, J. D., & Terauds, A. (2019). A snapshot of
biodiversity protection in Antarctica. Nature Communications 10,
1-6.
