UN Ocean Conference 2022 in Lisbon, Portugal
UN Ocean Conference 2022 in Lisbon, Portugal
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Sweden and WMO
Summary
In 2022, Portugal will be co-hosting – alongside Kenya – the second
UN Ocean Conference in support of the implementation of SDG14,
after constraints due to COVID-19. The Antarctic Treaty System has
the capacity and expertise to be one of the key contributors to the
success of the event.
Background
The Antarctic Treaty applies to the area south of 60ºS and has an
important role in sharing and promoting Antarctic research with the
World community, in accordance with Art. III of the Antarctic
Treaty (ATCM XLII/IP68). The United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Developments and its 17 Sustainable Development
Goals, the SDGs (2015), aim to address global challenges facing
humankind, including issues that overlap with some of the
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty (Ex. Art. I, II and III), such as
climate change (SDG13), water and ocean pollution (SDG6 and
SDG14) and gender equality (SDG5).
The 2022 UN Oceans Conference
Organized by Portugal and Kenya, the next UN Ocean Conference
will take place in Lisbon, between the 27th June and the 1st July
2022 (https://www.un.org/en/conferences/ocean2022). Apart from
the plenary meetings, the Conference will be holding interactive
dialogues which will address themes related to the different targets
under SDG 14, thus exploring the key role and potential that
partnerships between different actors have to bring about the
solutions supporting the full implementation of SDG 14 and other
Ocean-related SDGs. Another key outcome of the Conference will be
the adoption of an action-oriented political declaration, to be
focused on essential areas where solutions based on science and
innovation can perform a transformative role in addressing Ocean
challenges.
Because of its focus on ocean science and innovation, the 2022
Ocean Conference will be a unique event that will enable us to
continue raising global awareness to Ocean issues, establish new
partnerships and concrete solutions and create opportunities to
strengthen progress in the affirmation of the importance of a
sustainable blue economy, the implementation of SDG14 and the
conservation of our Ocean.
The UN Ocean Conference in 2022 will be an opportunity to get the
World one step closer to the realization of our commitments under
the 2030 Agenda and we are looking forward to welcoming
representatives of all States, at the highest possible level, as well as
all the interested stakeholders (private sector, academia and civil
society) including a wide range of ocean-relevant international
organizations.
