Energetic modernisation of the German Neumayer-Station III
Energetic modernisation of the German Neumayer-Station III
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Introduction
Climate change due to increased anthropogenic CO2 emissions is
one of the most important and increasingly obvious factors
influencing the state of the Antarctic environment. Reports like the
IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing
Climate and the updates provided by SCAR of its Antarctic Climate
Change and the Environment reportsee ATCM XLIV Agenda Item 16
and CEP XXIV Agenda Item 7 and SCAR Lecture at ATCM 2022
show that the climate of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean is
undergoing rapid change, which is expected to continue into the
future.
ATCM and CEP have over the last years adopted several
Resolutionse.g. Resolution 8 (2021) "Antarctica in Changing
Climate" and programmese.g. the CEP Climate Change Response
Work Programme in order to combat and mitigate climate change.
In the light of this, Germany has investigated the energetic
modernisation of the German Neumayer-Station III with a view to
increasing the utilisation of renewable energy sources, thereby
enhancing renewable energy technologies and reducing operational
costs.
1. Characteristic of Neumayer-Station III
Neumayer Station III is the third German research station to be
operated as a year-round station in Antarctica at about 70°35'S /
8°20'W on the Ekström shelf ice at the eastern exit of the Weddell
Sea near Atka BaySee https://www.awi.de/en/expedition/stations/
neumayer-station-iii.html . While the first two stations were built in
a tubular tunnel construction submerged into the shelf ice, a
fundamentally different construction principle has been
implemented since 2009 with the Neumayer Station III (NM III).
The station was built as a free-standing island station above a
roofed garage on top of the drifting ice shelf. As a result of snow
accumulation, the ground level at the site experiences an annual
elevation of approx. 100 cm. In order to avoid submersion, the
station building and all outdoor installations have to be lifted at
regular intervals. The corresponding technologies have been
developed. The NM III itself can be lifted via its 16 hydraulic stilts /
legs. For all other equipment, such as wind turbines, special lifting
and crane facilities are available at the station. All structures are
built on firn ice, which despite special foundations limits their
overall size and height (e.g. of new wind turbines).
2. Energetic modernisation of Neumayer-Station III
A modern energy concept was already developed and installed
during the construction of NM IIIXXXII ATCM IP 114: Neumayer
Station III Completion of construction and start of pilot operation in
February 2009. The energy efficiency of the diesel fuel used at NM
III was significantly increased compared to that of Neumayer-
Station II (NM II). Although the new station has more than twice as
much usable space as its predecessor and is also directly exposed to
the weather (i.e. wind and low temperatures), the additional
specific fuel requirement (litres/year/m²) is only about 54 percent
compared to NM II (see Table 2).
NM II in 2006
NM III averaged per year (2011 -2021)
Total consumption [litres]
190.152
242.020
Heated floor space [m²]
914
2.118
Specific consumption [litres/year/m²]
208
114
Table 2: Fuel consumption comparison Neumayer-Station II and
Neumayer-Station III
These favourable operating values are achieved in the combination
of:
- efficient energy management to utilise the electrical and thermal
energy of the combined heat and power plant (CHP) units;
- heat recovery from the exhaust air of the container modules and
the power station;
- use of a special wind turbine suitable for the specific Antarctic
conditions at NM III.
After 12 years of safe operation of the NM III station, the energy
technology is to be successively renewed in the coming years. After
a detailed inventory of the energy flows and requirements, a
feasibility study (FS) was carried out to assess the potential and
practicability of new alternative and environmentally friendly
technologies to be used under polar conditions. The main target
parameters of the subsequent optimisation investigations and
calculations were the CO2 emissions and the total annual costs. In
addition, the concept variables were dynamically simulated and
analysed in detail using a Transient System Simulation Tool
(TRNSYS), which allowed examination of concept variants and
expansion states as well as dedicated parameter studies.
3. Key statements of the feasibility study
Economic and environmental optimum: In order to achieve an
economic and environmental optimum when upgrading the
operating technology, a balance between available renewable
energy, thermal and electrical energy consumption and the
respective installation costs has to be achieved. In the case of NM
III, new combined heat and power plants (CHPs), additional wind
turbines, photovoltaic (PV) plants and thermal and electrical
storage systems are recommended.
A battery electrical storage system (BESS) and a heat storage
system: Both systems will primarily be used to optimise the running
time of the CHP units. The feature to shift energy quantities from
times of wind power generation to times of demand is very limited.
The evaluation of the available wind field around NM III shows that
the duration of lulls (times with small wind speeds or no wind)
would require a BESS in the MWh range to ensure a high level of
self-sufficiency of the station.
Power-to-heat technologies: With an increasing shift of the primary
energy source from fossil energy to renewable electrical energy, the
capacity of the heating register to generate thermal energy, to melt
snow and heat the building, needs to be increased.
Combined heat and power plants: In order to provide a safe energy
supply, the provision of thermal and electrical energy from CHP
units will continue. However, 2 module sizes are used in order to
cover the energy demand (above the yield generated by renewable
energy) adequately.
General: With increasing contribution of renewable energy, the
electric power demand in the system increases, whereas the share of
CHP units in covering the heat demand decreases from approx.
100% to a maximum of 56%. The heat demand is covered by
power-to-heat technologies (e.g. electric heating coils) and no
longer only by recuperating the waste heat from the CHP units. The
share of renewable energy in the total electricity demand increases
from currently 5% to up to 73% (depending on the chosen options
and configuration levels).
4. Start of upgrade
The feasibility study clearly showed that the wind turbine is the
most important component of the conversion to renewable energy
production at NM III. For this purpose, a suitable Vertical Axis Wind
Turbine VAWT was identified on the market and modernised for
polar operation. In addition to replacing adhesives and resins in the
generator and using steel suitable for use in low-temperatures, the
characteristic power curve of the turbines was adapted to the actual
air density conditions at NM III. The turbine proved its suitability
during a trial run in a climate-controlled test chamber.
In order to compensate for the annual increase in snow level of
around 100 cm, the wind turbine has to be raised once a year. The
new design of the foundation in the snow/firn and the mast ensures
this process.
It is planned to test the operation of the new wind turbine plant,
which has the nominal power of P=50 kW, after its installation in
January 2023 for at least one year.
The implementation of further steps in the energetic modernisation
of NM III are planned once the new wind turbine has demonstrated
its reliability in the test operation.
