Detection of a non-native species of Diptera in the Elephant Refuge,
ASPA 132, King George Island
Detection of a non-native species of Diptera in the Elephant Refuge,
ASPA 132, King George Island
Information Paper submitted by Argentina and Uruguay
Summary
One of the most notorious invasions in Antarctica is that of the
Diptera Trichocera maculipennis (Meigen, 1818). This species was
recorded for the first time in 2006 on the Fildes Peninsula and later,
in the Antarctic summer of 2017/2018, a joint monitoring
programme for this species was started on King George Island. As a
result of this monitoring programme, the presence of this species
has been detected for the first time within the Elephant Refuge
(62°15'18.1''S; 58°37'56.2'W), located within ASPA 132 on King
George Island.
Introduction
The problem of the introduction of non-native species has been
growing in importance in Antarctica, conditioned by the impacts of
climate change and by the increase in the number of people who
travel to Antarctica for different types of activities (science, logistics
and tourism) and act as possible vectors for the transfer of species
to Antarctica (Hughes et al., 2015; Hughes et al., 2019, McCarthy et
al., 2018). Non-Native Species are currently the threat with the
highest priority in the work plans of the Committee for
Environmental Protection (Five-Year Plan) as well as in the Work
Plan of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR).
Since 2006, the presence has been detected in areas near waste
water treatment plants of the winter crane fly Trichocera
maculipennis (Volonterio et al., 2013; Remedios De León, 2019). Its
presence has been observed at research stations on King George
Island (ATCM XL - WP 26). This situation gave rise to a joint
international work programme with the aim of managing this non-
native fly. The coordinated actions implemented were the
installation of sticky traps inside the facilities to identify population
trends throughout the year, pitfall traps around the stations to
assess the presence of the species beyond the limits of these
stations, and ultraviolet light traps to eliminate adult individuals as
a control measure (Remedios De León et al., 2021). This programme
was later extended to more bases and included the Carlini Base,
which monitors the presence of this species in the base’s facilities.
Figure 1: photographic record of the specimen found in the
Elephant Refuge.
Figure 1: photographic record of the specimen found in the
Elephant Refuge.
Detection of the Non-Native Species
On 24 February 2022, the presence of a specimen of a possible
“non-native species” of insect (Diptera) was detected in the kitchen-
dining room of the Elephant Refuge (62°15'18.1''S; 58°37'56.2''W),
within ASPA 132 – Potter Cove. Immediately, the scientific staff of
the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) informed the staff of the
Environmental Management and Tourism Programme (PGAyT) of
the National Antarctic Directorate (DNA) of the episode to
coordinate the measures to be taken. Scientific staff were informed
of the provisions of the Response Protocol (2019) and the
precaution was taken, until further information could be obtained,
of considering the observed species as an NNS.
This decision was based on the fact that, as established in document
ATCM XXXIII - WP 15, there is a high probability of a transfer of
winged insects through human activities. As stated in the
aforementioned paper, winged insects can probably survive in
Antarctica for more than just a few days if they are found in
research station buildings.
Immediate response
PGAyT staff asked the station staff to collect all the information
established in the “Non-mandatory Response Protocol for
implementation upon discovery of a potential non-native species
introduced inadvertently to the Antarctic Treaty area” (ATCM XLII
WP034). Photographs of the specimen were received (Figure 1) and
this material was immediately sent to the staff of the Antarctic
Programme of Uruguay so that, through consultations with their
specialists, they could determine the species detected. From the
analysis of the photographs sent, it was provisionally determined
that they featured the species Trichocera maculipennis (Meigen,
1818) (Diptera: Trichoceridae), the non-native species that is being
monitored on the island. The specimen was found flying inside the
refuge and was captured by the scientific staff. A few days later, as
an initial eradication measure, a search for the presence of other
specimens was carried out and then a trap was placed inside the
refuge and an intensive search was carried out for other
specimens of the species in the areas near the refuge. In turn, the
material will be sent from the Carlini Base so that it can finally be
catalogued by the scientific staff working on this monitoring
programme.
Long-term actions
Incorporate the site as a new sample-taking point in the permanent
monitoring programme, by installing sticky traps inside the refuge
and pitfall traps in the refuge’s surroundings.
Reinforce the use of the checklists for supply chain managers of
National Antarctic Programmes for the reduction in risk of transfer
of non-native species (ATCM XLII - WP 50). Permanent monitoring
will be important to assess whether the species is detected at the
nearby Carlini Base, and because it has already been proven that
using only a single eradication measure has hitherto not been
successful. In this sense, it will be necessary to implement an
exhaustive Monitoring Plan at the aforementioned station for early
detection of the presence of Trichocera maculipennis.
Conclusions
Non-native species discovered in the Antarctic Treaty Area may be
imported anthropogenic species (associated with human activities).
According to Annex II of the Protocol, species introduced by
humans must be eradicated, while natural populations and long-
term residents must be protected.
The detection in the Elephant Refuge of a potential and later
confirmed non-native species (Trichocera maculipennis), was
notified to the national authorities and this made it possible to
coordinate the necessary tasks for an immediate response,
immediate eradication, preservation and identification of
specimens, and initial control of the site of detection. The main task
is the establishment of mitigation measures that will be
incorporated into the logistic procedures to avoid the introduction
of this or other species to the Carlini Base, which is close to the
refuge. As previously mentioned, this record confirms that the
species continues to expand its range on the island, at least since its
original recording in Maxwell Bay in 2006.
For this reason, it is essential to adjust and promote long-term
eradication measures, since the continuous expansion of this species
through successful reproduction over time, which has allowed it to
expand its distribution range in Antarctica, demonstrates that non-
native species constitute a growing threat to the diversity of one of
the most isolated regions on earth.
Bibliography
Hughes KA, Pertierra LR, Molina-Montenegro M, Convey P. 2015.
Biological invasions in Antarctica: what is the current status and
can we respond? Biodiversity Conservation 24:1031-1055.
Hughes KA, Convey P, Pertierra LR, Vega GC, Aragón P, Olalla-
Tárraga MA (2019) Human-mediated dispersal of terrestrial species
between Antarctic biogeographic regions: a preliminary risk
assessment. Journal of Environmental Management 232:73–89.
McCarthy, A.H., Peck, L.S., Hughes, K.A., & Aldridge, D.C. (2019).
Antarctica: the final frontier for marine biological invasions. Global
Change Biology, 25(7), 2221-2241.
ATCM XXXIII - CEP XIII Punta del Este (2010) - WP 15. Guidance
for visitors and environmental managers following the discovery of
a suspected non-native species in the terrestrial and freshwater
Antarctic environment.
ATCM XL - CEP XX Beijing (2017) - WP 26. Inter-Parties’ Action
Plan to Manage the Non-Native Flies in King George Island, South
Shetland Islands.
ATCM XLII - CEP XXII Prague (2019) - WP 34. Non-native Species
Response Protocol.
ATCM XLII - CEP XXII Prague (2019) - WP 34. Review and Update
of the “Checklists for supply chain managers of National Antarctic
Programmes for the reduction in risk of transfer of non-native
species”.
Remedios De León ML., & Morelli Mazzeo ER. (2019). Invadiendo el
continente blanco. Presencia de Trichocera maculipennis (Diptera:
Trichoceridae) en la Antártida. Boletín de la Sociedad Entomológica
Argentina, 2019, 30 (2): 12-14.
Remedios De León ML. Hughes KA, Morelli E, Convey P (2021)
International Response under the Antarctic Treaty System to the
Establishment of a Non-native Fly in Antarctica. Journal of
Environmental Management 67:1043–1059.
Volonterio O, Ponce de León R, Convey P, Krzeminska E (2013)
First record of Trichoceridae (Diptera) in the maritime Antarctic.
Polar Biology 36:1125–1131.
