Preparation of the 45th Meeting
Helsinki, 2023
Preparation of the 45th Meeting
Helsinki, 2023
Information paper submitted by Finland
With reference to the Final Report of ATCM 42 in Prague 2019 para
119 which states
“(119)...The Meeting encouraged all upcoming ATCM Host
Countries to submit a progress report to the ATCM in the form of an
IP a year in advance, and for upcoming Host Countries to provide
regular progress reports to the Secretariat. It also agreed that this
suggestion should be included in the Organisational Manual that
the Secretariat routinely provided to upcoming Host Countries...”,
Finland wishes to inform about its preparations for the 45th
Meeting in Helsinki in 2023.
Finland regrets that, due to the outbreak of the global Covid-19
pandemic, it was obliged to cancel the ATCM XLIII in Helsinki in
2020. We are very grateful for receiving a new opportunity to host
the ATCM in Finland in 2023. We would like to give special thanks
to India for good cooperation and agreeing to us to host the
meeting next year. Finland looks very much forward to the 45th
ATCM as our first opportunity to bear our responsibilities as a
Treaty partner. We are obviously able to take advantage of the
planning and arrangements we already had in place for 2020 and
therefore the preparations are proceeding well. We would also wish
to express our appreciation for the good cooperation which has
already been established with the German Host Country Secretariat
which will further feed into our preparations in a fruitful manner.
The Meeting will take place in Helsinki from 29 May to 8 June
2023. We have chosen the Scandic Marina Congress Center which is
located right in the center of Helsinki, as the venue of the Meeting.
A block reservation will be made at hotels nearby and further
details will be provided in due course. The host country website
will be opened later this year.
The structures of the Meeting (ATCM Chair, ATCM Deputy
Secretary/Head of Host Country Secretariat, Head of Delegation)
outlined in the Antarctic Treaty Secretariats’ Organisational Manual
have been largely determined. The funding for the Meeting and for
the personnel required is secured. The Finnish Ministry for Foreign
Affairs bears the overall responsibility for organising the Meeting
although it will be supported by different service providers. Finland
will pay special attention to sustainability in the arrangements of
the meeting. We will stay in close contact with the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat and will give regular briefings on the further
preparations for the Meeting.
Finland proposes to add a topical session to the agenda of the 45th
ATCM to enhance and support harmonized implementation of the
IMO Polar Code in waters around both Poles. More information on
the session will follow in due time.
Finland would like to offer a review of its Antarctic and polar
activities and present the Meeting location in a short film, which
will be shown at the ATCM in Berlin under item 18 of the agenda
after a short oral introduction on our Meeting preparations. The
film will subsequently also be accessible to the public.
Finland is looking forward to the ATCM 2023 in Helsinki and we
would like to take this opportunity to cordially invite you to the
Meeting.
