A classification system of Antarctic inland aquatic ecosystems
A classification system of Antarctic inland aquatic ecosystems
An information paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
Ecological classification is the classification of land or water into
units that represent variation. They can be used to support
environmental management by grouping units with similar
characteristics and hence management needs. A recent study
(Hawes et al., 2021) developed a classification of lentic Lentic
aquatic ecosystems refers to those with standing or still water such
as ponds or lakes. aquatic ecosystems (ponds and lakes) in the
McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA).
Aquatic ecosystems have the potential to be highly sensitive to
human activities through physical disturbance, contamination and
the introduction of non-native species, and to climate variability.
The lentic water body classes were assessed against these factors to
identify the sensitivity of the different water bodies to support
prioritised environmental management needs.
Aquatic ecosystems are recognised as biodiversity hotspots yet are
under-represented in the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)
network (Howard-Williams et al., 2021). It is suggested that the
classification process used here could be applied to other lentic
aquatic environments elsewhere in Antarctica to support enhanced
management.
Classification of aquatic ecosystems
Using a mixture of remote sensing and existing cartography, over
6,000 ponds and lakes were identified in the McMurdo Dry Valleys
ASMA and then classified using a top down hierarchical system to
define 13 class separations based on physical attributes. Rivers and
stream ecosystems were excluded from the classification as existing
remote sensing imagery was not adequate to allow for identification
of active stream channels.
The first hierarchical level was classified based on landscape
(topographic vs. kettle holes). Kettle holes (water bodies on
glacially derived, thermokast formation) were separated from
topographic water bodies as a distinct subset due to their high
density, small size and occupation of recent, dynamic glacial
terrain. The second hierarchical level was classified on catchment
morphology (exorheic or endorheic Exorheic refers to water bodies
with an outflow and endorehic refers to water bodies with no
outflows.), the third hierarchical level on summer ice conditions
(open water, ice capped, or frozen to the base) and the fourth
hierarchical level on the source of water inflow (glacier fed or non-
glacier fed) (Figure 1). The classification was tested against existing
information on water chemistry and microbial biodiversity and,
where data was sufficient for statistical evaluation, class separations
were found to reflect ecological differences.
Level
Criterion
1
Landscape
Topographic
Kettle
2
Catchment Type
Endorheic
Exorheic
3
Summer Ice Cover
Open Water
Ice capped
Frozen to base
Open Water
Ice Capped
Frozen to base
Open water
Ice capped
4
Water Source
Non-Glacial
Non-Glacial
Glacial
Non-Glacial
Glacial
Non-Glacial
Glacial
Non-Glacial
Glacial
Non-Glacial
Glacial
CODE
TOP-END-OW-NG
TOP-END-ICE-NG
TOP-END-ICE-GL
TOP-END-FRO-NG
TOP-END-FRO-GL
TOP-EXO-OW-NG
TOP-EXO-OW-GL
TOP-EXO-ICE-NG
TOP-EXO-ICE-GL
TOP-EXO-FRO-NG
TOP-EXO-FRO-GL
KET- OW
KET-ICE
Figure 1: Top down classification of lentic water bodies based on
four hierarchical levels (Hawes et al., 2021).
Aquatic ecosystem sensitivity and ASMA management objectives
Water is a limiting resource in the McMurdo Dry Valleys and, where
present, provides for hot spots of microbial biodiversity and
ecosystem productivity in an otherwise extreme desert environment
(Vincent and James, 1996). Aquatic ecosystems have the potential
to be highly sensitive to human activities through physical
disturbance, contamination and the introduction of non-native
species, and to climate variability. The classification of lentic water
bodies in the McMurdo Dry Valleys was assessed against these
factors to identify the relative sensitivity of the different water
bodies and compared with management actions available in the
ASMA management plan (Figure 2). Prioritisation (low, medium
and high) included consideration of abundance, rarity and
representativeness of the aquatic ecosystem.
These considerations can be used to inform future research and
logistical operations while ensuring adequate protection of
wilderness and biodiversity values. Noting these ecosystems and
environments are dynamic, the sensitivity and management
response will likely need to be reviewed and adapted over time,
supported by monitoring and assessments and increased knowledge
and understanding of these sites.
Figure 2: Relative prioritisation of ecosystem sensitivities and ASMA
management actions by lentic water body class.
Applicability to wider area protection
Although freshwater ecosystems are recognised biodiversity
hotspots and are sensitive to human activities, only 2 of the 72
ASPA management plans explicitly identify freshwater values as the
primary reason for designation (Howard-Williams et al., 2021). 34
of them are known to include freshwater ecosystems, but often by
virtue of their inclusion within identified boundaries with little
thought of their representativeness, importance or management
requirements.
A classification system, using similar principles to the ones
developed here, may provide a systematic approach to prioritisation
of aquatic ecosystems for protection in ice free areas across the
Antarctic continent. It is acknowledged that the geographic settings
and geological mechanisms for formation of aquatic ecosystems and
catchment characteristics in other areas
will be different to the McMurdo Dry Valleys, so any classification
will need to accommodate local features.
A freshwater classification system in each Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region (ACBR) (Resolution 6 (2012)) could be
considered to assist in identifying areas for protection, particularly
since freshwater ecosystems are currently under represented.
References
Hawes, I., Howard-Williams, C., Gilbert, N. and Joy, K. 2021.
Towards an environmental classification of lentic aquatic
ecosystems in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica. Environmental
Management 67: 600-622.
Howard-Williams, C., Hawes, I. and Gilbert, N. 2021. Why do so
few Antarctic Specially Protected Areas protect inland waters?
(Editorial). Antarctic Science 33: 231-232.
Vincent, W.F., and James, M.R. 1996. Biodiversity in extreme
aquatic environments: lakes, ponds and streams of the Ross Sea
Sector, Antarctica. Biological Conservation 5: 1451-1471.
