Australian Antarctic Science Program 2021-22
Australian Antarctic Science Program 2021-22
Summary
Australia operated a successful science program in 2021-22. Nearly
50 projects were supported, across multiple disciplines and through
strong collaboration with Australian and international research
programs and institutions. Research highlights include the arrival of
Australia’s new icebreaker RSV Nuyina and the testing and
commissioning of science systems; fieldwork to support projects on
climate processes and change, Southern Ocean ecosystems and
environment protection and management; and the publication of a
number of significant papers. Australia has commenced the
development of a decadal plan for Antarctic science that will set out
priority science questions and research priorities. The Australian
Antarctic Science Program continues to benefit enormously from
national and international research and operational collaborations.
Overview
The Australian Antarctic Science Program (the program) is made up
of Australian Government agencies and Australian and international
universities and research institutions. In 2021/22 the program
undertook 49 science projects across multiple disciplines. More than
50 per cent of these projects included international collaborations
across 22 countries. The science program continues to benefit
enormously from national and international research and
operational collaborations.
The program has a strong focus on research designed to inform the
protection and management of Antarctica. This includes research
that contributes to understanding and addressing regional and
global issues through international organisations such as the
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM), the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), International
Whaling Commission (IWC), and Agreement on the Conservation of
Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP).
The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) of the Department of
Agriculture, Water and the Environment, leads, manages and
coordinates the Australian Antarctic Science Program. Public
summaries of all science projects, past and present, are available on
the AAD website.
Research Highlights 2021 - 2022
In the 2021-22 season, the AAD took receipt of the new icebreaker
RSV Nuyina, and undertook commissioning trials that included
Antarctic resupply and marine science operations. Nuyina
demonstrated the effectiveness of its acoustic instrumentation for
seafloor mapping, successfully caught live krill in its ‘wet well’
facility and deployed conductivity, temperature and depth (CTD)
sensors through its ‘moon pool’. Through the use of the ship’s
acoustic facilities, seafloor mapping in Vincennes Bay revealed a
significant and previously undiscovered canyon at the front of the
Vanderford Glacier in East Antarctica. The science capabilities of
RSV Nuyina will allow the program to support a greatly enhanced
marine science research effort over the life of the vessel.
The AAD acoustics team used Nuyina’s multibeam echosounders to
map more than 840 square kilometres of the seafloor in front of the
Vanderford Glacier, following a canyon more than 55 kilometres
long, and 2200 metres deep at the deepest point mapped (in
purple). Hydrographic Material reproduced with permission of The
Australian Hydrographic Office © Commonwealth of Australia
2022.
Significant field programs included the multi-national collaborative
project Old-growth mosses as proxies for past Antarctic climates,
which utilised ‘moss cores’ as proxies for climate change.
Researchers from Australia, New Zealand, Chile and the Czech
Republic are collaborating on this project, which included field-
work from Casey research station in the 2021-22 season utilising
drone technologies for data collection. The first fieldwork for the
Securing Antarctica’s Environmental Future (SAEF) project, led by
Monash University was also commenced, with the collection of rock
samples at Haupt Nunataks and Browning Peninsula, lake samples
throughout the Windmill Islands and soil samples at Browning
Peninsula to inform studies of climate processes and change and
biodiversity status and trends. Field activities also included an
episodic retrieval of ice core material from Law Dome, providing for
ongoing updates of this climate record now stretching more than 30
years from recovery of the original core.
Marine science projects throughout the period included the retrieval
of a Krill Observation Mooring for Benthic Investigations (KOMBI)
in support of an ongoing sustainable krill fishery management
project and the retrieval and redeployment of passive whale
acoustic recorders (in support of the Conservation and management
of Australian and Antarctic whales project). These underwater
moorings are deployed for many months at a time, and collect data
that provides important insights into the distribution and
abundance of krill and whales. These data and associated insights
are used in the preparation of submissions to CCAMLR on krill
biomass and krill predators and the IWC on the status of Southern
Ocean whales.
A number of significant manuscripts were published during the
period, with highlights including:
the seminal work of Australian Bureau of Meteorology and
Australian Antarctic Division scientists to document changes in
Antarctic coastal exposure over the past four decades [1]
insights into Eastern Australian Climate risk, from analysis of the
Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation over the last 2000 years - a
collaboration between researchers from the University of
Tasmania’s Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of
Newcastle and Australian Antarctic Division [2]
population modelling of emperor penguins led by the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute in the United States with contributions
from the Australian Antarctic Division, that suggest the species will
become “quasi-extinct” by 2100 if sea ice declines as projected [3]
a paper co-authored by the Australian Antarctic Division, with
contributions from further collaborators in Australia, New Zealand
and the United States on observations of the Antarctic ozone hole
through 2020 to 2021. Their research showed a significantly larger
daily hole area than the previous year, with the findings linked to
low temperatures in the Antarctic lower stratosphere [4]
a study led by scientists from the Institute for Antarctic and Marine
Studies at the University of Tasmania and the Australian Antarctic
Division assessed climate change impacts on habitats that are
known to be important for krill growth. The study found that there
were shifts in seasonal timing of habitat quality, and that regions
likely to experience declines in habitat quality were concentrated
near the northern limits of krill distribution [5].
Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan Update
Australia has reviewed and updated its Australian Antarctic
Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan (the Strategy and Action Plan),
first released in 2016. The Strategy and Action Plan sets out
Australia’s Antarctic interests and vision for future engagement in
Antarctica and the update further strengthens Australia’s scientific
capabilities in the region.
New measures in the Strategy and Action Plan expand Australia’s
scientific capability, including for:
research focused on Antarctic ice sheet science to build global
understanding of climate change impacts;
marine science in the Southern Ocean and a new state-of-the-art
krill aquarium in Hobart;
Australia’s new icebreaker, RSV Nuyina, to focus on extended
scientific voyages by providing logistical shipping support; and
new research to improve our understanding of Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean’s role in the global climate system by expanding
Australia’s logistical capability, including new longrange helicopters
and autonomous vehicles.
Antarctic Science Strategic and Decadal Plans
Australia has commenced the development of a decadal plan for
Antarctic science that will set out priority science questions and
research priorities. The decadal plan will deliver on the Australian
Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan and builds on the
Antarctic Science Strategic Plan (Attachment 1). The decadal plan
for Antarctic science is expected to be completed by the end of
2022.
Major Ongoing Research Partnerships
In addition to the Antarctic research led by the Australian Antarctic
Division, Australia has three major Antarctic research partnerships
to deliver integrated and collaborative science under the Australian
Antarctic Science Strategic Plan:
Australian Antarctic Program Partnership – includes the University
of Tasmania with partners from the Australian Antarctic Division
and agencies with Antarctic research interests. This program
focusses on improving the understanding of the role of Antarctica
and the Southern Ocean within the global climate system and its
implication for marine ecosystems. It has a strong focus on teaching
and early career researcher development.
Excellence in Antarctic Science Special Research Initiative
(Australian Research Council):
Securing Antarctica’s Environmental Future (led by Monash
University) – this is an international research program with
interdisciplinary science focussed on climate processes and change,
biodiversity status and trends, and supporting environmental
stewardship.
Australian Centre for Excellence in Antarctic Science (led by
University of Tasmania): this program conducts research into
changes that are happening in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean
and the impact those changes are having on the global climate
system.
Australian Antarctic Science Program Research Priorities
The Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan guides the
development and operations of the program in alignment with the
plan’s research priorities. These include four thematic areas:
Environmental protection and management
Ice, ocean, atmosphere and earth systems
Human presence and activities in Antarctica
Digital integration
There are two major ongoing projects within these theme areas.
Million Year Ice Core: Australia continues its progress towards
drilling a deep ice core at Little Dome C (some 30 km south of
Dome C and Concordia Station (Italy/France)). During December
2021, coordinates for the million-year drill site were finalised, with
analysis of the location indicating undisturbed ice that will provide
a record likely to extend back 1.4 million years in age. In December
2021, Australia conducted the first operational testing of the
million-year ice core drill in Antarctica.
Krill Research: Analysis of krill biomass resulting from the TEMPO
expedition in March 2021 has continued, including observations
resulting from the KOMBI moorings in support of an ongoing
sustainable krill fishery management project. Research on krill
reproduction, development and physiology, and the response of
krill to the effects of climate change remain a high priority for the
Australian Antarctic Science Program and the Australian Antarctic
Division. This research contributes to Australia’s engagement in
CCAMLR and in particular the work of its Scientific Committee.
References
Reid, P. A., & Massom, R. A. (2022). Change and variability in
Antarctic coastal exposure, 1979–2020. Nature
Communications, 13(1), 1-11.
Vance, T. R., Kiem, A. S., Jong, L. M., Roberts, J. L., Plummer, C. T.,
Moy, A. D., ... & van Ommen, T. D. (2022). Pacific decadal
variability over the last 2000 years and implications for climatic
risk. Communications Earth & Environment, 3(1), 1-9.
Jenouvrier, S., Che-Castaldo, J., Wolf, S., Holland, M., Labrousse, S.,
LaRue, M., Wienecke, B., Fretwell, P., Barbraud, C., Greenwald, N.,
Stroeve, J., & Trathan, P.N. (2021). The call of the emperor
penguin: Legal responses to species threatened by climate change.
Global Change Biology, 27(20), 5008-5029
Stone, K. A., Klekociuk, A. R., & Schofield, R. (2021). Future
changes in stratospheric quasi-stationary wave-1 in the extratropical
southern hemisphere spring and summer as simulated by ACCESS-
CCM. Journal of Southern Hemisphere Earth Systems
Science, 71(2), 181-193.
Veytia, D., Corney, S., Meiners, K. M., Kawaguchi, S., Murphy, E. J.,
& Bestley, S. (2020). Circumpolar projections of Antarctic krill
growth potential. Nature Climate Change, 10(6), 568-575.
