A Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Science
and Innovation of the Kingdom of Spain and the Scientific and
Technological Research Council of Turkey
A Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Science
and Innovation of the Kingdom of Spain and the Scientific and
Technological Research Council of Turkey
Information Paper submitted by Spain and Turkey
Summary
This paper gives information about the signing of a Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) between “the Ministry of Science and
Innovation (MCIN) of the Kingdom of Spain” and “the Scientific and
Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK)” within the
context of cooperation on polar sciences and logistics.
Introduction
The signing process of the MoU between the MCIN and the
TUBITAK has been completed on behalf of the Parties on November
17, 2021 by the signatures of H.E. Jose Manuel ALBARES BUENO,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation and
H.E. Mustafa VARANK, Minister of Industry and Technology. The
signing ceremony was held at the Presidential Complex in Ankara
during the “Turkey-Spain 7th Intergovernmental Summit” in the
presence of President Recep Tayyip ERDOĞAN and President Pedro
SANCHEZ of the Government of Spain with the participation of the
relevant ministers.
In the context of developing, promoting and strengthening the
cooperation in the area of polar research, based on equality and
mutual benefit the MCIN and the TUBITAK within the framework of
this MoU express a common interest to reinforce the cooperation
between Participants to jointly develop a close working relationship
in the fields of polar sciences and logistics.
The main aims of this MoU include cooperation in the study of
polar sciences by coordinating and sharing resources and data,
coordination of mutual intellectual activities to enable more
efficient operations and better utilization of resources and exploring
opportunities for cooperation and collaboration in polar logistics.
The priority areas of cooperation under this MoU include
facilitation of the exchange of personnel and data, integration of
research programs and cooperation in polar logistics. The
cooperation between the Participants will be carried out through
the exchange of early career researchers, access to the other
Country’s Antarctic infrastructures, international joint projects,
interaction for joint initiatives in international forums and
organization of joint polar expeditions.
The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey would
like to thank the Ministry of Science and Innovation of the Kingdom
of Spain for this opportunity. Such cooperation is extremely
important for both Participants in their aspiration to provide high
quality polar research to address global issues for the benefit of
mankind and to strengthen international cooperation in the field of
science and logistics.
The Spanish Polar Committee of the Ministry of Science and
Innovation express his grateful to TUBITAK to mutual collaboration
according its commitment to promote the scientific and logistic
collaboration in polar regions.
