Davis Aerodrome Project: Decision by Australia not to proceed, and
knowledge gained of the Vestfold Hills environment
Davis Aerodrome Project: Decision by Australia not to proceed, and
knowledge gained of the Vestfold Hills environment
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Australia has decided not to proceed with a proposal to construct
and operate a paved runway near Davis research station in the
Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica (the Davis Aerodrome Project),
following careful consideration of the likely environmental impact,
cost and complexity of the project. Consequently, Australia will not
complete a draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for
circulation to Parties and the Committee for Environmental
Protection. Significant progress had been made on assessing the
environmental values of the Vestfold Hills and potential impacts of
the proposal, informed by a range of subject matter experts and
several seasons of detailed field investigations. The enhanced
knowledge of the environment at the project site and surrounding
region developed through these efforts will support Australia’s
commitment to best practice environmental stewardship in
Antarctica, including through the rigorous planning, assessment and
conduct of future activities, and consideration of options for
ongoing and enhanced environmental protection and management
in the region.
Background
The 2016 Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan
included a commitment to investigate yearround aviation access
between Australia and Antarctica See ATCM XXXIX/IP111
Australian Antarctic Strategy and Action Plan (Australia). At ATCM
XLII (2019) Australia informed Parties about plans to construct a
paved runway near Davis research station in the Vestfold Hills,
East Antarctica (Figure 1), subject to environmental and other
approvals See ATCM XLII/IP089 Modernisation of Australia’s
Antarctic Program (Australia). The proposal recognised that the
Australian Antarctic Program (AAP) and other national Antarctic
programs have increasingly used aviation capabilities to support
their own and joint scientific and logistics operations, and that year-
round aviation access would considerably enhance the aviation
capability available to the AAP and other national Antarctic
programs that Australia works closely with in East Antarctica.
At CEP XXIII (2021) Australia submitted ATCM XLIII/IP102
Preparation of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the
proposed construction and operation of an aerodrome near
Australia’s Davis research station (the Davis Aerodrome Project).
The paper reported that the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD)
was undertaking planning activities for a proposal to construct and
operate a paved, all-weather runway in Antarctica, near Davis
research station (the Davis Aerodrome Project). It further noted that
the proposal would be subject to the highest level of environmental
scrutiny, including through the preparation and circulation of a
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) in accordance with
the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty.
Figure 1. Location of Australia’s Davis research station, Vestfold
Hills, East Antarctica
Decision not to proceed with the Davis Aerodrome Project
In November 2021 Australia decided not to proceed with the Davis
Aerodrome Project, following careful consideration of the likely
environmental impact, cost, and complexity of the lengthy
construction process. Year-round access to Antarctica remains a
worthy goal, but its value must be assessed against other
opportunities to support Australia’s Antarctic engagement. While
significant progress had been made on the environmental impact
assessment process for the Davis Aerodrome Project, Australia will
not complete the preparation of a draft CEE for circulation to
Parties and the Committee for Environmental Protection.
Enhanced knowledge of the Vestfold Hills environment
In keeping with Australia’s commitment to best practice
environmental stewardship in Antarctica, the planning for the Davis
Aerodrome Project involved significant efforts to understand the
environmental values and sensitivities of the area and address the
environmental impacts of the proposal to the highest standards. A
range of Antarctic environmental subject matter experts were
engaged to provide advice and input into the development of the
draft CEE. To establish a comprehensive understanding of the initial
environmental reference state and inform the assessment of
potential impacts, there was a thorough process to compile and
analyse existing scientific data, and a dedicated program of field
data collection each season from 2016/17 to 2021/22.
The project-specific field investigations included collection of
samples, quantitative data, and images from well over 1000
terrestrial, freshwater and marine locations in the Vestfold Hills
region, both in proximity to the project site and further afield.
Consistent with the requirements of Annex I to the Environmental
Protocol, and the guidance presented in the Guidelines for
Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica, these activities
aimed to systematically and thoroughly characterise the pre-activity
state of the environment across all locations that might have been
impacted.
The investigations considered biological features and processes that
could have been affected directly or indirectly including, for
example: lake and soil ecology (Figure 2); nearshore marine
environment (Figure 3); seals; seabirds (flying birds, cavity nesting
birds, penguins); cetaceans; and flora. The investigations also
considered physical features and processes, such as: terrain and
topography; coastal processes and sea ice; geology and soil;
landscape, aesthetics and wilderness; air quality; noise /
soundscape; weather; and heritage.
These detailed investigations have greatly increased understanding
of the terrestrial, freshwater and marine environment in the
Vestfold Hills. The scientific data collected will be progressively
stored and managed by the Australian Antarctic Data Centre, and
will support a range of
publications that advance scientific knowledge of the Vestfold Hills.
This enhanced knowledge will inform Australia’s existing operations
and future Antarctic activities, including plans to modernise Davis
research station. It will also inform consideration of options for
ongoing and enhanced protection and management of the Vestfold
Hills region, and support Australia’s commitment to leadership in
Antarctic environmental stewardship.
As appropriate, Australia will report to future CEP meetings on
experiences and information arising from the process to assess the
environmental impacts of the Davis Aerodrome Project that may
assist the work of the Parties and the CEP to comprehensively
protect the Antarctic environment.
