SCAR Tourism Action Group (Ant-TAG)
SCAR Tourism Action Group (Ant-TAG)
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
The SCAR Tourism Action Group (Ant-TAG) was approved at the
Standing Committee on the Humanities and Social Sciences (SC-
HASS) Business Meeting in November 2021. Ant-TAG provides an
umbrella under which SCAR researchers and practitioners can make
new connections, become aware of other existing projects, and pool
existing expertise to provide guidance on important and relevant
issues related to Antarctic tourism. Input from interested
researchers of all disciplines is welcomed. Planned outputs are
aimed at strengthening connections between academics, policy-
makers, industry, and the public, enabling the group to make
accurate and up-to-date recommendations relating to the practice of
tourism in the region. Ultimately, the newly-formed Ant-TAG will
strengthen SCAR’s capacity to provide timely guidance and input to
the CEP and ATCM on Antarctic tourism matters.
Background
Tourism is an important activity in the Antarctic region, with
visitation steadily climbing in recent years up to a total of 74,400
people in the 2019-20 season (pre-COVID19) (IAATO, 2020). Polar
tourism is a significant area of research across the humanities and
social sciences and has relevance for related disciplines such as
ecological and environmental sciences. Much existing scholarship
has an Arctic focus, so there is a need to consolidate Antarctic
expertise in one location. The coronavirus pandemic and ongoing
climate change impacts make this work more urgent than ever as
polar tourism faces significant changes and challenges. The
International Workshop on Antarctic Tourism in Rotterdam in 2019,
and the recommendations that emerged from the workshop (ATCM
XLII WP19 Antarctic Tourism Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam,
The Netherlands: Chair’s Summary and Key Recommendations and
IP26 Proactive Management of Antarctic Tourism: Time for a Fresh
Approach) detail contemporary challenges identified pre-pandemic.
As new stakeholders, practices and infrastructure emerge, policy-
makers will require objective advice on the challenges ahead for
tourism activities and operations in Antarctica.
Work Package 3 of the SCAR project ‘The Impact of Covid-19 on
Antarctica’ outlined challenges associated with Antarctic tourism
(Nielsen et al., 2022) including operational constraints related to
logistics, staff availability, potential introduction of zoonotic
diseases, and changes in health protocols. COVID-19 offers
opportunities related to tourism and conservation monitoring and
management – it is a chance to rethink the way in which tourism
has developed in Antarctica and to propose adaptive and
comprehensive approaches to its management. Meanwhile, an
international seed project engaging researchers from six universities
across four continents was formed in 2020 with support from the
Academic Consortium for the 21st Century (AC21). The AC21
Project aimed to build a prototype collaborative research network,
facilitate short-term collaborations, and formulate a proposed
research agenda for Antarctic tourism based on a horizon scan with
input from the larger community. AC21 project outputs to date
include Cajiao et al. (2021) and Tejedo et al. (2022). The SCAR Ant-
TAG emerges out of these two projects at a critical juncture, when
Antarctic tourism is on the agenda as researchers and nations turn
their attention to the practices and management of Antarctic
tourism.
The Tourism Action Group (Ant-TAG) harnesses the range of
expertise in SC-HASS and across other SCAR groups on tourism
topics, serving as a platform for researchers from different
disciplinary perspectives to work together collaboratively and make
evidence-based recommendations. These include discussion on how
climate change affects tourism operations, tourist activities,
decision-making and risk and subsequent human footprint in the
future; tourist
profiles and motivations; emerging markets, modalities and
diversification of tourism activities; connections between Antarctic
gateway cities; emerging Antarctic tourism policy; and how tourism
can be an effective conservation tool by creating advocates for
Antarctica or inspiring new pro-environmental behaviours when
tourists return home. By exploring future scenarios for Antarctic
tourism and analysing the impacts on a range of stakeholders, Ant-
TAG will make timely contributions to policy discourse and the
future management of the Antarctic Tourism industry.
Key aims of Ant-TAG over the coming four years (2021-2025) are
to:
Integrate, prioritize, and implement research agendas derived from
the two precursor projects (AC21 and SCAR COVID-19 project) and
critical research needs raised by other scholars with regards to
Antarctic tourism research, research that intersects with tourism,
and tourism in the post-COVID-19 world;
Facilitate research collaboration among Ant-TAG members and
other relevant SCAR groups in order to create policy-ready advice
for SC-ATS and the Antarctic Environments Portal;
Establish a communication platform with IAATO and other
stakeholders for translating research into management
recommendations and addressing industry-relevant knowledge gaps;
and
Collate research-based, policy-ready information on the topic of
Antarctic tourism for SC-ATS to present to the ATCM and CEP.
Trends and Challenges in Antarctic Tourism Practice, Management
and Regulation
Key areas that require closer attention include:
Diversification and Growth
Antarctic tourism has increased and diversified during the last
decades. Activities on offer include experiences such as kayaking,
scuba diving, paddle boarding, snow-shoeing and camping. The
diversity of tourism activities and their geographical and temporal
spread (including lengthened tourism seasons and push to travel
further south) may increase the risk to human and environmental
safety and the need for considered risk management, education, and
decision-support strategies. Risk-related tourism can also be
developed (or opposed), with adventure tourism already prominent
for Antarctica and the possibility for more diversity through disaster
tourism (Kelman and Dodds, 2009). The range of specialised
activities requires specialist staff to deliver the product, raising
challenges for the future of the tourism workforce and logistics
support. When coupled with the growth of the tourism industry,
diversification can lead to a wider range of impacts in and around
Antarctica. Growth in tourism numbers and changes in workforce
and environment increase the risk of adverse events due to human
behaviour, poor risk perception, and decision errors. Therefore,
understanding the decision-making, leadership, teamwork, and
educational needs of Antarctic tourism operators and opportunities
for increasing the efficiency and safety of operations is important.
Tourist and Tourism Operator Profiles
Tourism diversification also means the diversification of tourists’
and tourism operators’ expectations, motivations, and profiles,
including the risks they are willing to take, and their risk
management approaches. Emerging markets could potentially
introduce changes in the way tourism operations have been
conducted in the Antarctic, which needs to be further examined. A
better understanding of new tourists’ and tourism operators’
profiles, needs, and markets would enable us to make timely
recommendations to the industry if the aim is to use tourism as a
tool for conservation. Changes in the market, visitor profiles, and
operator profiles also raise questions about shifting behaviours and
decisions on the ground. Youth-based education expeditions have
been offered for more than two decades; Hehir et al, (2020) suggest
youth can
return as inspired and empowered ambassadors and go on to have
environmentally-focused careers. However, further research is
needed to understand what impact Antarctic expeditions have on
their participants’ subsequent lifestyle decisions and pro-
environmental behaviours. Tourist and tourism operator profiles
should therefore be examined in tandem with the wider Antarctic
workforce.
Impacts
Despite a total of 313 tourist sites being reported by IAATO in 2019
(IAATO, 2019), tourist activities are highly concentrated in a small
number of sites around the Antarctic Peninsula Region. Moreover,
the co-location of the tourist and the breeding season and other life
cycle stages (i.e., moulting) of several wildlife species has raised
concerns about negative environmental interactions and impacts
(Barbosa et al., 2013; Cajiao et al., 2022). The current lack of data
on cumulative impacts as well as the absence of comprehensive and
long-term monitoring programmes has created a gap in the
understanding of the actual positive and negative effects of tourism
activities on the local ecosystems (Tejedo et al., 2022). Another
aspect of impacts relates to responding to tourists in difficulty,
whether from a volcanic eruption (Erebus, Deception Island), a ship
sinking, or an expedition experiencing a major injury. What impacts
emerge from diversion of resources for search-and-rescue
operations, emergency responses, costs, litigation, and materials left
behind such as a downed aircraft? Researchers can also investigate
what impacts result from post-emergency aspects of disasters such
as investigation (Vennell, 1981), memorialisation (Mika and
Kelman, 2020), and disaster tourism (Kelman and Dodds, 2009).
This impacts priority has relevance for the CEP 5-year plan and the
ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan in relation to tourism
monitoring.
Policy Challenges
Policy challenges relate to permitting and the intersection between
(top-down) governance and (industry-led) management of Antarctic
tourism, and relate to both the terrestrial and marine realms
(Sykora-Bodie et al, 2021). IAATO collates the most comprehensive
information on tourism locations and activities but there is a
current lack of an independent central location to collate tourism
information and regulation. While the Ant-TAG seeks to coordinate
this within SCAR, the suggestion that the ATCM establish a
permanent Tourism Advisory Group (TAG) with a dedicated and
continuing focus on tourism issues (Cajiao et. al, 2021) would help
address this challenge at a higher level. As most Antarctic tourism
vessels are registered in non-AT signatory states, there is a need to
examine stronger port-state jurisdiction as well as impacts of the
Polar Code and wider IMO requirements. A further challenge
involves devising effective ways of reaching out to small private
expeditions to the Antarctic, e.g., on yachts and curtailing entrance
into the ATS area without proper permissions (Hemmings, 2012).
Overall, there is a need to enhance compliance of extant regulations
and to move from a more reactive to a more proactive management
(Soutullo and Rios, 2020).
Social License
The concept of social licence is likely to be increasingly central to
the governance of the Antarctic tourism industry in coming years,
inflected by both environmental and health concerns, including
direct human impact, carbon emissions and COVID-19. Social
licence can be understood as the “tacit permission that communities
and societies may grant for industry or government to utilise or
control a resource” (Kelly, Pecl and Fleming 2017). In the Antarctic
context, where there are no local permanent inhabitants to directly
observe the impact of tourism, media representation of the industry
is a key factor in determining community attitude. Particular
attention should also be paid to the Gateway Cities that act as
departure points for tourist vessels and experience direct economic
and social impacts. Researchers need to measure public sentiment
regarding Antarctic tourism, analyse media representation of the
industry and investigate the influence of concepts such as the
“Antarctic ambassadorship” (Alexander et al., 2019).
Future Vision
Changes in the fleet, such as new vessels entering the market, and
products, such as chartered aircraft for landings, are already having
implications for where tourists can go and when. Similarly, climate
change will impact the Antarctic operating environment and
infrastructure and have implications for accessibility, risk and safety
(human and environmental). Operators will need to be adaptable
and resilient. The absence of a vision on tourism by the ATPs is a
key challenge. When looking forward to Antarctic futures, scenario
planning is helpful (Frame, 2019). It is also important to consider
ways to maximise the positive impacts of tourism, including
education, science support, citizen science, monitoring, risk
management, and emergency response. This includes creating
inclusive and welcoming environments for tourists, researchers, and
those back home. Investigating ways to foster connections with
Antarctica from afar (for instance, from Antarctic Gateway Cities
and via polar museums and research organisations) is key to
supporting a sustainable future for Antarctica as a continent.
Next steps
In order to address these challenges in a coherent manner, Ant-TAG
has proposed the following outputs over the coming four years. Key
Ant-TAG activities with relevance for the CEP and ATCM include
development of a report on the future of Antarctic tourism, based
on peer-reviewed scholarship that will be presented at the SCAR
Open Science Conference. We envision that these outputs will be
produced or established within the period of the Action Group
(2021-2025).
Publication
Peer-reviewed paper examining policy impacts of Antarctic Tourism
research, and associated public outreach, making a scholarly
contribution to the fields of Antarctic Studies and Tourism Studies.
SC-ATS Advice
Report for SC-ATS on possible Antarctic Tourism Futures – links
contemporary research to the policy arena, creating impacts in the
ATCM and CEP forums.
Environments Portal
Antarctic Environments Portal submission on current issues in
Antarctic tourism.
SC-HASS Conference
Tourism Research stream at SC-HASS Conference – draw together a
wider range of researchers and raise the profile of this area of work
while supporting future collaborations and developing the best
available research teams.
Operations Workshop
Operations workshop to facilitate smoother connections between
researchers and potential industry hosts. This activity builds
capacity amongst researchers by opening alternative ways to access
Antarctica as a research site and providing opportunities to
understand the research needs and logistics of industry.
Practitioner Exchange Platform
Practitioner exchange platform. Scope steps to develop a tool to
support increased communication between practitioners and
researchers, and the opportunity to identify common areas of
interest for future projects. This sub-group will pilot the platform
connections via a webinar series connected to the SCAR conference
activities.
The Ant-TAG co-leads (Dr Hanne Nielsen, Dr Yu-Fai Leung, Dr
Gabriela Roldán and Dr Daniela Cajiao) welcome further input from
researchers with an interest in this area who wish to
contribute. Interested researchers can find out more via the SCAR
website. https://www.scar.org/science/ant-tag/home/
References
Alexander, K.A., Liggett, D., Leane, E., Nielsen, E.F., Bailey, J.L.,
Brasier, M.J., & Haward, M. (2019). Who and what is an Antarctic
ambassador? Polar Record, 55(6): 497-506.
Barbosa, A., De Mas, E., Benzal, J., Diaz, J.I., Motas, M., Jerez, S.,
Pertierra, L., Benayas, J., Justel, A., Lauzurica, P., Garcia-Peña, J.F.,
& Serrano, T. (2013). Pollution and physiological variability in
gentoo penguins at two rookeries with different levels of human
visitation. Antarctic Science 25: 329-338.
Cajiao, D., Leung, Y.-F., Tejedo, P., Barbosa, A., Reck, G., &
Benayas, J. (2022). Behavioural responses of two penguin species to
human presence at Barrientos Island, a popular tourist site in the
Antarctic Peninsula region. Antarctic Science, 13, 1–13. https://
doi.org/10.1017/s0954102021000559
Cajiao, D., Benayas, J., Tejedo, P., & Leung, Y.-F. (2021). Adaptive
management of sustainable tourism in Antarctica: A rhetoric or
working progress? Sustainability, 13, 7649. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su13147649
Frame, B. (2019). A Typology for Antarctic futures. The Polar
Journal, 9 (1): 236-246. https://
doi.org/10.1080/2154896X.2018.1559015
Hemmings, A.D. (2012). The Antarctic Treaty System. New Zealand
Yearbook of International Law, 10, 237-243.
IAATO (International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators).
(2019). A Catalogue of IAATO Operator Activities (ATCM, IP 145).
IAATO (2020). Tourism statistics-IAATO. Retrieved September 19,
2020, from https://iaato.org/tourism-statistics
Kelman, I., & Dodds, R. (2009). Developing a code of ethics for
disaster tourism. International Journal of Mass Emergencies and
Disasters, 27(3), 272-296.
Kelly, R., Pecl, G.T., & Fleming, A. (2017). Social licence in the
marine sector: A review of application and understanding. Marine
Policy, 81, 21-28.
Mika, K., & Kelman, I. (2020). Shealing: Post-disaster slow healing
and later recovery. Area, 52(3), 646-653.
Nielsen, H., Cajiao, D., Roldan, G., Benayas, J., Herbert, A., Leung,
Y.-F., Tejedo, P., & Dinica, V. (2022). Is COVID-19 helping or
hindering effective management of Antarctic Tourism? Polar
Perspectives, No. 10 (March 2022). https://www.wilsoncenter.org/
sites/default/files/media/uploads/documents/Polar Perspectives
No. 10_COVID-19 in Antarctic.pdf
Sykora-Bodie, S. T., Álvarez-Romero, J. G., Adams, V. M., Gurney,
G. G., Cleary, J., Pressey, R. L., & Ban, N. C. (2021). Methods for
identifying spatially referenced conservation needs and
opportunities. Biological Conservation, 260, 109138. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2021.109138
Soutullo, A., & Rios, M. (2020). Sustainable tourism in natural
protected areas as a benchmark for Antarctic tourism. Antarctic
Affairs, 7, 45-52. http://antarcticaffairs.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/02/04-6.pdf
Tejedo, P., Benayas, J., Cajiao, D., Leung, Y.-F., De Filippo, D., &
Liggett, D. (2022). What are the real environmental impacts of
Antarctic tourism? Unveiling their importance through a
comprehensive meta-analysis. Journal of Environmental
Management, 308, 114634. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jenvman.2022.114634
Vennell, M.A. (1981). Report of the Royal Commission to Enquire
into The Crash on Mt Erebus, Antarctica of a DC10 Aircraft
operated by Air New Zealand Limited. Air and Space Law, 6(4),
254-259.
