International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration: The Future of
Thwaites Glacier and its Contribution to Sea-Level Rise
International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration: The Future of
Thwaites Glacier and its Contribution to Sea-level Rise
Information paper submitted by the United States and United
Kingdom
Introduction
Considerable uncertainty remains in projections of timing and
magnitude of future global sea-level rise, and much of this
uncertainty arises from projections of ice-loss from West Antarctica.
Thwaites Glacier would contribute ~0.65m by itself—but is thought
to be a keystone to broader collapse of West Antarctica, which
contains ~3m of sea-level equivalent. Projections of the demise of
Thwaites Glacier vary from millennia to just two centuries. This
uncertainty arises from gaps in data, inadequate understanding of
the key processes involved, and a lack of data to test computer
models. Reducing this uncertainty is an international priority that
was underscored by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
in its “Horizon Scan 2020” (http://www.scar.org/horizonscan).
This was also the top Antarctic research priority of the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine report, A
Strategic Vision for NSF Investments in Antarctic and Southern
Ocean Research (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/21741/a-strategic-
vision-for-nsf-investments-in-antarctic-and-southern-ocean-
research).
Since the 1990s, satellites have shown accelerating ice loss driven
by ocean change in five neighboring glacier catchments in West
Antarctica, including the massive Thwaites and Pine Island glaciers
(see Figure 1), which, together, drain more than one third of the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS). The rate of ice loss from this
region grew significantly in the period 2005-2010 and has since
accounted for more than 10 per cent of global sea-level rise.
Significant net ice-loss was first observed on Pine Island Glacier,
which was the focus of several recent U.S. National Science
Foundation (NSF)-funded projects and the U.K. Natural
Environment Research Council (NERC) iSTAR Programme
(2010-2017, http://www.istar.ac.uk/). However, a consistent result
obtained by recent ice-sheet modeling studies is that, on societally-
relevant decade-to-century timescales, the most significant, and
potentially irreversible changes in West Antarctica are likely to
occur on Thwaites Glacier (e.g., National Academies of Sciences,
2015). Satellite studies confirm that significant changes are already
underway on this glacier, with the grounding line retreating at
several hundred m/year and sub-shelf melt rates of up to 200 m/
year (Milillo et al., 2019). The ice-mass loss from Thwaites Glacier
has increased six-fold over the past 25 years (Shepherd et al.,
2019), but its future trajectory, and thus its potential contribution
to sea-level rise, cannot currently be assessed with certainty.
Building on shared priorities, and recognizing that such research is
becoming an increasingly global endeavor, with demands that
exceed the capacities of any one nation, NSF and NERC launched a
collaborative program in 2017 with the objective to substantially
improve both decadal and longer-term (century-to-multi-century)
projections of ice loss and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites
Glacier (NSF Program Solicitation https://www.nsf.gov/
pubs/2017/nsf17505/nsf17505.htm).
Grants to science teams, each involving a core of U.S. and U.K.
participants, were awarded in April 2018 (see https://
thwaitesglacier.org). Together, these projects form the International
Thwaites Glacier Collaboration (ITGC), which is intended to
produce a direct and significant improvement in understanding of
the stability of marine ice sheets and specifically the West Antarctic
Ice Sheet in the vicinity of Thwaites Glacier. The eight ITGC science
projects collectively address boundary conditions, external drivers
of change, processes leading to collapse, past change, and forecasts
of future change. The program will improve understanding of the
key processes that are leading to ice-sheet change, and the ice-sheet
modeling community’s capability to simulate ice sheets and thus
reduce the uncertainties in sea-level projections. In addition, the
program will contribute to improving risk assessments that coastal
communities need for decisions about adaptation and long-term
planning.
An integrated and collaborative research program
ITGC is supporting observational campaigns on the Thwaites
Glacier (TG) and the neighboring Amundsen Sea to understand the
changes taking place and the processes driving these changes. At
the same time, modeling work will help optimize observational
strategies, decipher external drivers, and, ultimately, deliver
improved projections of sea-level rise. Observational evidence
collected on three science cruises and from mountains flanking the
Thwaites basin will constrain the extent and timing of past
deglaciation of TG. This will provide a key opportunity to test
hypotheses regarding the instability of marine ice sheets.
A Science Coordination Office facilitates collaboration; science
synthesis; data management; education and outreach; integration of
early career scientists; action on inclusion, diversity, equity, and
accessibility; and media engagement for the ITGC as a whole. Each
project includes U.S. and U.K. researchers from a total of 39
institutions, with scientific and logistical collaboration with
partners in South Korea, Sweden, Germany, Norway, Finland,
France, New Zealand, and Abu Dhabi.
Field seasons
The Collaboration was initially planned to include four major field
seasons starting in 2018/19. That first field season focused on
marine science, and, on the ice, on logistics staging and scoping of
field sites, as well as initial aerogeophysical surveys. The major
overland field component began successfully in 2019/20 with
deployment of glaciological and oceanographic instruments on the
Thwaites Eastern Ice Shelf and its grounding zone, operation of an
underwater robot in the Thwaites ocean cavity, coring of sub-shelf
marine sediments, deployment of instrumentation along the eastern
shear margin and at Dotson Ice Shelf, surface and subglacial
geological sampling to determine ice-sheet thinning history at
Mount Murphy, and further aerogeophysical surveys. A second
science cruise aboard the Nathaniel B Palmer (in January 2020)
focused on the marine sedimentary record, marine mapping, seal
tagging, deployment of gliders, testing of an autonomous
underwater vehicle, and mooring visits.
The 2020/21 field season was heavily curtailed due to COVID
constraints. Technicians were able to download data and remove
glaciological instrumentation on the Thwaites Eastern Ice Shelf and
to visit sites on the eastern shear margin. Slightly more activity was
possible in the COVID-affected 2021/22 season, with successful
removal of instrumentation from the eastern shear margin and
Dotson Ice Shelf, and data download and instrument repair on the
eastern shelf. The third and final cruise successfully completed its
work in March 2022, having been able to intensively study ocean
circulation under and in front of Dotson Ice Shelf with autonomous
vehicles, gliders, profiles, and tagged seals. Further sediment cores
were retrieved for ice-sheet history. Collaborators on the Korean
vessel Araon installed a mooring under the Dotson Ice Shelf and
deployed ocean profiling instruments through openings in thick sea
ice near Thwaites Glacier.
Preparation is now underway for another ambitious over-snow field
campaign in 2022/23, with a final major over-snow campaign in
2023/24. In the meantime, insights from the Collaboration are
entering the literature (see https://thwaitesglacier.org/resources/
publications).
Contacts for international collaboration and cooperation
Additional international collaboration would be welcomed. The
contacts listed below are interested in learning of other nations who
are or intend to be engaged in research in this region over this time
frame, with the hope that synergistic activities might be developed.
The primary contacts are:
NSF and NERC:
Paul Cutler, NSF; telephone: +1 (703) 292-4961, email:
pcutler@nsf.gov
Lizzie Garratt, NERC; telephone: +44 (0)1793 411600, email:
lizzie.garratt@nerc.ukri.org
Science Coordination Office:
Ted Scambos, University of Colorado; telephone: +1 (303)
492-1113, email: tascambos@colorado.edu
Rob Larter, British Antarctic Survey; telephone: +44 (0) 1223-
221573, email: rdla@bas.ac.uk
Figure 1 – Location map for Thwaites and Pine Island glaciers. The
background image shows the ice-loss 2010-2013 measured using
data from ESA’s Cryosat-2 satellite (McMillan et al. 2014).
References
McMillan, M., Shepherd, A., Sundal, A., Briggs, K., Muir, A., Ridout,
A., Hogg, A., & Wingham, D. (2014). Increased ice losses from
Antarctica detected by CryoSat‐2. Geophysical Research
Letters, 41(11), 3899-3905. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/2014GL060111/full
Milillo, P., Rignot, E., Rizzoli, P., Scheuchl, B., Mouginot, J., Bueso-
Bello, J., & Prats-Iraola, P. (2019). Heterogeneous retreat and ice
melt of Thwaites Glacier, West Antarctica. Science Advances 5.
https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/1/eaau3433
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2015).
A Strategic Vision for NSF Investments in Antarctic and Southern
Ocean Research. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
https://www.nap.edu/catalog/21741/a-strategic-vision-for-nsf-
investments-in-antarctic-and-southern-ocean-research
Shepherd, A., Gilbert, L., Muir, A. S., Konrad, H., McMillan, M.,
Slater, T., et al. (2019). Trends in Antarctic Ice Sheet elevation and
mass. Geophysical Research Letters, 46, 8174–8183. https://
doi.org/10.1029/2019GL082182
