International response under the Antarctic Treaty System to the
establishment of a non-native fly on the South Shetland Islands
International response under the Antarctic Treaty System to the
establishment of a non-native fly on the South Shetland Islands
Information Paper by the United Kingdom and Uruguay
Summary
The United Kingdom and Uruguay present information relevant to
the potential development of an internationally agreed non-native
species management plan for the non-native fly Trichocera
maculipennis in the South Shetland Islands and the wider maritime
Antarctic region.
Background
Antarctica currently has few non-native species, compared to other
regions of the planet, due to the continent’s isolation, extreme
climatic conditions and the lack of habitat. However, human
activity, particularly the activities of national governmental
operators and tourism, increasingly contributes to the risk of non-
native species transfer and establishment in terrestrial ecosystems of
the region.
The CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2019) Annex
‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or
development’ highlights the need to identify potential non-native
species that present a high risk to Antarctic environments.
Trichocera (Saltitrichocera) maculipennis Meigen, 1888 is a non-
native fly originating from the Northern Hemisphere that was
unintentionally introduced to King George Island in the maritime
Antarctic South Shetland Islands around 15 years ago, since when it
has been reported within or in the vicinity of several research
stations. It is not explicitly confirmed that T. maculipennis has
established in the natural environment, but life-history
characteristics make this likely, thereby making potential
eradication or control a challenge.
Recent developments
In the CEP XX Final Report (para. 190), referring to this species, the
Committee encouraged Parties to ‘develop coordinated standardised
monitoring and eradication programmes to effectively control the
spread of the flies’. Working and Information Papers concerning
different aspects of the fly’s introduction, establishment and
dispersal have been submitted to the CEP by several Members and
Experts in recent years (ATCMXXXIV IP50; ATCMXXXIX WP52;
ATCMXL WP26; ATCMXLII IP20; ATCMXLII IP38). Antarctic Treaty
Parties active in the region are developing a coordinated and
expanding international response to monitor and control T.
maculipennis within and around stations in the affected area (see
Figure 1). However, there remains no overarching non-native
invasive species management plan for T. maculipennis in the South
Shetland Islands, or for the wider maritime Antarctic region that
shares similar environmental conditions and habitats.
Options towards the development of an internationally agreed non-
native species management plan are presented in the academic
publication attached to this Working Paper (Attachment A:
Remedios-De León, M., Hughes, K. A., Morelli, E., Convey, P. (2021)
International response under the Antarctic Treaty System to the
establishment of a non-native fly in Antarctica. Environmental
Management 67: 1043-1059), which resulted from a SCAR
Fellowship and is a
contribution to the SCAR Ant-ICON (Integrated Science to Inform
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Conservation) research programme.
Suggested measures that Parties may wish to consider are presented
in Table 1, and include potential measures on education,
monitoring, reporting, reduction of fly dispersal, prevention of
reintroduction, international cooperation and coordination and fly
eradication. It should be noted that Trichocera maculipenis is
winged and can fly, and therefore its arrival at further research
stations could plausibly be through ‘natural/unaided’ dispersal from
existing colonised stations.
Potential policy needs to support Parties’ responses to non-native
species introductions
The development of a non-native species management plan for the
fly T. maculipennis may be supported by the development of policy
guidelines clarifying:
the use of pesticides, in accordance with Annex III to the Protocol,
in order to reduce the risk of conflicting interpretations by Parties
attempting to eradicate non-native species.
the level of acceptable environmental damage caused by an
eradication attempt (see Annex II, Article 4(5)) and the range of
endorsed methodologies available. Such information may also help
Parties complete the mandatory environmental impact assessment
process before commencing any eradication or control activities
(Annex I to the Protocol).
which introduction events may trigger unilateral, multilateral or all
Treaty Party responses. Sharing of information and receiving early
warming of expanding non-native species distributions may allow
Parties to amend their practices accordingly, or join international
efforts to monitor, control or eradicate the species as coordinated
by COMNAP, CEP or any locally formed management groups.
Conclusions
The development of an internationally agreed non-native species
management plan for the fly T. maculipennis may help deliver co-
ordinated management of this increasing widespread non-native
species. Further work by the CEP to provide guidelines on non-
native species management may help in the on-going delivery of a
timely and effective response to T. maculipennis and potentially
other introduced species.
Figure 1. Map indicating the locations of research stations in the
vicinity of the Trichocera maculipennis introduction area. The
stations are classified as follows: stations undertaking or planning
monitoring, where evidence of flies has been found (red squares),
stations undertaking or planning monitoring with no evidence of fly
colonisation (yellow squares) and stations not yet involved in a fly
monitoring programme (green squares). The red square indicates
the area first colonised by the fly.
Table 1. Potential practical control measures to reduce the
population size and further distribution expansion of Trichocera
maculipennis
No.
Measures
Education of station personnel and those arriving on King George
Island
1
Implementation of effective educational and training practices.
Posters and information leaflets should be placed at the entry points
to Antarctica and at each station on King George Island informing
visitors of the presence of the invasive species and the efforts that
are being made to eradicate it from Antarctica. Educational
information should also be disseminated at Punta Arenas airport
and other points of entry from the South American mainland.
2
Station personnel should be made aware of the importance of
cleanliness of rooms and common spaces to ensure locations for
flies to shelter or reproduce are minimized.
Monitoring
3
Monitoring activities should be put in place, or existing monitoring
maintained, across the stations on King George Island, and
potentially beyond. To quantify fly numbers, sticky traps and
ultraviolet traps should be deployed in potential breeding areas
within stations, with these methods also having the benefit of
reducing flying adult population numbers.
4
To track the potential spread of the T. maculipennis, monitoring
should also be undertaken at research stations and in the natural
environment, in areas beyond the known distribution of the fly.
5
To ascertain the environmental requirements of T. maculipennis in
Antarctica, water treatment chamber and field environmental
temperatures should be recorded. This would allow a comparison of
temperature vs. survival rates, thereby informing management
practices applied to the sewage system that may make them less
favourable for reproduction and survival of the species.
Reporting
6
Personnel on stations in the South Shetland Islands should report
immediately the presence of flies on station or in the natural
environment to their station leader and those responsible for
environmental management and protection. Steps should be taken
to minimize the likelihood of inadvertent dispersal of the fly to
other locations/buildings.
Steps to reduce dispersal of the flies from colonized stations
7
Sewage systems should be airtight or, failing that, be supplied with
a fine mesh grid to prevent movement of adult flies. Grills should be
placed in ventilation ducts to prevent the entry and exit of adult
flies. Frequent cleaning of the sewage systems should be considered,
for instance monthly.
8
Storage areas for materials under areas under buildings should be
removed to reduce the availability of shelter locations for adult
flies.
9
To prevent dispersal of the flies, vehicles entering and leaving
stations should be rigorously cleaned, which may require a
dedicated cleaning location.
Steps to prevent re-introduction of T. maculipennis or introduction
of other invertebrates from outside Antarctica
11
Biosecurity measures should be implemented by all national
Antarctic programmes and the tourism industry to ensure the risk of
non-native species introductions is minimized. Biosecurity guidance
and information can be obtained from the CEP Non-native Species
Manual (Edition 2019) and the SCAR and COMNAP Inter‐
continental checklists for supply chain managers of the national
Antarctic programmes for the reduction in risk of transfer of non‐
native species (version May 2019).
International cooperation and coordination
12
National Antarctic programmes should meet (either physically or
virtually) at least annually to review progress in addressing the fly
introduction and to plan further action.
13
Science: National Antarctic programmes should continue to work
together in a coordinated manner, using comparable methodologies
to monitor fly population numbers, and sharing scientific
information.
14
Environmental management: National operators should develop
common methodologies to control the fly and reduce dispersal
through inter-station movement.
Eradication
15
Earlier experiences at Artigas and King Sejong stations have shown
that unilateral eradication of T. maculipennis from research stations
has been followed by rapid recolonization. Stations where the fly
has been eradicated may be rapidly recolonized from populations
resident in other stations or in the natural environment. Therefore,
it is essential that national Antarctic progammes coordinate their
eradication activities so that all populations within stations are
eradicated simultaneously, thereby reducing the opportunity for re-
colonization.
