Competent authorities discussion forum on tourism regulatory
activities: report by the convener
Competent Authorities discussion forum on tourism regulatory
activities: report by the convener
Summary
ATCM XLII in 2019 established a permanent web-based forum for
competent authorities to discuss tourism regulatory activities and
exchange knowledge and experience. The forum is convened by the
working group co-chair with responsibility for the ATCM tourism
agenda item. This paper reports on the commencement of
discussion of five issues identified as a priority for initial focus, in
accordance with the agreed scope and purpose of the forum. Parties
are encouraged to have their competent authorities participate in
the work of the group as appropriate.
Background
The convened competent authorities discussion forum is intended to
discuss tourism-related issues of general relevance to the competent
authorities, and enhance cooperation across a range of issues. As
reported in ATCM XLII IP 58, the group has established a scope and
purpose under the mandate provided by ATCM XLII (below),
identified five priority issues for initial focus of discussion, and
discussed opportunities for enhanced cooperation.
Priority issues for discussion
In the 2021-22 intersessional period, the Convener initiated
discussion of the five priority issues for initial focus:
Harmonisation of standards;
Nested permits / permits where multiple activities are authorised
by different Parties on the same expedition;
Compliance and enforcement issues of common interest to the
competent authorities (excluding arrangements under national
legislation);
Issues arising from new activities or those seldom conducted, and
potentially risky activities;
Scientific activities associated with tourism activities.
To assist in the discussion, the Convener provided topic summaries
for each of the issues. These summaries were intended to ensure
participants had ready reference to previous consideration and
discussion of the topic in the ATCM and related forums, and any
relevant ATCM tools or arrangements (for example communication
and cooperation mechanisms). Each of the topic summaries
included: an introduction and summary of the issue, review of
existing ATCM tools, instruments or arrangements of relevance to
the topic; and previous discussions or proposals relating to the
topic. The topic summaries are available to Parties on the web-
based forum.
In moving to the discussion of these issues, the convener has invited
participants to share information for each topic (among other
things) on:
general points or observations including new views or aspects, new
developments, points of particular concern, priorities, or other
perspectives
particular tools, practices or procedures that may be of interest to
other competent authorities
additional tools that would be of assistance in dealing with this
topic
suggestions for taking forward discussion of the topic or key
elements
whether the topic might be particularly suited to an online
videoconference discussion, workshop, webinar, or ‘best-practice’
session.
Discussions will continue in the coming intersessional period, with
the objective of identifying options to support the competent
authorities in relation to each issue, including where advice to the
ATCM via delegations may be useful. Additional issues will be
discussed following consideration of the initial five issues,
depending on the priority assigned by participants. Participants will
consider options for enhanced cooperation and discussion,
including potential virtual, online or videoconference discussion
and opportunities to share experiences and best practice, in the
2022/23 intersessional period. Consistent with the scope and
purpose of the discussions, the group will also consider as necessary
new and emerging issues of relevance.
The convened forum is open to participation by all national
competent authorities and wide participation is encouraged.
Scope and purpose:
The competent authorities will consider issues related to
authorisation of tourism and non-governmental activities that have
general relevance for most competent authorities, with a view to:
identifying specific challenges and opportunities for enhanced
cooperation in the implementation of the Protocol, ATCM Measures
and Resolutions;
identifying for ATCM consideration emerging issues related to
tourism regulation; and
formulating advice to the ATCM, via delegations, on specific
relevant issues related to the evaluation and authorisation of tourist
and non-governmental activities.
The forum will be convened by the ATCM working group chair
responsible for the tourism agenda item. Discussion will be guided
by a work plan, and will address issues as agreed by participants,
including new and emerging issues as necessary. The convened
forum is open to participation by all national competent authorities
and wide participation is encouraged. The convened forum is not
intended to replace the other web-based forums for discussion and
consultation on specific tourism and non-government activity
proposals.
