Report on Refurbishment and Modernization of the German
Antarctic Receiving Station GARS O’Higgins
Report on Refurbishment and Modernization of the German
Antarctic Receiving Station GARS O’Higgins
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
The renovation and modernization of the German Antarctic
Receiving Station GARS O’Higgins at the Antarctic Peninsula was
planned and funded by the German Aerospace Center DLR and was
kicked off in the year 2017. The overall aim of this project is to
sustain the station in overall layout and purpose as is, but to
achieve up to date infrastructure and technological equipment and
to reduce the environmental footprint of ongoing station operations.
From 2018 to 2020, the technical proposal for the refurbishment
and modernization of GARS O’Higgins has been developed by a
German engineering company, supported by a Chilean service
company. During that time, the tendering process was started as
well.
In 2020, DLR submitted the Initial Environmental Study (IES) to the
German Environment Agency (Umweltbundesamt - UBA) as the
National Competent Authority (NCA). Based on the IES, UBA
conducted the Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) during the
same year. The evaluation states that the planned activities give
cause to suspect only minor and transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment. The approval to conduct the refurbishment and
modernization was given with conditions to ensure that the
requirements of the Act Implementing the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty are met. End of
2020, the on-site work was started in the Antarctic.
The project is slightly delayed through the pandemic for several
reason, but is nevertheless progressing well. Major goals are
achieved and it is planned to finalize the work by the end of 2023.
In the following the station background, activities in detail, status
of the project and measures for reducing the environmental impact
are described.
Background
The German Antarctic Receiving Station GARS O’Higgins at the
Antarctic Peninsula is a multi-purpose facility for Earth observation
and geodesy since more than 30 years. It serves as a satellite ground
station for payload data downlink and telecommanding of Earth
observation satellites as well as a geodetic observatory for
determination of global reference frames, continental drift, Earth
rotation parameters and radio astrometry. Both applications use the
same 9 m diameter radio antenna. The German Antarctic Receiving
Station is owned and primarily operated by the German Aerospace
Center DLR. DLR is the national aeronautics and space research
centre of the Federal Republic of Germany.
The German Antarctic Receiving Station GARS O’Higgins is located
in direct neighbourhood to the Antarctic Base of the Chilean Army
General Bernardo O’Higgins, on the island Isabel Riquelme at the
northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula (63.32°S, 57.90°W). It is
jointly utilized by the German Aerospace Center (DLR) and the
Federal Agency of Cartography and Geodesy (BKG). The station
operation is organized in cooperation with the Chilean Antarctic
Institute (INACH).
A manifold support in overall station operations and logistics is
obtained under Chilean responsibility by the Chilean army (Ejercito
de Chile). The carriage of freight and passengers from Punta Arenas
via King George Island to O’Higgins is realized by the Chilean air
force (FACh) and the Chilean naval forces (Armada de Chile), the
Brazilian Antarctic Program
(PROANTAR) and the Brazilian air force (FAB). The operations and
maintenance of the station infrastructure is supported by a private
Chilean service company (Servimet).
Research
GARS O’Higgins was constructed in 1989-1991 and was planned to
act as satellite ground station for the, at this time, upcoming
European Remote Sensing satellites ERS-1 and ERS-2, and as the
first station on the Antarctic continent supporting very long
baseline interferometry (VLBI) measurements. In the past the
station was continuously upgraded to keep pace with technological
progress. For example, it was complemented by additional
measurement systems like GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite
System) receivers, a PRARE (Precise Range And Rangerate
Equipment) system, or tide gauges. Additionally, also the satellite
data receiving chain was upgraded by more sensitive and more
reliable demodulators and further equipment. 20 years of reception
of radar data from the ERS-1 and ERS-2 satellites generated a
unique data set of remote sensing data over the Antarctic Peninsula
and the surrounding area. This data set was and is still used in
various research fields. Today it plays an important role as a
satellite ground station supporting mainly Earth observation
missions, and as fundamental geodetic point in Antarctica for the
realization of global reference frames and monitoring crustal
motions. The geodetic VLBI experiments are usually performed once
or twice a month, while the IGS reference stations (GNSS receivers)
and the meteorological station yield continuous time series. From
1991 to 2010, the operation on site was mainly done campaign-
wise during the Antarctic summer. However, with the launch of the
German TanDEM-X satellite in 2010 and the close formation flight
of the two German satellites TerraSAR-X and TanDEM-X a year-
round station operation was necessary. This was especially
important for generating a digital elevation model of the land
surface of the whole Earth. This digital elevation model achieved
unprecedented accuracy and uniqueness as a global data set. The
TerraSAR-X data are continuing the data set established with ERS-1
and ERS-2 and furthermore the digital elevation model also
comprises Antarctica and is currently being updated (second
version) especially for the Antarctic coastal zones.
As a satellite ground station GARS O’Higgins is part of the global
ground station network of the DLR’s German Remote Sensing Data
Center (DFD) with ground station location in the Arctic, Antarctic
and of course Germany.
For space geodesy and astrometry, the radio telescope GARS
O’Higgins significantly improves the coverage on the southern
hemisphere and plays an essential role within the global Very Long
Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) network. In particular, the
determination of the Earth Orientation Parameters (EOP) and the
coverage of the International Celestial Reference Frame (ICRF) are
benefitting from the location at high southern latitude. Further, the
resolution of VLBI images of active galactic nuclei (AGN), cosmic
radio sources defining the ICRF, drastically improves when
O’Higgins is included in the network. The various geodetic
instrumentations and the long-term time series at GARS O’Higgins
allow a reliable determination of crustal motions.
The outstanding location on the Antarctic continent makes GARS
O’Higgins also in future attractive for polar orbiting satellite
missions and an essential station for the global VLBI network.
Rationale for Refurbishment and Modernization
The station was built from 1988 onward and was set into operations
in the year 1991. The station has always been continuously
maintained. Station components where improved and especially the
technical station equipment was renewed as necessary.
Nevertheless, parts of the technical equipment are used from the
very beginning on and are thus more than 30 years old. Those parts
(e.g. the diesel engines for generating power) are no longer state of
the art and need either to be completely replaced (e.g. fuel storage,
diesel generators,
inverse osmosis) or basically refurbished (e.g. container modules).
Furthermore, the station construction in the original building phase
followed design principles and safety regulations of time of station
set up. Especially the safety regulations, including measures for
environmental protection, are changed and much more
comprehensive now and necessary adoptions have to be performed.
Therefore, a package of measures was decided, without significantly
changing the station layout as such.
Overview of Refurbishment and Modernization Measures
The station consists of three main facilities: the research station
composed of a set of containers housing technical equipment for
operating the satellite station and the radio telescope providing
living and sleeping accommodation, the supply station comprising
infrastructure for power generation, water supply, sewage plant and
workshop etc. and the antenna system as such. The main measures
for refurbishment concentrate on two aspects.
Technological/technical modernization of the antenna system. The
antenna system is very well maintained and provides the reception
of satellite data with a very high reliability (> 99 %). The basics of
the antenna control, antenna gears and motors, cabling etc. needs
an upgrade to state of the art technology.
Infrastructure: diesel generators, UPS, fuel storage, inverse osmosis,
electrical installation and other technical details have to be
renewed. But there is also improvement in structural fire protection
necessary in order to achieve the current safety regulation in fire
protection. In addition, a decrease of the environmental impact and
the reduction of human footprint shall be achieved.
The built-up area of the station buildings as such will not be
significantly changed. The first of the named facilities (a set of
containers housing technical equipment for operating the satellite
station providing living and sleeping accommodation) will nearly be
not affected at all, only two server room containers are added. The
second named facility (the station infrastructure part with power
generation, water supply, sewage plant, etc.) needs modifications of
the internal floor plan, renewal of the foundations, replacement of
the majority of the containers building this structure and renewal of
the exterior cladding of the building, but the building location stays
the same and the built-up area will be increased only slightly at the
southwestern building corner. Finally, the antenna system, being a
special construction is anyway only affected in the technical parts
and the whole foundation, steel structure and mechanical
construction will not be touched.
Figure 1a: Layout of the station GARS O’Higgin.s
Figure 1b: Design of the modernized supply station including
position of the new double-shell stainless steel tank containers - 3D
view.
Initial Environmental Study & Evaluation / Environmental Impact
Mitigation Measures
For the approval of the refurbishment and modernization project,
DLR was preparing an Initial Environmental Study (IES). The IES
would be available from DLR, but is available in German language
only. The IES covers the following topics:
Overview and context.
A description of the station itself, as well as the environment,
including all protected assets.
The necessary renovation/modernization activities that will be
carried out at the station, including the objective, location, and
schedule.
An analysis potential environmental impacts and proposes
mitigation measures to minimize them.
And finally the conclusions and summary of environmental impacts.
In 2020, DLR submitted the IES to the UBA as the NCA, for
approval of the project. As the project was expected to have minor
or transitory environmental impact UBA had to obtain a statement
from the national Committee of independent scientific experts. The
Federal Agency for Nature Conservation (BfN) as the consent
authority with regard to the protection of flora and
fauna was also involved in the approval process. Based on the IES
and opinions from the Committee and the BfN, UBA conducted the
IEE and concluded, that the planned activities give cause to suspect
not more than minor and transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment. However, the approval to conduct the refurbishment
and modernization was given with conditions to ensure that the
requirements of the Act Implementing the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty are met. End of
2020, the on-site work was started in the Antarctic.
An important IES consideration is gentoo penguins breeding in the
immediate vicinity of the station buildings and associated
mitigation measures to reduce impacts on the size of the local
gentoo penguin breeding population. These mitigation measures are
included as conditions in the approval according to the AUG and
Annex II of the Protocol.
Figure 2: Gentoo penguin breeding sites (stars), out of bounds crane
access through breeding areas west of the supply station (red
dashed arrow with X), and proposed penguin fence (lime green
dashed).
In order to avoid affecting the potential breeding areas of gentoo
penguins west of the supply station, a conscious decision was made
to implement crane access to the supply station exclusively from the
roadway east of the station and not to use access through the
potential breeding areas west of the station (see Figure 2, red
dashed arrow with X).
This avoidance of crane access from the west complicates
construction logistics, but avoids impacting the penguins' ancestral
breeding grounds.
Part of the IES proposed mitigation measures was also the
construction of a penguin protection fence at a distance of about 5
m from the construction site to the west of the supply station and
research station, to deter penguins from breeding within the
construction area or too close the
noisy core zone of the works (see Figure 2, indicated lime green
dashed). The construction of a penguin protection fence was also
part of the conditions in the permit.
The penguin protections fence consists from
the metal posts with eyelets (100 mm distance), embedded in the
ground/rock in a storm-proof manner,
the ropes stretched through the eyelets and
the "chicken wire" (small animal fence, galvanized metal wire, 6-
corner mesh, mesh size 25 mm) attached to the ropes.
Figure 3: Penguin protection fence - northern part, zoom, view
towards west (photo January 25, 2021).
During the austral summers of 2020/2021 and 2021/2022, the
penguin protection fence worked extremely well - also especially
with the very curious, exploratory juvenile penguins (see Figure 3
and Figure 4). The combination of taut, thicker ropes and "chicken
wire" proved particularly effective here. Additionally, the ropes
ensure good visibility of the fence for the penguins (better than
without ropes).
Figure 4: Penguin protection fence - northern part, looking
northwest (photo November 18, 2020).
To assess the impact of the construction work and the efficiency of
the mitigation measures on breeding success, the annual counting of
the penguin nests using the same method and period as before the
construction work started, has been imposed as further important
condition by UBA. Count data from February 2020 and February
2021 were merged and compared - for the entire Peninsula Schmidt
and especially for the GARS sector. The following statements can be
made:
On the entire Peninsula Schmidt, the number of occupied nests
increased slightly by 3 nests from 795 (2020) to 798 (2021).
In the GARS sector, the number of occupied nests decreased slightly
by 3 nests from 281 (2020) to 278 (2021). However, if we consider
that one particular area could not be used for breeding in the
southern summer of 2020/21 due to exceptionally large amounts of
snow - regardless of the construction measure - and consider this in
the comparison, then the remaining breeding sites actually show an
increase of 13 nests.
For the southern summer of 2020/21, it can be concluded that the
previous modernization measures at the GARS O'Higgins station had
no significant impact on the size of the local breeding population of
the gentoo penguins. The fluctuations are within the usual range.
Modernization activities carried out and planned progress
Logistics
In November 2020, the supply vessel LSDH 91 "Sargento Aldea" of
the Chilean Navy transported a total of 12 container units
consisting of container modules and container attachments from
Talcahuano to O'Higgins in Antarctica. A further 4 container
modules were transported from Punta Arenas to O'Higgins by the
Chilean Navy's supply vessel AP-41 "Aquiles" in April 2021.
In November 2021 and March 2022, the AP-41 "Aquiles"
transported a total of 16 container units consisting of container
modules and container attachments as well as transport containers
from Punta Arenas to O'Higgins.
Thus, a substantial part of the container modules, container
attachments and transport containers required for the refurbishment
and modernization of the GARS O’Higgins station are already in
Antarctica.
Refurbishment and modernization of the supply station and
complement to research station
The following activities have been completed or are in the process
of implementation to date:
Achieving station level consolidation by lifting the containers of the
north side by 762 mm.
Preparation of the foundations. A load-bearing substructure of
galvanized HEB 200 double-T steel beams was installed under the
lifted containers of the north side.
Temporary wall was built up to the east of the old generators and
the old containers were removed by crane from the compound of
the previous supply station.
Temporary replacement of UPS, inverse osmosis and further
removal of old containers.
Temporary relocation of the two old diesel generators and the new
emergency backup generator.
Figure 5: Conversion of the old supply station with use of the
Liebherr LTM1040-2.1 mobile crane within the old supply station.
Extension of research station by two server room containers.
Extension of the fuel storage by 2 additional double-shell stainless-
steel tank containers, each with a capacity of 24,000 liters, which
are also approved for the transport of diesel.
Emptying of the old single-shell tanks by transferring the fuel
(Antarctic diesel) into the total of 5 double-shell stainless steel tank
containers of the fuel storage.
Removal of the old, single-walled tanks (3 container units).
Positioning of two new double-shell stainless-steel tank containers,
also approved for the transport of diesel, each with a capacity of
24,000 liters on the new double-T steel beam foundations of the
new supply station to be built.
Figure 6: Positioning of a new double-shell stainless steel tank
container with a capacity of 24,000 liters, also approved for the
transport of diesel, on the new double-T steel beam foundations
prepared for the new supply station.
Planning for upcoming season and Antarctic summer season
2023/2024
Conducting of technical antenna modernization.
Finalizing the new structure of the supply station.
Establishing of new cladding of the supply station (2023/2024
season).
Important Remark
It is emphasized that the whole logistics relies on the Antarctic
operations of Chile (mainly) and especially the Chilean navy.
Support was also given by Brazil (PROANTAR) and to a small
portion also on Uruguayan operations. The German Aerospace
Center DLR appreciates this support of the named nations very
much and likes to emphasize, that without this support it would
rarely be possible to perform a successful station modernization.
