Progress in the revision process of the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Managed Area Nº 1, Admiralty Bay
Progress in the revision process of the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 1, Admiralty Bay
Joint Information Paper Submitted by Brazil, Ecuador,
Peru, Poland and the United States
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the ASMA No. 1
Management Group has initiated a five-year review of the
management plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area Admiralty
Bay (ASMA No. 1). Resolution 1 (2017) Annex B (Guidelines for the
preparation of ASMA management plans) has been followed in the
process of revising the management plan. According to the work
plan presented in IP 133 at CEP XXIII/ATCM XLIII, the review
continued during the intersessional period, and a progress report for
CEP Meeting (joint IP) was prepared.
Revision process
As part of the process of revising the Management Plan for ASMA
No. 1, Admiralty Bay, initiated in 2019, during the intersessional
period, the ASMA No. 1 Management Group worked on the
identified topics to be updated in the current management plan,
adopted under Measure 14 (2014), which included:
Information updated on the current status of values to be protected,
biological communities, scientific research and monitoring being
conducted, climate, tourism, and commercial harvesting within the
ASMA No. 1;
Contacts were made with IAATO for updated information on
tourism on Admiralty Bay;
Updated ASMA No. 1 Map.
Next steps
The ASMA No. 1 Management Plan review process is nearing
completion, and the ASMA No. 1 Management Group plans to
conclude this document in the next intersessional period and
present its final version in 2023. The next actions to be taken are
the following:
Updating the maps to reflect the guidance in Annex B of the
Guidelines for ASMA management plans;
Reviewing Code of Conduct for Visitors (Appendix A) and Scientific
and Environmental Guidelines (Appendix B) to make sure this is up
to date, and to include reference to relevant Treaty documents;
Submitting a joint WP with the revised Management Plan to the
CEP once the review is concluded.
