Work to review International Maritime Organization and Antarctic
Treaty system guidelines and agreements concerning ship
biofouling and ballast water management
Work to review International Maritime Organization and Antarctic
Treaty system guidelines and agreements concerning ship
biofouling and ballast water management
Information Paper presented by Australia, New Zealand and the
United Kingdom
Summary
Marine non-native species present an increasing threat to Antarctic
marine ecosystems, particularly under climate change. This paper
sets out progress with ongoing work initiated by the CEP Subsidiary
Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) to review the
guidelines and agreements of the International Maritime
Organisation (IMO) and Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) concerning
ship biofouling and ballast water management, to check adequacy
for the Southern Ocean and vessels moving from region to region.
Background information
Non-native species drive ecological changes that impact biodiversity
in almost all marine environments and are one of the most pressing
global conservation concerns. There is growing awareness that ship
activity globally spreads invasive marine non-native species,
especially through transport in ballast water and hull fouling. So
far, no established populations of non-native marine species are
confirmed in the waters around Antarctica; however, establishment
may become more likely as the effects of climate change become
more pronounced (ATCM XXX IP37; ATCM XXXIX IP27; ATCM XLII
IP27; ATCM XLIII IP6).
The threats to habitats and ecosystems by invasive marine non-
native species have been recognised by policymakers globally and
within the ATS, and steps have been taken to reduce the risk:
The IMO International Convention for the Control and Management
of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediments (Ballast Water Management
Convention) was adopted in 2004 and entered into force globally in
2017. Under the Convention, all ships in international traffic are
required to manage their ballast water and sediments to a certain
standard, according to a ship-specific ballast water management
plan.
ATCM Resolution 3 (2006) on Ballast water exchange in the
Antarctic Treaty Area recommends that the annexed Practical
Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty area
be used by all ships in the Antarctic Treaty area, except those
referred to in Article 3, paragraph 2, of the Ballast Water
Management Convention.
In 2007, the IMO Marine Environment Protection Committee
(MEPC) adopted Resolution MEPC.163(56), adopting the Guidelines
for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty area (detailed
above), and inviting Governments to apply them as an interim
measure pending entry into force of the IMO Ballast Water
Management Convention. Notably, the guidelines do not replace the
requirements of the Ballast Water Management Convention, but
provide an interim Ballast Water Regional Management Plan for
Antarctica under Article 13(3).
In 2008, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources (CCAMLR) adopted Recommendation 28/XXVII on
Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the CAMLR Convention
Area North of 60°S, which recommends that all ships engaged in
harvesting and associated activities in the CAMLR Convention Area
apply the ATCM and IMO Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in
the Antarctic Treaty Area, and
Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the CAMLR Convention
Area north of 60°S, as an interim measure before the Ballast Water
Management Convention comes into force.
In 2011 the MEPC adopted the Guidelines for the control and
management of ships' biofouling to minimize the transfer of
invasive aquatic species (the Biofouling Guidelines), via resolution
MEPC.207(62), to provide a globally consistent approach to the
management of biofouling. The guidelines are intended to provide
useful recommendations on general measures to minimize the risks
associated with biofouling for all types of ships.
Given developments in technology, management practices and
international instruments to reduce the risk of marine non-native
species introductions by ship traffic, as detailed above, the CEP has
agreed to consider the issue further. Specifically, the CEP Climate
Change Response Work Programme (CEP XIX Final Report,
Appendix 2) identifies the issue of ‘Enhanced potential for non-
native species (NNS) introduction, establishment’, and an associated
action to undertake a ‘Review of IMO biofouling guidelines to check
adequacy for Southern Ocean and vessels moving from region to
region’. Furthermore, the CEP 5-Year Work Plan (CEP XXIII Final
Report, Appendix 1) contains the action to ‘Review IMO report on
biofouling guidelines’ under the priority issue ‘Introduction of non-
native species’.
Recent developments
As outlined in ATCM XLIV/WP037, the SGCCR reviewed tasks
identified in the CCRWP that could be advanced during the 2021-22
intersessional period. Recognising that the CCRWP and CEP 5-Year
Work Plan prioritise efforts to minimise the risk of marine non-
native species introductions in a changing climate, the Subsidiary
Group encouraged members to undertake a review of IMO and ATS
guidelines and agreements concerning ship biofouling and ballast
water management.
Preliminary work has been undertaken by Australia, New Zealand
and the United Kingdom, with progress to date including:
the compilation of relevant scientific papers;
the review/summary of CEP papers and related discussions relevant
to the introduction of marine non-native species, biofouling and
ballast water management; and
the compilation of related ATS and IMO guidelines and agreements,
and the initiation of work for their consideration and comparison.
Conclusions and next steps
In recent years, there have been substantial developments in
knowledge of the risk marine invasive non-native species present to
Antarctic marine ecosystems. Concurrently, there have been
developments in the availability of methods and technologies to
reduce the risk of non-native species introductions associated with
ballast water and vessel biofouling.
During the 2022-23 intersessional period Australia, New Zealand
and the United Kingdom intend to continue the review of IMO and
ATS guidelines and agreements concerning ship biofouling and
ballast water management, building on the preliminary work
summarised above, with a view to developing relevant
recommendations for consideration by the CEP at XXV. Engagement
by other interested Members and Observers in this informal work
would be greatly welcomed.
