The Case of Polar Bears Conservation informed by Climate Models
and the Potential Similar Case of Emperor Penguins
The Case of Polar Bears Conservation informed by Climate Models
and the Potential Similar Case of Emperor Penguins
Submitted by Delegation of China
Summary:
This Information Paper aims to put forward 2 articles respectively
on the case of Polar Bears conservation informed by climate models
and the potential case of emperor penguin, which extracted from
the website of “Polar Bear Science: past and present” See the
website: https://polarbearscience.com/, latest visit on April 22,
2022., which could be used as reference materials to facilitate the
consideration of Antarctic Special Protected Species issues and
particularly the emperor penguin designation. In 2006, the IUCN
up-listed Polar bears from “Least Concern” to “Vulnerable” to
extinction in the IUCN Red List informed by climate model, which
predicted that the number of Polar Bears would decline by more
than 30% over the next 45years, despite the Polar Bears population
had recovered in 1980s and maintained stable thereafter. This
decision was the first time such designation had ever been made
that changed the way the IUCN assessed species risk, and led to
mass confusion for the general public, who falsely assume polar
bear numbers had already declined by a huge amount. In fact, the
Polar bear numbers are now the highest they’ve been over the past
60 years. Recently, the IUCN is petitioned to up-list the Emperor
Penguin from “Near Threatened” to “Vulnerable” informed by
climate model as its population kept increase in recent decades, and
the ATCM and CEP is proposed to list the species as Antarctic
Specially Protected Species.
Background
The following 2 articles extracted from the website of “Polar Bear
Science: past and present” could be used as reference material for
the consideration of Antarctic Specially Protected Species issues,
particularly the designation of emperor penguins. Both Articles are
written by Susan Crockford, former adjunct professor at the
University of Victoria, British Columbia and also zoologist with
more than 35 years’ experience, including published work on the
Holocene history of Arctic animals See the website: https://
polarbearscience.com/about-2/ , latest visit on April 22, 2022..
1. How are polar bears doing 15 years after the IUCN declared them
‘vulnerable’ to extinction? See the website: https://
polarbearscience.com/2021/05/10/how-are-polar-bears-doing-15-
years-after-the-iucn-declared-them-vulnerable-to-extinction/, latest
visit on April 22, 2022.
In 1982, the polar bears were listed as “vulnerable” in the IUCN
Red List. When it became clear that the polar bear numbers had
recovered substantially, the IUCN changed the status of polar bears
to “lower risk” (now known as ‘least concern’) in 1996 and
remained there for 10 years.
In 2005, the Polar Bear Specialist Group (PBSG) of the IUCN
recommended to the IUCN that polar bears be up-listed back to
“Vulnerable” on the basis of population declines expected to follow
from modelled sea ice loss due to expectations of global warming.
In May 2006, the IUCN reported that the polar Bear among 530
species be added to the list of endangered species, based on the
opinion of scientists, informed by climate models, that their
numbers would decline by more than 30% over the next 45 years.
However, the truth is that polar bear numbers are the highest they
have been in about 60 years as of today. The Article observed none
positive effect on the bears from being listed by the IUCN, as they
were already well protected by national laws and international
treaties put in place before 2006, such as the 1973 International
Treaty to protect polar bears from unregulated hunting. The
concern for future polar bear survival was always about predicted
low sea ice levels in the future
but even after 15 years of moderately low summer sea ice (about
40% less than 1979) we have not yet seen any species-wide effects
that can be attributed conclusively to climate change.
2. Emperor penguin numbers rise as biologists petition for IUCN
Red List upgrade See the website: https://
polarbearscience.com/2020/08/06/emperor-penguin-numbers-rise-
as-biologists-petition-for-iucn-red-list-upgrade/, latest visit on April
22, 2022.
The author also provided the case of the potential up-list of
emperor penguins in the IUCN Red List also with the use of climate
model, despite of an actual increase in the population of emperor
penguins.
The 2 Articles and the information about the author down loaded
from the website into PDF can be found in the attachments.
