Impact of RPAS (drone) use on emperor penguins
Impact of RPAS (drone) use on emperor penguins
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Introduction
Due to the increasing application of Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS A Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS) is
defined by the International Civil Aviation Authority (ICAO) (2015)
as “A remotely piloted aircraft, its associated remote pilot station(s),
the required command and control links and any other components
as specified in the type design”. A Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA)
is “An unmanned aircraft which is piloted from a remote pilot
station”. RPAS are one class of Unmanned Aerial System (UAS), and
they are often referred to as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) or ‘drones’. In this context RPAS
is used for all types of remotely piloted drone systems, the term
which has also been adopted by COMNAP, SCAR and a number of
national authorities, and RPA is used to refer specifically to the
aircraft itself.) in Antarctica, an intersessional ICG which was
convened by Germany in 2017/2018 developed Environmental
Guidelines for RPAS (see ATCM XL IP38 Use of UAVs in Antarctica -
A competent authority’s perspective and lessons learned, ATCM XLI
WP29 Report of the CEP Intersessional Contact Group to develop
guidelines on the environmental aspects of the use of Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) / Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
in Antarctica, ATCM XLIII IP18 Operationalizing the use of
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) for assessing Antarctic wildlife
populations, Harris et al 2019). With Resolution 4 (2018) the
Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (v 1.1) were adopted. The current
version of the guidelines does not include distinct minimal distances
from animals, mainly because the scientific basis for such
restrictions is not fully established yet. Information on sensitivity to
RPAS is incomplete, preliminary or completely missing for many
Antarctic species. The iconic emperor penguin (Aptenodytes
forsteri) is one of those species for which there is no knowledge
about RPAS sensitivity. The data presented here aim to close this
gap. It becomes particularly important in light of the predicted
strong population changes the species faces with ongoing climate
change, where RPAS present a promising tool to observe and
monitor penguin colonies for a better understanding of their
development.
Abstract
During experiments carried out in November and December 2019 at
the emperor penguin colony at Atka Bay (Weddell Sea, Dronning
Maud Land) near the German research station Neumayer III,
emperor penguin chicks and adults on the sea ice / fast ice were
video recorded from a distant position on the ice shelf to observe
behavioural reactions to two different drone models or human
approaches (Rümmler et al. 2021a,b). In general, only moderate
responses to drone overflights with distinct reactions were observed
in fewer than 20% of individuals. There was no observation of
severe reactions like escape behaviour, panic, or large group
movements. The behavioural reaction also only lasted for a fairly
short time, with individuals returning to their previous behaviour in
less than one minute. In chicks, the greatest reaction was observed
during vertical approaches of a multirotor drone, while adults
showed only an intermediate reaction. During horizontal flights,
increased vigilance behaviour was observed in chicks, but very few
reactions in adults. Contrastingly, adult emperor penguins showed a
stronger reaction to human approaches than chicks and stronger
than to any drone activity (see Figure 1).
The comparison of two different RPAS models revealed only slight
differences, with a fixed-wing drone causing fewer individuals to
react than a multirotor drone.
For adult emperor penguins, a flight height above 70 m was shown
to not induce significantly different behaviour for the multirotor
drone than observed during controls. For chicks or fixed-wing
drones, no such height could be derived.
The reaction towards the multirotor drone was stronger later in the
season when chicks were in fledge phase than in the earlier crèche
phase, though it cannot be concluded with certainty if this effect is
caused by the timing in season or by daily factors such as daily
patterns or weather conditions.
Figure 1: Comparison of observed behavioural reactions (percentage
of individuals showing vigilance & flipper-flapping) to different
disturbance sources. Displayed are the mean ± standard error
during the class of the highest observed disturbance (i.e. 11-20 s
after the drone was directly overhead in horizontal flights at 20 m
flight height, <5 m in human approaches, 15–20 m for vertical
approach).
Concluding remarks
In general, there seems to be no strong reaction of emperor
penguins to drones. There was very little influence on adults,
particularly in comparison to a human approach. In chicks, stronger
reactions have been observed, comparable or even slightly stronger
than to a human approach. Especially vertical movements above
chicks should be avoided. In all cases, the reaction towards the
drone is very short in time.
Thus, it can be concluded that RPAS flights for monitoring purposes
(mainly horizontal) over emperor penguins, where the drone only
passes over the colony for short moments, can be regarded as
reasonable, particularly if done above 70 m. Repeated activities,
particularly with reoccurring changes of direction (as for example
often used for recreational or journalistic purposes) should be
avoided. Where applicable, fixed-wing drones should be preferred.
References
Harris, Colin M., Heike Herata, and Fritz Hertel. 2019.
“Environmental Guidelines for Operation of Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (RPAS): Experience from Antarctica.” Biological
Conservation 236: 521–31, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biocon.2019.05.019
Rümmler, M-C, Esefeld, J, Pfeifer, C, Mustafa, O. 2021a. Effects of
UAV overflight height, UAV type, and season on the behaviour of
emperor penguin adults and chicks, Remote Sensing Applications:
Society and Environment, Volume 23, 100558, ISSN 2352-9385,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rsase.2021.100558
Rümmler, M-C, Esefeld, J, Hallabrin, M T, Pfeifer, C, Mustafa, O.
2021b. Emperor penguin reactions to UAVs: First observations and
comparisons with effects of human approach, Remote Sensing
Applications: Society and Environment, Volume 23, 100545, ISSN
2352-9385, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rsase.2021.100545
