Implementation of the National Antarctic Program of Ukraine in the
Conditions of Hybrid Warfare and Open Military Aggression of the
Russian Federation: Challenges and Lessons Learned
Implementation of the National Antarctic Program of Ukraine in the
Conditions of Hybrid Warfare and Open Military Aggression of the
Russian Federation: Challenges and Lessons Learned
Information Paper submitted by Ukraine
Summary
In this Information Paper, Ukraine outlines the main challenges
faced by its National Antarctic Program in the context of a
prolonged hybrid war and the current full-scale military
intervention of the Russian Federation.
Ukraine believes that the lessons learned from this situation should
be taken into account by other Antarctic Treaty Parties and serve as
a basis for further consultations to strengthen the Antarctic Treaty
System.
Consequences of a hybrid war for the National Antarctic
Programme of Ukraine
The Russian Federation, in an attempt to renew its influence
throughout the entire post-Soviet space, is systematically carrying
out a hybrid war against Ukraine, as well as other neighbouring
states. Such extremely unfriendly steps had a negative impact,
among other, on the formation and development of the National
Antarctic Programme of Ukraine.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Russian
Federation, which declared itself its legal successor, left all Soviet
Antarctic stations under its jurisdiction, despite the fact that,
according to Article 1 of the Agreement on the distribution of all
property of the former USSR abroad of July 6, 1992, 16.37% of the
assets of the USSR should have been moved to Ukraine. Article 2 of
this Agreement states that the application of this fixed share
applies, among other things, to space, air, sea, ground and other
systems and their infrastructures, which certainly include scientific
stations. However, this Agreement regarding the transfer of
Antarctic stations by the Russian Federation was not fulfilled.
At the same time, in 1994 the United Kingdom decided to transfer
one of its Antarctic stations to another state, subject to the
continuation of long-term geophysical observations. In July 1995
after negotiations between the governments of the United Kingdom
and Ukraine a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between
the British Antarctic Survey and the Ukrainian Antarctic Centre. On
February 6, 1996 the British Faraday station was transferred to
Ukraine free of charge and renamed in honour of Volodymyr
Vernadsky, the first president of the Academy of Sciences of
Ukraine (1918), who made a significant contribution to the
development of the doctrine of the Earth's biosphere and noosphere.
This was the first, and to date the only, case of the transfer of an
Antarctic station by a Western state to a state of the former USSR,
indicating a qualitative transition from Cold War rivalry to
international cooperation in the post-Soviet space. For Ukraine, the
acquisition of its own Antarctic station is another expression of its
independence and desire for closer integration into the international
scientific community.
At the XXVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) (Cape
Town, 2004), when considering the application for achieve Ukraine
the status of a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty, the
delegation of the Russian Federation expressed its disagreement,
referring to the existence of unresolved claims of Ukraine to
scientific stations from the Russian Antarctic Expedition. Only the
renunciation of any claims by Ukrainian delegation to some of the
stations built by the USSR opened the way to consensus, as a result
of which Ukraine became the 28th Consultative Party to the
Antarctic Treaty (Decision 2 (2005) XXVIII ATCM).
A decade later and following an attempted annexation by the
Russian Federation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea (fact was
condemned by the UN General Assembly Resolution 68/262 on the
territorial integrity of Ukraine in March 27, 2014) Ukraine lost a
number of scientific infrastructure facilities and scientific personnel,
including 4 scientific institutes in the field of marine research. This
created significant difficulties in the implementation of
oceanographic research by Ukraine including within the framework
of the State Antarctic Research Programme for the period
2011-2023.
Moreover, Ukraine, having found itself in a difficult economic
situation, as a result of the loss of control over part of the eastern
regions of the country, caused by further military actions by the
Russian Federation, was forced to speak at ATCM XXXVIII (Sofia,
2015) with Working Paper WP-045. In the paper Ukraine raised the
issue of considering the possibility of amending the Financial
Regulations of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) so that each
Consultative Party that finds itself in a situation of force majeure
(military aggression, natural disaster, etc.) has the opportunity to
pay contributions to the ATS in instalments before the settlement of
the situation. The Meeting noted that, under the Financial
Regulations, Parties that are in arrears in payment of their
contributions can still fully participate in the ATCM, and therefore
did not see the need to amend the Financial Regulations (paragraph
104 of the Final Report of the XXXVIII ATCM).
The impact of Russia’ military aggression on the work of the
National Antarctic Programme of Ukraine
For almost two decades Ukraine used a charter of foreign tourist
and supply vessels for rotation of Antarctic expeditions and
Vernadsky station supplies, which was extremely complicated due
to the dense schedules of the vessels and the impossibility of their
prompt correction. Therefore, Ukrainian government decided to
purchase its own strengthened ice class vessel in 2019, when the
state's economy has gained positive trends.
In August 2021, the government of Ukraine acquired the British
research vessel James Clark Ross (renamed Noosfera, ukr.
Ноосфера) for the needs of Ukrainian Antarctic expeditions and the
restoration of integrated marine research not only in the Southern
Ocean, but also in other parts of the World Ocean.
Vessel Noosfera set out on its first Antarctic voyage under the flag
of Ukraine from the seaport of Odesa on January 28, 2022. Less
than a month later, Odesa was shelled from the sea by warships of
the Russian Federation and remained under the risk of assault on
the adjacent territory. The marine area of ​the Black Sea adjacent to
the port of Odesa was mined by Russian naval mines, which made
any navigation in these waters extremely dangerous and led to the
cessation of civilian navigation in the north-western part of the
Black Sea.
The Noosfera has made its transatlantic passage with the crew on
board, while the main staff (winterers) of the 27th Ukrainian
Antarctic Expedition, as well as scientists and technicians involved
in the summer expedition were supposed to get to Chile by air and
to board the Noosfera there.
The flight scheduled for February 28, 2022, which actually became
the fourth day of a full-scale military invasion of the Russian
Federation, was suspended because of the closed sky to civilian air
traffic.
Some of the participants of the Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition were
under conscription to the Armed Forces of Ukraine, while others as
reservists were not able to leave Ukraine during the martial law. In
agreement with the government of Ukraine, the main staff of the
27th Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition (14 people) travelled to the
Warsaw Airport and flew to Chile.
At the same time, the personnel of the 26th Ukrainian Antarctic
Expedition and the seasonal group of specialists who remained at
the Vernadsky station and were waiting for their rotation found out
about the outbreak of war far from home. Native cities of many of
them, living in the eastern regions of Ukraine, were destroyed as a
result of massive missile and bomb attacks. Their family members
were in mortal danger and were forced to seek asylum in western
regions of Ukraine or abroad. In an interview with foreign media,
Ukrainian scientists stated that they had nowhere to return to (The
Guardian, see the link https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/
mar/16/nowhere-to-return-ukrainian-scientist-in-antarctica-
watches-war-unfold-from-afar).
In the current situation, it seems appropriate to provide additional
personal research grants to support Ukrainian scientists whose
homes or research infrastructure have been significantly damaged.
On March 30, 2022, despite these tragic circumstances, the vessel
Noosfera safely arrived at Vernadsky station, and the process of
personnel rotation, unloading of materials, fuel supplies and station
preparation for the next season was completed in the normal mode.
It should be noted that at the time of the vessel Noosfera's departure
from the port of Odesa, Ukraine was planning large-scale research
work in the Atlantic sector of Antarctica and in the Western
Antarctic Peninsula region (CCAMLR Statistical Subareas 48.1 and
48.2). In particular, in March-April 2022, it was planned to
continue the oceanographic research begun by Ukraine almost two
decades ago on the research vessel Ernst Krenkel in March-April
1997 and 1998. It was expected that new data would be obtained
on changing ecological characteristics of the marine environment in
the Western Antarctic Peninsula region, which should provide
additional scientific justification for further marine protection in
Domaine 1.
However, due to the military aggression of the Russian Federation
against Ukraine, the reorientation of the country's economy under
martial law and the sequestration of Ukraine's budget allocations
for education, science, culture and other socially important areas,
the budget of the National Antarctic Program of Ukraine was also
cut.
The marine research programme of the vessel Noosfera was
reduced, and the return of the vessel to Ukraine is now temporarily
not possible. This raises the question of finding a temporary home
port for the vessel Noosfera during the off-season, preferably in the
ports of the Southern Hemisphere.
The reduction in marine research and the possible long demurrage
of the vessel will undoubtedly hinder the development of Ukraine's
scientific capacity ahead of its CCAMLR Chairmanship in
2022-2024.
Since the beginning of Russia’ military aggression, many
representatives of the National Antarctic Programmes have
expressed their support to Ukraine and their readiness to help
Ukrainians both in Antarctica and beyond. We especially want to
note the efficient support of the Polish Antarctic Program, which
has assumed the role of a transit point to arrange the travel of
participants of the Ukrainian Antarctic Expeditions from Ukraine
and back to Ukraine.
In this regard, the Ukrainian side expresses its deep gratitude for
the support and is ready to consider such proposals to preserve and
expand the scientific potential of the international community to
continue further research of Antarctica and protect its natural
resources.
Next steps for Parties to respond
Every day, since February 24, 2022, brings new facts of targeted
killing of civilians, looting, destruction of civilian and critical
infrastructure, education institutions, historical and cultural
heritage monuments of national and global significance. The
unprovoked and unmotivated military aggression of the Russian
Federation against Ukraine caused irreparable damage to objects of
the natural reserve fund, as well as objects, whose destruction
threatens an ecological catastrophe on a regional and continental
scale, in particular, nuclear power plants.
Such actions are to a certain extent the result of the unwillingness
at the highest political level to respect norms and principals of the
international law and fulfil obligations assumed under the
international treaties, if at some point this becomes an obstacle to
the implementation of the Russian Federation's plans.
It is significant that political leaders, regional players and the wider
international community oppose the aggression of the Russian
Federation in Ukraine (for example, the European Commission has
stopped research cooperation programmes with the Russian
Federation). It can also be confidently expected that within the
framework of the ATCM, the Russian Federation, in the eyes of the
Antarctic Treaty Parties, will lose trust and the status of a partner
that respects international law, human rights and human life as the
highest value.
In this regard, Ukraine calls to the Parties of the Treaty to initiate
discussions of the Antarctic community’ response to unfriendly
actions (including military actions), taken by one Consultative Party
towards another Party, as well as develop preventive measures in
case of unilateral violation of the basic principles laid down in the
Antarctic Treaty against one of the Consultative Parties.
In this case, both joint and bilateral measures that do not require a
mandatory consensus to amend the Rules of Procedure (for
example, depriving a Party of the right to vote at the next two
ATCMs) may turn out to be effective.
Such measures can be:
- political demarches;
- boycott of initiatives of the aggressor Party, its chairmanships
during intersessional contact groups, nomination of its
representatives to the governing bodies of working groups;
- termination or suspension of the implementation of joint scientific
and logistics projects;
- refusal to purchase goods and services from suppliers from the
aggressor Party, as well as from suppliers whose owners are
affiliated with the aggressor Party;
- refusal to supply goods and services to buyers from the aggressor
Party, as well as to buyers whose owners are affiliated with the
aggressor Party.
Ultimately, it could be, as the Russian Federation itself noted, a
more pragmatic use of the full potential of the ATS and its
flexibility provided, inter alia, by Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty
(ATCM XLIII WP055).
Conclusions
Both hybrid warfare and open military aggression by one
Consultative Party against another undoubtedly have a destructive
effect on the implementation of the National Antarctic Program of
the Party under attack.
At the same time, the unconditional loss of confidence in the
aggressor Party in terms of its compliance with international
obligations in other areas, including obligations under the Antarctic
Treaty, is an equally significant negative consequence of this.
This jeopardizes the atmosphere of mutual trust and support that
has been built up by the Antarctic community over the years and
requires a consolidated response from the Antarctic community and
a joint response.
Ukraine believes that lessons learned from current situation should
be duly taken into account by other Antarctic Treaty’ Parties and
become a platform for further consultations to strengthen the
Antarctic Treaty System to adjust it to emerging challenges.
