Information on chemical pollution at Port Foster, Deception Island
Information on chemical pollution at Port Foster, Deception Island
An Information Paper submitted by Portugal and Spain
Summary
This paper reports of emerging contaminants in phytoplankton
samples collected from Port Foster, Deception Island (South
Shetland Islands, Antarctic Peninsula). A total of 70 persistent
pollutants (including, Biocides, PAHs, POPs, PCPs, and
Pharmaceuticals) from human origin were found, with
pharmaceutical compounds the largest group of emerging
contaminants identified. We encourage Parties to set up monitoring
programs to mitigate and remediate chemical pollutants from across
the Antarctic Treaty area, to help inform future monitoring research
and policy development, and consider the implementation of
appropriate contamination control and remediation methods.
Introduction
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
states that activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned
and conducted to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic
environment. Considerable initial work has been made by many
National Antarctic Programmes, via SCAR and COMNAP, on the
Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook (May 2000) that
National Antarctic Programs have implemented and improved as
technology advanced.
Within the Antarctic Peninsula region, the South Shetland Islands
have been subject to long-term human activity, which increased
with the establishment of research stations as scientific activity in
the region expanded. In accordance with the provisions of Annex I
to the Protocol, the region has been the subject of scientific
investigations for monitoring of environmental impact (ATCM XXII/
IP44; ATCM XXXI/IP30) with more recent research suggesting that
some areas have been subjected to negative environmental impact
caused by historic and potentially on-going local human activity
around the scientific stations (ATCM XXXIX/IP8, ATCM XL/IP22)
and the increasing pressure of tourism (ATCM XLIII/IP110). As
there is scarce information on the presence of these emerging
contaminants, such as Biocides, Persistent Organic Pollutants
(POPs) as well as Pharmaceutical and Personal Care Products
(PPCPs) in the Antarctic Treaty Areas, this paper reports on the
most recent scientific evidence of these emerging contaminants in
Deception Island, South Shetlands Island (Antarctic Peninsula
region).
Information of emerging contaminants
An untargeted screening of the metabolome of the phytoplankton
community, collected at two sites in Port Foster Bay at Deception
Island, was performed. Seventy different contaminant compounds
were found to be present. These emerging contaminants included 1
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH), 10 biocides (acaricides,
fungicides, herbicides, insecticides and nematicides), 11 POPs
(flame retardants, paints and dyes, polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB),
phthalates and plastic components), 5 PCPs (cosmetic, detergents
and dietary compounds), 40 pharmaceutical compounds and 3 illicit
drugs. Pharmaceutical compounds were, by far, the
largest group of emerging contaminants found in phytoplankton
cells (anticonvulsants, antihypertensives and beta-blockers,
antibiotics, analgesic and anti-inflammatory
drugs)(Duarte et al. 2021) (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Location of sampling sites, in the vicinity of the Spanish
Gabriel de Castilla station (GdC station) and at Fumarole Bay,
situated in Foster Bay, Deception Island (South Shetland Islands
archipelago, Antarctica), and relative abundance of the total
contaminants classes per site and Venn diagram made for the
detected contaminants for both sites.
As Port Foster is a semi-closed natural port with a long residence
time, the bioaccumulation rates of these potential compounds is
unknown at the site and there is a large number of vessels visiting
Port Foster, it is extremely difficult to identify the sources of these
contaminants, evidencing that a more extensive sampling program
in time and space may be needed to find suitable and effective
mitigation and protection guidelines. The present findings provide
evidence that a diverse range of persistent pollutants of human
origin are found in the Antarctic
food chain.  Further consideration should be given by the CEP to
the development of policy aimed at reducing the release of
persistent pollutants into the Antarctica environment.
Reference
Duarte, B., C. Gameiro, A. R. Matos, A. Figueiredo, M. S. Silva, C.
Cordeiro, I. Caçador, P. Reis-Santos, V. Fonseca, and M. T. Cabrita.
2021. First screening of biocides, persistent organic pollutants,
pharmaceutical and personal care products in Antarctic
phytoplankton from Deception Island by FT-ICR-MS. Chemosphere
274:129860
