WMO Annual Report
WMO Annual Report
An Information Paper submitted by WMO
The World Meteorological Organization www.wmo.int (WMO) is a
specialized agency of the United Nations and includes 193 Member
States and Territories. It is the UN system's authoritative voice on
the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction
with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting
distribution of water resources.
WMO covers a range of activities of relevance to the Antarctic
Treaty System, including Antarctic Science via the World Climate
Research Programme Co-sponsored by the International Science
Council (ISC) and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission (IOC) of UNESCO and World Weather Research
Programme, Antarctic Observations and Infrastructure, for example
via the Global Cryosphere Watch; and Antarctic Services via, for
example, the Antarctic Regional Climate Centre network.
Antarctic Science activities of the World Climate and World
Weather Research Programmes
Through the World Climate Research Programme2 (WCRP), WMO
carries out several research and modelling activities in which the
climate of the Antarctic region is a key aspect. Its activities are
often conducted in partnership with other organisations, such as
SCAR.
WCRP’s Climate and Cryosphere Core Project (CliC)
WCRP’s CliC project, with an international office hosted by the
Bjerknes Centre in Norway, focusses on the cryosphere component
of the climate system. CliC is a connector and integrator of
cryosphere research worldwide, coordinating research and
modelling activities (often in partnership with SCAR) on ice sheet
mass balance and sea level, ice shelves and alpine glaciers, sea ice,
and permafrost. With a vision of cultivating future leaders in
cryospheric research, CliC has also established a new fellowship and
grant program, particularly aimed at early career scientists https://
climate-cryosphere.org/2021-clic-fellowships-grants-open-call/. See
accompanying IP for further details.
WCRP also coordinates several modelling activities of relevance to
Treaty Parties, including Antarctic CORDEX https://cordex.org/
domains/region-10-antarctica/ (the Coordinated Regional
Downscaling Experiment, with an office at the Swedish
Meteorological and Hydrological Institute), and CMIP (the Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project, with a new project office hosted by
the European Space Agency in the UK) that generates the scenario
runs that are integral to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC). https://www.wcrp-climate.org/wgcm-cmip
assessment reports.
Antarctic CORDEX
The CORDEX vision is to advance and coordinate the science and
application of regional climate downscaling through global
partnerships. Detailed projections of how the Antarctic climate may
evolve over the twenty-first century in response to anthropogenic
forcing are urgently required by many users, in particular by the
glaciological and biological communities in order to produce
improved projections of mass balance and biological processes. A
detailed paper (IP119) on
Antarctic CORDEX was submitted to CEP XX (Beijing, 2017).
Recently, Mottram et al. (2021) What is the surface mass balance of
Antarctica? An intercomparison of regional climate model
estimates, The Cryosphere, https://doi.org/10.5194/
tc-15-3751-2021. compared the performance of five different
regional climate models, available through the Antarctic CORDEX
project, in simulating the present-day near-surface climate and
surface mass balance (SMB) of Antarctica. This study showed that
all models simulate Antarctic climate well when compared with
daily observed temperature and pressure. The largest spatial
differences between model SMB estimates are in West Antarctica,
the Antarctic Peninsula, and around the Transantarctic Mountains.
A new paper on this paper will be submitted to the next ATCM.
Antarctica 2300 Projections
The Ice Sheet Model Intercomparison for CMIP6 (ISMIP6) is the
primary effort of CMIP6 focusing on ice sheets. It was designed to
provide processed-based projections of ice sheets contribution to sea
level rise over the 21st century, and assess uncertainties associated
with these projections as well as their origins. However, improved
ice sheet projections beyond the 21st century are also necessary, as
instability mechanisms have the potential to rapidly destabilize ice
sheets and several regions may reach tipping points, potentially
leading to much larger sea level contributions. Building on the
success of ISMIP6, a new effort targeting projections of the
Antarctic ice sheet until 2300 has being launched. This effort is
open to the international community and we invite all modelers
interested to participate, regardless of their previous involvement in
ISMIP6 https://www.climate-cryosphere.org/wiki/index.php?
title=ISMIP6_wiki_page or at ismip6@gmail.com. A full paper on
this topic will be submitted to the next ATCM.
The WCRP Academy
WCRP has developed five new Lighthouse activities https://
www.wcrp-climate.org/lha-overview that are designed to be
ambitious and transdisciplinary so that they can rapidly advance
some of the new science and technologies, and institutional
frameworks, that are needed to manage climate risk and meet
society’s urgent need for robust and actionable climate information
more effectively.
The WCRP Academy https://www.wcrp-climate.org/academyaims
to determine the requirements for climate research training and
education and build enabling mechanisms. One mechanism being
planned is an online marketplace for climate science training, which
will connect training providers and those who seek training. The
Academy will also identify training gaps and advocate for those
needs to be met and will work with partner organizations around
the world to ensure that climate science training and education are
meeting the needs of society. See accompanying IP for further
details.
The Southern Ocean Action Plan
Coordinated by SCAR, a Southern Ocean Task Force was set up to
develop a Southern Ocean Action Plan as part of the UN Ocean
Decade. The plan itself was developed by several partners,
including WCRP and IAATO. Through the publication of this Action
Plan, the Southern Ocean Task Force aims to mobilise the Southern
Ocean community and inspire all stakeholders to seek engagement
and leverage opportunities to deliver innovative solutions that
maintain and foster the unique conditions of the Southern Ocean.
This framework provides an initial roadmap to strengthen links
between science, industry and policy, as well as to encourage
internationally collaborative activities in order to address existing
gaps in our knowledge and data coverage. The Southern Ocean
Action Plan will, as part of the UN Ocean Decade, deliver in
achieving the
UN Agenda 2030 and its Sustainable Development Goals in a polar
context. See accompanying IP for further details.
The Year of Polar Prediction final Summit
The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) 2017-2019 of WMO’s World
Weather Research Programme’s Polar Prediction Project, galvanised
extra observational and modelling efforts in both the Arctic and
Antarctic. The final Special Observing Period in the Antarctic has
been extended to the end of August 2022, to take advantage of the
South African RV Agulhas II presence in the Weddell Sea.  
A Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) Final Summit will take place in
Montreal (QC), Canada, Monday, August 29 - September 1 2022.
The conference will bring together the polar prediction community,
from operational centres and academia, to environment services
and polar prediction users and northern communities, to showcase
the successes of YOPP and contribute to the legacy of the Polar
Prediction Project. For further details see: https://
www.polarprediction.net/ or accompanying IP for further details.
 
Antarctic Observations and Infrastructure
WMO has adopted new Unified Data Policy that is necessary for the
global efforts to monitor, understand and then predict weather and
climate, as well as the Global Basic Observing Network (GBON).
GBON paves the way for a radical overhaul of the international
exchange of observational data, which underpin all weather,
climate and water services and products. See accompanying IP for
further details.
The increased frequency of extreme temperatures seen in Antarctica
recently emphasises the need for systematic observations of
demonstrated quality. There are significant challenges to obtaining
continuous quality measurements over the ice sheet surface of the
Antarctic, e.g., due to the impact of the snow albedo and of the
extreme operating conditions. For that reason, WMO is committed
to continue bringing together the international community of
experts engaged in maintaining observing stations in Antarctica as
part of its Global Cryosphere Watch https://
globalcryospherewatch.org/, to address specific observations,
instrumentation, challenges, e.g., measurements of snow depth, air
temperature, fast ice, etc.
Antarctic Services
WMO, with partners, continued with the development of an
Antarctic Polar Regional Climate Centre (AntRCC) Network.
Progress has been slower than envisioned due to COVID, though the
Antarctic RCC Network will build on the lessons learned in the
process of establishment of the Arctic RCC Network to produce
coherent, and harmonized climate products across the Antarctic
domain through a single portal, and establishment of a platform for
a dialogue with stakeholders and users. WMO will provide updates
in the future and continue to engage Treaty Parties as relevant.
High-level Publications of Interest
WMO produces several Antarctic and climate related science
publications. Just to highlight
three high-profile publications:
WMO Statement on the State of the Global Climate
Each year WMO produces a high-level “Statement on the State of
the Global Climate” with key partners, including SCAR. These
statements are presented at the Conference of Parties (COP)
meetings and other fora and are available in English, Spanish,
Russian, French, Chinese and Arabic. Copies of the 2021 provisional
report can be downloaded from: https://library.wmo.int/index.php?
lvl=notice_display&id=21982#.YkLj49lBzAM
United in Science
The United in Science report is a multi-organization high-level
compilation that presents the very latest scientific data and findings
related to climate change, to inform policy and decision-makers.
See:
https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/united_in_science
10 New Insights in Climate Science
WCRP co-produces the “10 New Insights in Climate Science” with
Future Earth and the Earth League. The 2021 edition was launched
at COP26 by Patricia Espinosa. The online version can be seen at:
https://10insightsclimate.science/.
WMO continues to look forward to a positive, mutually beneficial
engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate
observations, services and research. For further queries please
contact Mike Sparrow (msparrow@wmo.int) in the first instance.
