Australia’s Cleaner Antarctica Strategy
Australia’s Cleaner Antarctica Strategy
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan: Update
2022 reaffirms Australia’s ongoing commitment to best practice
environmental stewardship in Antarctica. Related high priority
actions over the next five years include establishing a Cleaner
Antarctica science program, and developing an actionable Cleaner
Antarctica Strategy for Australian stations and sites. This paper
summarises the goals of the Cleaner Antarctica Strategy and
highlights Australia’s interest to engage and share knowledge with
other Parties undertaking or planning similar site assessment and
clean-up activities, with the aim of improving environmental
outcomes across Antarctica.
Background
Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (Environmental Protocol) establishes requirements
for the clean-up of past and present waste disposal sites on land and
abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities. To support Parties to
address these requirements, the Committee for Environmental
Protection (CEP) has developed the CEP Clean-Up Manual
(Resolution 2 (2013), Resolution 1 (2019)), which contains key
guiding principles and links to practical guidelines.
As noted in the CEP Clean-Up Manual, the environmental risks
associated with past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites
are likely to increase over time, as structures and containers
deteriorate, and in the context of a changing climate which,
through increased melting, creates the potential for localised release
and mobilisation of contaminants.
Many Parties have undertaken considerable efforts to minimise the
environmental impacts of past waste disposal sites and abandoned
work sites in Antarctica. As outlined in previous CEP papers,
Australia has been conducting ongoing research to inform the
development and application of cost-effective and environmentally-
effective methods, techniques and tools to assess risk, remediate
and monitor recovery of past waste sites and legacy and
contemporary fuel spill sites in the vicinity of Australia’s Antarctic
stations. This work has informed the development of practical
guidance materials, some of which have been included in the CEP
Clean-Up Manual.
The Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan: Update
2022 reaffirms Australia’s ongoing commitment to best practice
environmental stewardship in Antarctica. Related high priority
actions over the next five years include establishing a Cleaner
Antarctica science program, and developing an actionable Cleaner
Antarctic Strategy for Australian stations and sites. The strategy is a
key component of Australia’s systematic environmental
management and full life-cycle approach to sustainable operations
in Antarctica.
Overview of Australia’s Cleaner Antarctica Strategy
Having a scientifically robust understanding of the status and
environmental risk of contamination and waste is essential to
addressing the clean-up requirements under Annex III of the
Environmental Protocol. The CEP Clean-Up Manual notes that an
assessment should be undertaken of the features of the site that will
influence how contaminants behave, and the environmental values
that may be impacted, before considering how best to clean-up a
site. It identifies ‘site assessment’ as a key stage of the clean-up
process. Accordingly, Australia will initially focus on site
assessment, to inform the development of a detailed, multi-year,
actionable clean-up strategy.
In keeping with the objectives and provisions of the Environmental
Protocol, and the key guiding principles highlighted in the CEP
Clean-Up Manual, Australia aims to ensure the systematic
evaluation of environmental and human health risks associated with
legacy waste and work sites, while continuing to evaluate options
for environmental remediation and restoration consistent with
international best practice. Specifically, over the next five years this
will involve:
Completing comprehensive site assessment programs across all
Australian Antarctic research stations and field camps, including:
Updating or completing desktop studies to document the history of
contamination events and known contamination.
Conducting comprehensive on-ground site assessments to inform
detailed risk assessments and clean-up planning for each site. Site
assessments (see Appendix 1 for more detail) will integrate findings
from:
On-site biodiversity assessments (microbes, plants, micro- and
macro-invertebrates, and vertebrates) in soil/sediment/water in
terrestrial and coastal marine environments.
Site characterisation (hydrology/hydrogeological/physical)
assessments of geological and soil features, physicochemical
properties (in soil/sediment/water), physical terrain attributes and
probable fate and transport of contaminants.
Physical and chemical assessments of soil/sediment/water/waste to
determine contaminant levels, if any, and their sources (both local
and global) in terrestrial and coastal marine environments. A suite
of contaminants will be assessed.
Ecotoxicological assessment of soil/sediment/water as required to
derive Environmental Quality Guideline Values (EQGVs) and site-
specific Remediation Targets.
Derivation of Environmental Quality Guideline Values (EQGVs) and
site-specific Remediation Targets. Measures of soil health and
effects data from laboratory-based toxicity tests, with a suite of
representative local species, will be used to determine tolerance
thresholds to key contaminants of concern identified in site
assessment programs.
Prioritising sites for clean-up based on environmental risk and
logistical feasibility, while integrating clean-up with station
modernisation programs, where possible.
On-going remediation of contemporary fuel spill sites at Casey
research station.
Continuing to develop cost-effective polar remediation tools and
clean-up technologies suitable for the range of contaminants
identified, in the range of substrates and environments in which
they occur.
Developing a detailed, multi-year, actionable clean-up strategy for
Australian research stations and sites, with cost-effective and
efficient assessment, remediation and monitoring technologies that,
in accordance with Article 1.5 of Annex III, ensure remediation and
management actions cause no further environmental damage and
lead to the greatest net environmental benefit.
Collating baseline site-specific biodiversity, site characteristics and
contaminant data into a searchable geographic information system
/ database to inform future planning and monitoring of remediation
efficacy and ecosystem recovery.
Next steps
Through the newly announced Cleaner Antarctica science program
and work to develop a Cleaner Antarctica Strategy, Australia is
strongly committed to promoting knowledge sharing and
cooperation in the field of Antarctic contaminated site assessment,
remediation, monitoring and clean-up. Over the next five years
Australia will develop and share with the international
community scientifically robust techniques for the assessment and
clean-up of terrestrial fuel spills and contamination arising from
waste sites.
Australia would welcome engagement with other Parties who have
an interest in, or who are currently undertaking activities, in the
field of environmental risk assessment and remediation, and
associated research. Arctic-based collaborative partners and new
opportunities through SCAR groups (e.g. Integrated Science to
Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean Conservation (Ant-ICON))
will also be sought.
Australia looks forward to further collaboration with interested
Parties to share expertise and support clean-up activities across
Antarctica.
Appendix 1 – Further detail on methodology for planned site
investigations and risk assessments
On-site biodiversity assessments (microbes, plants, micro- and
macro-invertebrates) in soil/sediment/water in terrestrial and
coastal marine environments using a range of sampling strategies
(bulk grab/hand samples, cores, photo quadrats and imagery, ROVs
and drones) with analysis via traditional taxonomy, molecular
analysis, and image analysis techniques, including at appropriate
control sites.
Site characterisation (hydrology/hydrogeological/physical)
assessments of geological and soil features, physicochemical
properties (in soil/sediment/water), physical terrain attributes and
probable flow paths for migration of contaminants. Achieved
through traditional field mapping, drone derived digital terrain
models, tracer tests and geophysical surveys (ground or drone
derived).
Physical and chemical assessments of waste and contamination to
determine contaminant levels, if any, in terrestrial and coastal
marine environments, and their sources (both local and global).
Analysis of contaminants to include metals, petroleum
hydrocarbons, volatile organic compounds, polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and
contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) such as flame retardants
(PFAS/PFOA), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polybrominated
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), asbestos and microplastics. Methods of
assessment to include targeted discrete or passive, time-integrated
sampling of environmental matrices (soil, sediment, water, vapour,
waste) using field suitable or laboratory-based analytical assessment
tools (both traditional and novel, project derived tools).
Laboratory-based toxicity tests following established protocols
developed for marine and terrestrial species or using new protocols
to be developed based on-site specific targeted species to determine
impacts on local biota to key contaminants of concern. Test media
will include environmental samples from contaminated sites (for
complex contaminant mixtures) and spiked soils/elutriates/
sediments/water (for single high-risk contaminants). This
experimental toxicity approach will be used to derive
Environmental Quality Guideline Values (EQGVs) and site-specific
Remediation Targets applicable to Antarctic and sub-Antarctic sites.
