Education and Outreach Activities of the World Climate Research
Programme
Education and Outreach Activities of the World Climate Research
Programme
Introduction
The co-sponsored WCRP is co-sponsored by the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO), the International Science
Council (ISC) and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission of UNESCO (IOC-UNESCO) World Climate Research
Programme (WCRP) relies on a strong international research
community with expertise in all aspects of climate science and in all
regions of the world. Training, capacity building, higher education,
and facilitated collaboration are of paramount importance to
sustain and grow this community, particularly through
opportunities for early career, underrepresented, and developing
country researchers (WCRP, 2019). As such, WCRP takes seriously
its responsibility to ensure that the next generation of climate
science leaders are ready to take on important roles in guiding the
climate research agenda and that all scientists are equipped to
engage with society in the context of climate change. While
education and outreach activities take place across all WCRP Core
Projects and activities, it is particularly useful in this report to
highlight two new WCRP initiatives: the WCRP Academy
Lighthouse Activity https://www.wcrp-climate.org/academy and
the Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) https://climate-cryosphere.org
Fellowships and Grants.
WCRP Academy
In 2020 five key areas were identified by WCRP where rapid
advancement is required to manage climate risk and meet society’s
urgent need for robust and actionable climate information more
effectively. These were developed into five “Lighthouse Activities.”
https://www.wcrp-climate.org/lha-overview One of these
Lighthouse Activities was built on the realization that we need to
ensure that climate science education and training not just keeps
pace with, but anticipates, the knowledge and tools that will be
required in the future to meet the challenges and take advantage of
the opportunities of a changing climate.
In 2021, the WCRP Academy initiated its inaugural Climate
Training Stocktake Survey. It received over 400 complete responses,
the results of which are currently being analyzed. The survey asked
respondents about climate science education and training that they
were currently undertaking, or had undertaken in the past, and
asked them to identify any training they would like to do in the
future. It also asked about training availability in the country in
which the respondents lived and about any perceived barriers to
accessing education and training. A publication on the findings of
the survey is planned towards the end of 2022.
The preliminary results of the Climate Training Stocktake Survey
have identified that one of the highest barriers to education and
training is ‘limited knowledge of available options.’ Financial
barriers, a local lack of expertise, and training limited to formal
studies were also all ranked high as barriers to climate science
education and training There are now many different training
opportunities offered both online and in person, from universities,
technical institutes, online training providers (including Massive
Open Online Courses or MOOCs), and from many other sources
(including WCRP). Ascertaining the quality and even content of all
these courses can be difficult.
The WCRP Academy is planning to build an online portal that links
climate science training providers with those seeking training, to
make the various options available clearer. The
Academy will not itself act as a training provider (although other
parts of WCRP will do so) but will help to build a global community
of climate researchers at all career stages to facilitate lifelong
learning and skills matching for current and future research projects
across the globe. The Academy would very much like to partner
with the ATCM ICG on Education and Outreach, where appropriate,
and with climate science training providers with a focus on the
Antarctic continent and Southern Ocean.
Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) Fellowships and Grants
In 2021, the WCRP Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) Core Project
developed a new Strategic Plan. One of the objectives of the Plan is
to “Establishing CliC fellowships and grants aimed at engaging early
career scientists and scientists from under-represented regions and
groups in CliC activities” (CliC, 2021). The first round of CliC
Fellowship and Grants were launched in late 2021and received 48
applications. From the applications, two fellowships and two grants
were awarded to early career recipients from Uzbekistan, Pakistan,
Germany and Argentina, totalling CHF 48,500. Of all applications
received, only five were focused on Antarctic research and none of
these were successful in this round. It is hoped that future CliC
fellowship and grant calls will attract more applications from early
career researchers focused on Antarctica. It is expected that another
round of CliC Fellowships will be launched in late 2022.
For further questions or details please contact Dr Narelle Van de
Wel (nvanderwel@wmo.int) in the first instance.
References
CliC, 2021. Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) Strategic Plan 2022–
2031. World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) Publication
8/2021 [F. Straneo, J. Renwick, T. Naish, A. Lovecraft, L. H.
Smedsrud, E. Hanna, H. Christiansen, C. Lique, H. Seroussi, S.
Sugiyama, M. Vancoppenolle, T. Zhang, B. M. Balino, N. van der
Wel, eds.)] https://www.wcrp-climate.org/WCRP-
publications/2021/CliC_StrategicPlan_2022-2031-c.pdf
WCRP, 2019. World Climate Research Programme Strategic Plan
2019–2028. WCRP Publication 1/2019. https://www.wcrp-
climate.org/images/documents/WCRP_Strategic_Plan_2019/WCRP-
Strategic-Plan-2019-2028-FINAL-c.pdf
