Education & Outreach Activities of Turkey in 2021-2022
Education & Outreach Activities of Turkey in 2021-2022
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents information on the education and outreach
activities about “polar regions and global climate change” carried
out in Turkey in 2021-2022.
Background
Education and outreach activities are carried out and given utmost
importance by The Scientific and Technological Research Council of
Turkey (TUBITAK) Marmara Research Center (MAM) Polar
Research Institute (PRI) to explain the importance and role of polar
regions to young generations. These events, ranging from seminar
talks to festivals, not only appeal the youth but also intend to
educate and inform audiences from all age groups.
2020-2021 Activities
TUBITAK MAM PRI opened a booth at TEKNOFEST, Turkey’s first
and only aerospace and technology festival, which hosted more
than 1.5 million visitors despite the pandemic conditions. Visitors
were informed about the polar research and national polar activities
by interacting with polar researchers in a fun environment (Figure
1). In addition, a short documentary targeting the young audience
on climate change named “You Have a Message From the Poles!”
was prepared by TUBITAK MAM PRI as a part of awareness
activities. The premiere of the documentary was held at
TEKNOFEST 2021 to a wide audience.
Figure 1. A photo from the TUBITAK booth in TEKNOFEST 2021.
The first "Polar Research Projects Competition for High School
Students" by TUBITAK attracted great interest with over 700 project
submissions. The finalist projects were exhibited and the winners
were announced at the TEKNOFEST in September 2021, where 22
projects in four different categories were awarded. TUBITAK opens
this project call annually to meet the expectation of the intense
interest from the young generation.
Although organized virtually due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the
first Polar Science Festival attracted the participation of many
students throughout Turkey. TUBITAK MAM Polar Research Insitute
organized the 2nd Polar Science Festival at the TUBITAK campus in
Kocaeli on December 1, 2021, Antarctica Day. The festival achieved
important success with the participation of more than ten thousand
children from all over the country. The event mainly targets the
young generation, as future polar scientists, to create awareness on
polar regions and global climate change. Various activities
including workshops, games, and exhibitions took place in the
festival. While popular polar science seminars were given by
scientists who conducted research in the polar regions,
documentaries of Turkish polar expeditions were screened. In
addition, the participants had fun moments with VR glasses, photo
booths, polar research-themed comics, photo shooting in the polar
regions with the green screen, and live music (Figure 2).
Figure 2. A selection of activities in the 2nd Polar Science Festival
Meanwhile, PRI researchers contributed to printed and digital
publications on polar regions with an educational aspect. "Polar
Expeditions", a children’s book, was published by TUBITAK to
introduce polar regions and polar research. Besides, a comic series
on the adventures of a researcher in Antarctica continues in a
TUBITAK magazine for kids with the contributions of PRI
researchers.
In addition, active participation of the Polar Research Institute was
ensured in education and awareness activities in different cities of
Turkey throughout the year, namely the 8th Konya Science Festival,
Erzurum Winter Science Festival, and Antalya Science Festival.
Conclusion
Since the day it was established, TUBITAK MAM PRI reached
thousands of people in Turkey to inform them about the importance
of polar research, polar regions, and their relation to global climate
change. To this aim, a great awareness was created by organized
events, printed publications, project competitions, online
presentations & seminars, festivals, and documentaries.
