Report of the Joint Inspections’ Program undertaken by Brazil,
Ecuador, Peru, Poland, and the United States to the ASMA No. 1 -
Admiralty Bay, King George Island
Report of the Joint Visit undertaken by Brazil, Ecuador, Peru,
Poland, and the United States to the Antarctic Specially Managed
Area No.1 – Admiralty Bay, King George Island.
Summary
From 13-31 January 2022, personnel from the United States visited
Copacabana Field camp and reviewed the western shore of the
Admiralty Bay region. Personnel from Brazil were at Admiralty Bay
from February 28 to March 17 and a Polish team sent information
regarding the area around Arctowski Station. In summary, visiting
personnel concluded that the values for which the ASMA No. 1 was
designated remain relevant and several measures are in place to
ensure the aims and objectives of the Management Plan are being
met. The Parties report this visit was conducted under Article 10 of
Annex V to the Protocol that provides for Parties to “make
arrangements for collecting and exchanging records, including
records of permits and reports of visits, including inspection visits,
to Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and reports of visits to
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas.”
Introduction
Admiralty Bay is located on King George Island, South Shetland
Islands, about 125 kilometres from the northern tip of Antarctic
Peninsula. The primary reason for its designation as an Antarctic
Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 1) is to protect its outstanding
environmental, historical, scientific, and aesthetic values by
assisting in the planning and coordination of activities, avoiding
possible conflicts, improving cooperation among Parties and
minimizing environmental impacts. Admiralty Bay was first visited
by sealers and whalers in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and
relics from these periods still remain. The area is characterized by
magnificent glaciated mountainous landscape, varied geological
features, rich seabird and mammal breeding grounds, diverse
marine communities, and terrestrial plant habitats. For nearly four
decades coordinated scientific research has been conducted in
Admiralty Bay by five countries. Research on penguins has been
undertaken continuously since 1976 and ASMA No. 1 is the site of
longest continuous penguin study conducted in Antarctica.
Admiralty Bay also has one of the longest historical series of
meteorological data collected for the Antarctic Peninsula,
considered as one of the most sensitive areas of the planet to
climate change, as stated in its current Management Plan (https://
www.ats.aq/devph/en/apa-database/3), which is currently under
review.
Officials from Brazil and the United States visited the area to ensure
that its designation as an ASMA provided continued protection of
the special values based upon which it was initially designated. The
ASMA No 1 Management Plan and other relevant background
information were reviewed prior to the start of the review. The
“Checklist to Assist in the Inspection of Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas”
(Resolution 4 (2008)) was used as a guide during these visits. The
visit was planned and conducted, when possible, in coordination
with science and program support activities to minimize
environmental impact.
This visit included identifying whether significant changes had
occurred within ASMA No. 1 and whether the ASMA No. 1
Management Plan, as implemented, remains relevant and sufficient
to protect the values of the Area.
Site Visit
From 13-31 January 2022, personnel from the United States visited
Copacabana Field camp, which is located with ASPA No. 128. The
team conducted annual scientific research, continuing long-term
monitoring of penguins, skua, and giant petrels. They also
performed several flights with a small fixed-wing remotely piloted
aircraft systems (RPAS) to survey penguin colonies at Llano Point
and Rakusa Point, including beyond-visual-line-of-sight flights.
From 28 February to 17 March 2022, the team from Brazil visited
the areas around the Comandante Ferraz Station, on the edges of
the Keller Peninsula and visited Hennequin Point, where the
República del Ecuador Refugee is located, and also visited Crepin
Point, at the area of Machu Picchu Station.
From 20 January to 18 February 2022, a Peruvian team conducted
annual scientific research in Crepin Point. From 11-18 February
personnel from Peru visited the areas around Machu Picchu station
and observed/ found a few individuals of Antarctic tern, as well as
Skuas populations.
The values for which the Area was designated pertain primarily to
the status of penguins, skuas, and giant petrels along the western
shore of Admiralty Bay. In general, all species identified in the
Management plan remain present and relevant for protection under
the Management Plan. Chinstrap and Adélie penguin populations
continue to decline, while gentoo populations have increased. The
decline of chinstrap penguins within the ASMA is particularly
striking, with several former breeding areas now abandoned. In
contrast, the expansion of areas used by the growing gentoo
penguin population has resulted in trampling and loss of vegetation
in some areas, notably near Llano Point along the far eastern end of
lateral moraines left by the retreat of Ecology Glacier. Skua and
giant petrel populations remain abundant, with relatively stable
distributions of breeding areas. Among other regularly occurring
birds identified in the Management Plan, breeding kelp gulls,
sheathbills, storm petrels, Antarctic terns, and blue-eyed shags were
observed, indicating the continued use of ASMA No. 1 by a diverse
suite of seabirds.
The occurrence of other rare species to the ASMA was noted again
this year during their short visits to Copacabana Field Camp. A king
penguin laid and abandoned an egg during their stay. This bird
(banded by Polish researchers several years ago) has been present
in the Copacabana colonies for several years now A small flock of
white-rumped sandpipers was observed near the Baranowski
Glacier. An adult macaroni penguin visited for several days. These
observations suggest the broader importance of Admiralty Bay for
bird species not typically present in the ASMA No 1.
The presence of several marine mammal species was also noted.
Humpback, fin and killer whales, and leopard seals were observed
at sea within ASMA No. 1. On shore, numerous elephant, Antarctic
fur, and Weddell seals were observed. The presence and abundance
of such species suggests that species in ASMA No. 1 remain
abundant and attractive to a diverse set of marine predators.
In the general vicinity of Copacabana Field Camp, other values to
be protected include the rich vegetation, including grasses, lichens,
and mosses. Observations suggest healthy and lush growth in areas
not routinely used by penguins for breeding.
Near the Comandante Ferraz Station two moss carpet areas occur,
both of which are almost 300 m long. Hennequin Point has large
moss carpet areas as well. Even though moss carpets are the most
conspicuous vegetation form, there are several small patches of
mosses distributed everywhere on ice free areas across the bay.
In the vicinity of the Henryk Arctowski Station the eradication of
the non-native species of grass Poa annua continues. Eradication is
carried out in accordance with the methods proposed in the multi-
year research program “The causes, course and consequences of the
expansion of Poa annua L. in Western Antarctica, a multi-aspect
population study” which was carried out in 2014 – 2017. In
accordance with Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, as well as the CEP non-native
species manual, and the Management Plan of ASPA No 128,
measures to eradicate P. annua from the area are undertaken.
Progress was reported to ATCM XXXVIII/CEP XVIII (IP78), ATCM
XXXIX/CEP XIX (IP60), ATCM XL/CEP XX (IP47), ATCM XLII/CEP
XXII (IP150) and ATCMXLIII/CEP XXIII (IPIP089).
Human activity
There are currently two permanent year-round research stations
(Henryk Arctowski Station and Comandante Ferraz Station), three
seasonal research stations/facilities (Machu Picchu Station,
Copacabana Field Camp and República del Ecuador Refuge) and
several minor structures (historical remains, emergency refuges,
permanent field camps) in the Area.
In addition to numerous scientists, supporting personnel and
research expeditions, Admiralty Bay has been visited by an
increasing number of tourists, the latter mainly as organized tourist
ship expeditions and private yachts. However, visitor numbers
dropped dramatically during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recommendations
All personnel entering the ASMA No. 1 should be made aware of
the provisions of the Management Plan and required to follow the
guidance;
Personnel should be trained to reduce the risk of introducing non-
native species to the ASMA No. 1, including food-borne pathogens;
Personnel should be instructed to use vegetation-free walking routes
whenever possible to minimize trampling; and
Coordination among members of the ASMA No. 1 Management
Group should continue to ensure successful management of the
area.
