Consideration of climate change within the Antarctic Protected
Areas System
Consideration of climate change within the Antarctic Protected Area
System
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
An Action within the CEP Climate Change Response Work
Programme is to ‘Review and revise where necessary existing
management tools to consider if they aﬀord the best practical
adaptation measure to areas at risk from climate change’. In order
to inform this work, this paper examines how climate change is
represented within the CEP’s area protection guidance documents
and protected area management plans.
Background
Antarctica is increasingly vulnerable to climate change impacts,
with the continent predicted to warm by ~4 ◦C by 2100 under a
‘business as usual’ greenhouse gas emission scenario (see Figure 1).
At a continent-wide scale, the higher temperatures are predicted to
increase precipitation by about 30% and result in a 30% reduction
in sea ice extent. Predicted warming could result in up to a three-
fold increase in the area of ice-free ground in the central and
northern Antarctic Peninsula, and ice retreat across coastal areas of
continental Antarctica, with substantial impacts upon biological
communities (see also ATCMXLIII WP17).
The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) provides
a mechanism for identifying and revising goals and specific actions
by the CEP to support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty System to
prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a
changing climate and the associated implications for the
governance and management of Antarctica. Within the CCRWP
issue ‘Change to the terrestrial (including aquatic) biotic and abiotic
environment due to climate change’, Action 2(e) is to: ‘Review and
revise where necessary existing management tools to consider if
they aﬀord the best practical adaptation measure to areas at risk
from climate change’. In an effort to provide information to support
the Committee’s work on this Action, the United Kingdom
undertook a review of how climate change is represented in the
CEP’s area protection guidance documents and within the
management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs)
and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). The research is
published in a peer-reviewed journal (see Attachment A): Hughes,
K.A., Convey, P., and Turner, J. (2021). Developing resilience to
climate change impacts in Antarctica: An evaluation of Antarctic
Treaty System protected area policy. Environmental Science &
Policy 124, 12-22.
Results
Climate change is not mentioned explicitly in the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and is little
considered in guidelines for the designation and management of the
region’s existing protected areas. For example, climate change is not
considered in those guidance documents concerning Historic Sites
and Monuments, inspection of ASPAs, or consideration of new and
revised draft ASPA and ASMA management plans.
Climate change was considered in approximately one third of ASPA
management plans, but in almost all cases, this was primarily in the
context of scientific research activities. Climate change impacts on
the protected area were considered in only 17% of ASPA
management plans. Only 6% of ASPA management plans noted that
climate change had already caused changes to the management of
the protected area (e.g., revisions to area boundaries), all of which
were located in the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Arc. Overall,
there was inconsistency regarding the most appropriate section(s) of
the management plan for the consideration of climate change.
Climate change-related effects observed within protected areas
included declines in emperor penguin populations (ASPA 107),
declines in Adélie and chinstrap penguin populations (ASPAs 113,
128, 139), increases in gentoo penguin populations (ASPAs 128 and
139), substantial ice retreat (ASPAs 126, 128, 139), changes in
vegetation cover, diversity and community composition (ASPA 113,
135, 151) and establishment of non-native plants (ASPAs 128, 134;
ASMAs 1, 4).
Conclusions
An integrated protected area system is likely to provide Antarctic
species and habitats with increased resilience to climate change.
However, existing guidance on climate change impacts within
protected areas has largely taken a limited view, focussing on
protected areas as individual units. The provision of an integrated
strategy that sets out the blueprint for the use of the wider Antarctic
protected area system to provide climate change resilience has yet
to be developed. Designation of a number of new protected areas
(including a potential move toward designation of a smaller number
of larger areas) and integration of existing areas are likely to be
components of a practical solution. Facilitating this, researchers
could provide information on the distribution of recognised biotic
and abiotic values, the predicted spatial extent of climate change
under different greenhouse gas emission scenarios and likely
impacts upon biological groups, ecosystems and environments.
Researchers could also consider the characteristics of locations that
may act as climate change refugia, including candidate sites.
Ultimately, reducing global greenhouse gas emission will provide
the greatest protection from climate change impacts within
Antarctica.
Figure 1. The projected 2 m annual mean air temperature changes
between the means of 1970-1999 and 2070-2099 as determined
from the mean of one ensemble member from each of the currently
available models used in the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project 6 exercise. Data are shown for Shared Socioeconomic
Pathways (SSPs) 245 (a) and 585 (b). The hatched areas indicate
where < 50% of the models project significant change or where <
90% agree on the sign of the change. SSPs 245 and 585 represent
respectively a stabilization of radiative forcing at 4.5 and 8.5 W per
square metre by 2100, which can be regarded as essentially
moderate or high greenhouse gas emission scenarios.
