Expeditions within Expeditions: Authorizing Non-Governmental
Organization Activities Associated with Tourist and other Non-
Governmental Expedition Organizers
Expeditions within Expeditions: Authorizing Non-Governmental
Organization Activities Associated with Tourist and other Non-
Governmental Expedition Organizers
Submitted by the United States
Introduction
This paper is submitted with reference to Article 13, Paragraph 4 of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(the Protocol) regarding the sharing of information on activities
that may affect the implementation of the Protocol. The purpose of
this paper is to discuss the authorization The term “authorization”
is used broadly throughout to reference compliance with U.S. laws
and regulations implementing Protocol obligations. Unlike some
other Competent Authorities, the United States does not implement
a generic permit or authorization advising whether an organization
can proceed with its activity, or not. of non-governmental (NGO),
non-scientific expeditions to Antarctica which rely on tour operators
for logistical support. While the United States has authorized many
such activities in the past, recent changes in the types of requests
being received is leading to complexities which may result in
inconsistencies in authorization. Our intent with this paper is to
discuss these changes and to share how we intend to approach
authorizing NGO activities in the future. We also hope to encourage
communication amongst Parties to identify and address shared
challenges in how NGO activities are authorized and managed by
Competent Authorities.
Background: authorization of NGO activities
Non-governmental expeditions to the Antarctic have long relied on
tourist or other NGO operators for logistical support and access to
the region. The activities of these so-called ‘expeditions within
expeditions’ are separate from the authorized activities of the
tourism or other NGO operator.
As with NGO science expeditions, detailed in IP XX “Authorization
of Science Activities Associated with Tourist and other NGO
Expedition Organizers,” non-scientific NGO expeditions must obtain
the appropriate independent authorizations from U.S. Competent
Authorities. This includes providing advanced notification under
Article VII (5)(a) of the Antarctic Treaty and submitting an
environmental impact assessment (EIA) in accordance with Article 8
and Annex I of the Protocol. Expedition organizers must also obtain
any necessary permits required to conduct planned activities in the
Antarctic in accordance with the Protocol and U.S. legislation.
Currently, flora and fauna and protected area permits under Annex
II and Annex V are not issued to non-scientific NGO operators, with
the exception that NGO expeditions may be issued permits for entry
into Historic Huts which are designated as ASPAs. All U.S.-
authorized NGO operators using Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) are expected to follow guidelines listed in the
Environmental Guidelines for Operation of Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (Resolution 4, 2018). All NGO operators using
RPAS are encouraged to obtain a waste
management permit under the Antarctic Conservation Act (ACA),
the U.S. legislation which implements Article IV of the Protocol.
Although not explicitly required, an ACA permit is strongly
encouraged by the U.S. Competent Authorities in the event of an
accidental release of waste should an RPA become lost or
irretrievable.
Concerns and complicating factors
As Antarctic tourism continues to grow and the region becomes
more accessible, U.S. Competent Authorities have been seeing an
increase in requests to authorize more of these ‘expeditions within
expeditions.’ This includes requests for filmmaking expeditions and
land-based commercial, educational, or recreational expeditions.
Documentary and commercial filmmakers have historically relied
on NGO operators for access to the region for filmmaking purposes.
In recent seasons, U.S. Competent Authorities have reviewed an
increasing number of these types of filmmaking expeditions,
particularly those using RPAS for filming. Land-based filming has
been authorized in the past, but typically filmmaking takes place
aboard NGO vessels. In some cases, filmmakers will provide the
tour operator with material that can be used as promotional and
commercial material in addition to filming material for their own
purposes. We have also been reviewing an increased number of
requests for land-based activities which rely on NGO operators for
travel to and around the continent. Such land-based activities
include solo expeditions, mountaineering and other self-organized
activities that are independent from the shore-based activities
offered by the tour operator.
Typically, NGO expeditions are expected to obtain independent
authorization, however in recent seasons we have received requests
from a class of ‘expeditions within expeditions’ that they be
included in the authorization of the supporting tour operator. These
requests have mainly been from RPAS-based filming expeditions
which are seeking to have their activities included under the
authorization and EIA of the NGO operator providing logistical
support. They also seek all RPAS activity to be covered under the
waste management permit of operator, many of which utilize RPAS
for commercial and navigational purposes. Requests to include
third-party NGO activities under an operator’s authorizations are
especially common when there is a time constraint that limits the
expeditions’ ability to obtain independent authorizations. The
unpredictability of Antarctic Tourism in recent seasons due to the
COVID-19 pandemic has led to an increase in these types of last-
minute requests. This change in how NGO expeditions hope to be
authorized has raised questions amongst the U.S. Competent
Authorities about how to ensure authorizations for NGO expeditions
can receive appropriate oversight and that the individuals directly
responsible for an activity are the ones authorized.
As tourism and other NGO operations in the Antarctic resume
following the COVID-19 pandemic, U.S. Competent Authorities have
decided on a standard of practice that requires all third-party, non-
scientific NGO expeditions working with tourism or NGO operators
to obtain independent authorization regardless of the size or the
nature of the proposed activity. This ensures that all expeditions
can be managed and overseen by the appropriate U.S. Competent
Authority and that authorizations are issued to the individuals
directly responsible for a particular activity. While an NGO
expedition may obtain individual authorization from U.S.
Competent Authorities, it is ultimately the decision of the NGO
operator supporting the activity to allow it to proceed or not.
Independent authorization from U.S. Competent Authorities does
not supersede the ultimate discretion of the tourism or other NGO
operator supporting the expedition within an expedition
We are also witnessing an increase in ‘expeditions within
expeditions’ that plan to obtain logistics support from non-U.S.
authorized NGO operators. We expect U.S. citizens to seek
authorization from the U.S. Competent Authorities for all planned
activities in Antarctica, even those taking place with the support of
foreign NGO operators. We understand that other Competent
Authorities may have different requirements for foreign nationals
working aboard
vessels under their jurisdiction. This raise concerns over how to best
coordinate with other Competent Authorities to ensure that all
necessary requirements are met and to prevent duplicate
authorizations or forum-shopping.
Moving forward: developing best practices and encouraging
collaboration with other parties
As Antarctic tourism resumes normal operations following two
seasons impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the United States
hopes to develop a system of best practices to address the questions
and concerns raised in this information paper. We expect that the
growing and fast-changing nature of Antarctic tourism means that
such circumstances may become more common in the future. By
requiring all third-party NGO expeditions working with tourist or
other NGO operators to seek independent authorization we hope to
promote consistency in our authorization processes and to continue
to appropriately manage all U.S.-based expeditions to Antarctica.
The United States welcomes input and discussion from other
Competent Authorities on this and related topics as we move
forward in addressing the challenges arising from the changing
landscape of Antarctic tourism. We understand that other
Competent Authorities may have similar experiences and concerns
to share, and we hope to encourage conversation between Parties
on these issues. Many of these concerns are currently being
addressed by WG-2: Tourism and we support the work being
proposed by the Convenors. We look forward to working with other
Parties to discuss standards and best practices and to establish
methods for future collaboration.
