Update on the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action
Plan and major initiatives
Update on the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action
Plan and major initiatives
Summary
The 2022 update to the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year
Action Plan (the Strategy and Action Plan) further strengthens
Australia’s capabilities in the Antarctic region. It reaffirms
Australia’s strong commitment to the Antarctic Treaty system and
to ensuring Antarctica remains valued, protected and understood.
This paper highlights new measures associated with the updated
Strategy and Action Plan and reports on progress on major
initiatives, including: the entry into service of Australia’s new, state-
of-the-art icebreaker, RSV Nuyina, modernising Australia’s Antarctic
research stations, and contributing to the search for a million year
ice core.
2022 update to the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year
Action Plan
Australia has reviewed and updated the Australian Antarctic
Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan (the Strategy and Action Plan),
which was first released in 2016. The Strategy and Action Plan sets
out Australia’s Antarctic interests and vision for future engagement
in Antarctica. The 2022 update further strengthens Australia’s
logistic and scientific capabilities in the region, and reaffirms
Australia’s strong commitment to the Antarctic Treaty system and
to ensuring Antarctica remains valued, protected and understood.
New measures in the 2022 update to the Strategy and Action Plan
include:
an expansion of Australia’s scientific capabilities, including:
research focused on Antarctic ice sheet science to build global
understanding of climate change impacts
new research to improve our understanding of Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean’s role in the global climate system by expanding
Australia’s logistical capability, including new longrange helicopters
and autonomous vehicles.
providing logistical shipping support to allow Australia’s new
icebreaker, RSV Nuyina, to focus on extended scientific voyages,
and
marine science in the Southern Ocean and a new state-of-the-art
krill aquarium in Hobart.
greater support for Australia’s environmental management
including a ‘Cleaner Antarctica Strategy’, and
support for Hobart as a gateway to East Antarctica.
These measures anticipate and present new opportunities for
collaboration amongst Antarctic Treaty Parties to build scientific
understanding of the region, to ensure the region is protected and
continues to be dedicated to peace and science.
The updated Strategy and Action Plan can be found on the
Australian Antarctic Division’s website.
Updates on major initiatives
Consistent with the updated Strategy and Action Plan, Australia is
continuing with major initiatives announced in 2016, including:
making use of Australia’s new, state-of-the-art icebreaker, RSV
Nuyina, planning for infrastructure upgrades to our Antarctic
research stations, and contributing to the international search for a
million year ice core.
RSV Nuyina
Australia achieved a major milestone in 2021 with the delivery of
its new Antarctic icebreaker, RSV Nuyina. The vessel provides a
state-of-the-art capability to conduct multidisciplinary science, both
in sea ice and open water. It is the main lifeline for delivering
essential personnel, cargo and equipment to and from Australia’s
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic research stations.
Following the first steel cutting in 2017 and the successful
completion of a range of trials during 2020 and 2021, RSV Nuyina
arrived in its home port of Hobart, Australia in October 2021.
A comprehensive commissioning program was undertaken in
2021-22 to prepare the vessel and crew for Antarctic operations.
RSV Nuyina completed its maiden voyage to Antarctica in late
January 2022. As part of the voyage, RSV Nuyina delivered
helicopters to Davis research station, refuelled Casey research
station, and underwent commissioning of marine science systems.
The vessel then supported a second voyage to retrieve helicopters
from Davis research station and conduct a resupply of Macquarie
Island research station, concluding in March 2022. RSV Nuyina has
now sailed to Singapore for a pre-planned dry dock inspection and
works program, in readiness for the 2022-23 Antarctic season.
The scientific research capability of RSV Nuyina is being
progressively commissioned over the first two seasons (2021-22 and
2022-23), before the first major marine science campaign planned
for early in the 2023-24 Antarctic season. Scientific research
commissioning during the 2021-22 season focussed on underwater
and hull-mounted science capabilities, so that any issues identified
can be rectified during the dry docking.
Further information about RSV Nuyina’s achievements in the
2021-22 season and results from commissioning of marine science
systems is available from the Australian Antarctic Division’s
website. Further information about RSV Nuyina is available from
the Australian Antarctic Division’s dedicated RSV Nuyina website.
Figure 1: RSV Nuyina moves through fast ice. © Pete Harmsen/
Australian Antarctic Division
Modernising Antarctic research stations
In ATCM XLIII/IP103 Australia reported on progress to investigate
options for refurbishing or rebuilding Australia’s Antarctic research
stations and associated infrastructure. In that paper
Australia noted master plans were in development for Davis,
Mawson and Casey research stations, and for the seasonal Wilkins
aerodrome.
The updated Strategy and Action Plan continues Australia’s
commitment to develop modern research infrastructure, and to
consider options for more efficient and flexible use of existing
stations.
The station modernisation program will provide infrastructure that
will support Australia’s longterm scientific objectives and
operational needs.
Initial master plans for modernising Davis research station and
Wilkins aerodrome have been completed, and work is underway to
plan the delivery of these projects. Work is also continuing on the
development of master plans for Casey and Mawson research
stations.
Master plans aim to address the challenges of living and working in
Antarctica, while delivering sustainable, world-class facilities to
support Antarctic science and operations.
Further information about the Davis research station master plan is
available from the Australian Antarctic Division’s website.
Figure 2: Casey Station and Newcomb Bay. © Justin Chambers/
Australian Antarctic Division
Enhanced traverse capability and million-year ice core
In ATCM XLIII/IP 103 Australia reported on the Traverse and
Inland Station Project, developed to support the scientific and
operational requirements of the Australian Antarctic Program,
through the delivery of a mobile research station and associated
equipment.
The initial focus of the enhanced traverse capability is to support
Australia’s involvement in a collaborative project to recover an ice
core with a million year climate history. Drilling for the million
year ice core will take place at Little Dome C, approximately 30
kilometres south of Concordia station. Drilling is expected to occur
over four or five seasons, depending on the weather and other
conditions.
The traverse capability is now approaching completion with key
machinery and equipment delivered to Australia’s Casey research
station in 2020, 2021 and 2022. This includes the delivery of
tractors and snow groomers, which will be used to prepare the
traverse route from Casey research station to Little Dome C
(approximately 1200 kilometres). This route is expected to be
confirmed in coming months, with the first route-proving traverse
scheduled to depart Casey in December 2022.
Australia has completed construction of a mobile research station,
which was successfully delivered to Casey research station during
the 2021-22 season. Power generation units are scheduled to be
delivered next season, prior to deployment to Little Dome C in
2023-24.
Further information about the Traverse and Inland Station Project is
available from the Australian Antarctic Division’s website.
Figure 3: Traverse tractor in Antarctica. © Chris Burns/Australian
Antarctic Division
Davis Aerodrome Project
In ATCM XLIII/IP103 Australia informed Parties about progress
towards establishing year-round aviation access capability in East
Antarctica, to enhance the aviation capability in East Antarctica.
Australia reported on dedicated field investigations to identify a
proposed site for a paved runway, approximately 4.5 kilometres
from Davis research station in the Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica,
and to inform preparations of a draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation (CEE) for the proposal to construct and operate the
aerodrome (the Davis Aerodrome Project).
Australia has decided not to proceed with the Davis Aerodrome
Project, following careful consideration of the likely environmental
impact, cost and complexity of the project. Significant progress had
been made on assessing the environmental values of the Vestfold
Hills and potential impacts of the proposal. This enhanced
knowledge will support Australia’s commitment to best practice
environmental stewardship in Antarctica, including through the
rigorous planning, assessment and conduct of future activities, and
consideration of options for ongoing and enhanced environmental
protection and management in the region.
Further information is provided in an Information Paper submitted
to CEP XXIV on Davis Aerodrome Project: Decision by Australia not
to proceed, and knowledge gained of the Vestfold Hills
environment.
