The usefulness of the Environmental Guidelines for operation of
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems in Antarctica - Insights from a
survey
The usefulness of the Environmental Guidelines for operation of
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems in Antarctica - Insights from a
survey
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
This paper provides a summarised overview of the results of a
survey amongst the National Competent Authorities (NCA) initiated
and carried out by Germany. The survey looked at the use of the
Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS A Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS) is
defined by the International Civil Aviation Authority (ICAO) (2015)
as “A remotely piloted aircraft, its associated remote pilot station(s),
the required command and control links and any other components
as specified in the type design”. A Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA)
is “An unmanned aircraft which is piloted from a remote pilot
station”. RPAS are one class of Unmanned Aerial System (UAS), and
they are often referred to as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) or ‘drones’. In this context RPAS
is used for all types of remotely piloted drone systems, the term
which has also been adopted by COMNAP, SCAR and a number of
national authorities, and RPA is used to refer specifically to the
aircraft itself.) in Antarctica (v 1.1) https://documents.ats.aq/
recatt/att645_e.pdf adopted in 2018 (Resolution 4 (2018)) and at
the general satisfaction of the NCA with them. The poll has verified
that RPAS activities are part of almost all Antarctic programmes,
comprising all fields of scientific research, tourism and recreational
use. The majority of the NCA have already included the guidelines
in their permitting processes. Most applications are for scientific
purposes, followed by tourism and recreational use. Most NCA find
the guidelines useful or adequate, with the strength of the
guidelines being mostly regarded as well balanced. Twelve
authorities have given extensive feedback on the flaws or possible
improvements of the guidelines, most of the feedback includes
different aspects of environmental/wildlife considerations, technical
limitations and structural improvements.
Introduction
Because of the rapidly growing use of RPAS in the Antarctic Treaty
Area and its only partly known impacts on wildlife, Environmental
Guidelines for RPAS were developed during an intersessional ICG in
2017/2018, which was convened by Germany (see ATCM XL IP38
Use of UAVs in Antarctica - A competent authority’s perspective and
lessons learned and ATCM XLI WP29 Report from the CEP
Intersessional Contact Group to develop guidelines on the
environmental aspects of the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs) / Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica).
With Resolution 4 (2018) the Environmental Guidelines for
operation of RPAS in Antarctica (v 1.1) (hereafter called ‘the
Guidelines’) were finally adopted (see also Harris et al. (2019)).
Four years after the adoption of these Guidelines, Germany has
raised the question whether the current state of knowledge and the
experiences gathered so far with the Guidelines could already
justify a guideline revision (see WP14). One step of this evaluation
was to conduct a survey amongst the NCA by sending them an
appropriate questionnaire and asking for responses. The aim of this
paper is to present the summarised results of the responses
Germany received from NCA.
Summarised results of the questionnaire evaluation
In December 2021, Germany posted a message about the intention
of this request and the Questionnaire regarding the use and benefit
of the RPAS guidelines (see Attachment) to the web-based Forum of
Competent Authorities (at www.ats.aq) and additionally sent it to
CEP representatives via e-mail. By February 2022, 19 NCA and
IAATO had responded and sent back filled-in questionnaires.
Part I – RPAS usage and application of RPAS guidelines in
Antarctica
(1) Are drone operations in Antarctica part of the activities of
members of your nation?
(2) Do you know the Environmental Guidelines for operation of
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica?
(3) Have you/your authority worked with these guidelines?
(4) Are the guidelines a requirement of the permitting process or
the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)?
(1) Are drone operations in Antarctica part of the activities of
members of your nation?
(2) Do you know the Environmental Guidelines for operation of
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica?
(3) Have you/your authority worked with these guidelines?
(4) Are the guidelines a requirement of the permitting process or
the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)?
Results from the questions 1 – 4
All 19 NCA (plus IAATO) which gave feedback on the guidelines
gave answers to questions 1-4 on the application of the Guidelines
in their countries. Questions 1-4 and the results are shown in figure
1. The majority of NCA (89 %) stated that drones have been used
during Antarctic activities, all NCA are aware of the Guidelines, and
most of them (84 %) have applied the Guidelines before. In 15
countries, the guidelines are a requirement of the permitting
process or the EIA (79 %).
Figure 1: Answers to questions 1-4.
Results from the questions
(5) How many applications connected with the use of RPAS in
Antarctica do you usually have each year in the fields of
Journalism, Science, Tourism, Logistics and Others?
(6) What is the proportion of permit applications that include RPAS
use in the total number of applications?
(5) How many applications connected with the use of RPAS in
Antarctica do you usually have each year in the fields of
Journalism, Science, Tourism, Logistics and Others?
(6) What is the proportion of permit applications that include RPAS
use in the total number of applications?
5 and 6
Regarding the fields of applications of RPAS, in most countries
scientific usage is dominant or at least among the most common
uses (see Figure 2), though the single highest number of
applications (10) was reported for tourism. The mean number of
applications per NCA and year ranged from 0.17 (other usages) to 2
(scientific usage). Others include communication purposes and
closely managed recreational use. The proportion of permit
application that included RPAS ranged from 0 to 80 %.
Figure 2: number of applications connected with RPAS in different
fields per year (Question 5).
Part II – Assessment of usefulness and balance of guidelines and
proposed improvements
Results from the questions 7 and 8
(7) Do you consider the current version of the guidelines (v1.1) as
useful for your permitting process or EIA (Scale ranging from very
useful to not useful)?
(8) Do you think the guidelines are … (Scale ranging from too strict
to too weak)?
(7) Do you consider the current version of the guidelines (v1.1) as
useful for your permitting process or EIA (Scale ranging from very
useful to not useful)?
(8) Do you think the guidelines are … (Scale ranging from too strict
to too weak)?
The assessment of usefulness of the Guidelines was answered by 17
of 19 NCA (plus IAATO). The majority of those find the guidelines
in their current form useful (65 %), with 24 % of NCA additionally
regarding them as adequate. One NCA each deemed the guidelines
useful ‘with limitations’ and ‘not useful’. The balance of the current
guidelines was assessed by 16 NCA, with most of them (87 %)
finding them well balanced, and two regarding them as weak.
Results from the questions 9 and 10
(9) What/which aspects do you miss in the guidelines? (e.g. size/
weight limits, reporting forms, minimum distances to wildlife)
(10) What should/could be improved?
(9) What/which aspects do you miss in the guidelines? (e.g. size/
weight limits, reporting forms, minimum distances to wildlife)
(10) What should/could be improved?
A lot of feedback on flaws and possible improvements of the
guidelines was given by 12 of 19 NCA (plus IAATO). A synthesis of
the proposals will be summarized in the following.
Environmental considerations
The most requested environmentally related change was to include
minimum distances to animals using specific values, as requested by
two thirds of the authorities. Other proposals to better protect
environmental values were restricted time periods for RPAS
operations (particularly during breeding seasons and/or due to
weather conditions like visibility, wind, temperature) and more
details on interference with fauna and flora.
Technical considerations
The main concerns raised were technical limitations that should be
defined within the Guidelines, such as a noise level threshold, flight
speed regulations or weight, size and distance limitations
(especially near wildlife). These limitations should also be defined
in more detail giving clear numbers instead of broad statements.
Additionally, technical requirements for RPAS used in Antarctica
should be reinforced, recommending or demanding return-home
functions, on-board GPS, communications with pilot, battery
warning systems, electric powered engine, failsafe auto-landing
systems and floatation systems when flying over water. Guidance
should also be given on how to deal with out-of-sight-sight missions
and on how to treat possible technical advancements in the future.
Maximum distances between RPAS an its pilot (if not beyond the
line of sight) should be prescribed.
Certifications
Several NCA proposed stronger demands of certificates for pilots
and airworthiness of RPAS models. A uniform ecological training
for pilots was also proposed.
Coordination and Communication
The most requested improvement for communication about RPAS
activities were templates for reports of flight activities, especially
and most importantly an accident report form. Several authorities
also requested better regulation of the coordination of several
airborne activities in one area, be it RPAS (with regards to
accumulated environmental risk as well as security) or manned
flight activities, namely restrictions or at least communication
requirements in the vicinity of runways. Communications should be
developed to faster and easier exchange experiences and results
between users, as well as between authorities to unify permit
processes and also exchange experiences.
Others
Other recommendations included considerations that should be
regarded in the Guidelines, such as more details and special
requirements for operating RPAS from ships or specific guidelines
for operating RPAS in Important Bird Areas (IBAs) and Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs). An incorporation of the
COMNAP manual (forms, incident report) was also proposed.
Several NCA required a better consideration of non-scientific users
and purposes, like tourism and recreational use, a user-friendly
summary was recommended, as well as the inclusion of more
visuals. Specific measures for different purposes should be regarded.
Note: If any Party is interested in the complete but anonymised
responses, please contact the German CEP Contact Point.
Discussion and conclusion
The application of RPAS in Antarctica is relevant for nearly all
responding NCA. The existing Guidelines obviously have become an
important part of the permitting process for the majority of NAC
that responded. Less unexpected is the fact that the most common
reason for using drones is scientific research. Surprisingly, however,
RPAS use for tourist purposes comes in second place, although
IAATO still has a ban on the recreational use of drones on their
ships.
The most requested improvement was the inclusion of minimal
distances of RPAS to wildlife. Other frequent suggestions involved
inclusion of different specific technical limitations, like size and
weight limits or noise thresholds. Many of these aspects have been
part of the discussion during the process of developing the existing
Guidelines from 2018, but were ultimately not included in these,
for reasons of, amongst others, high complexity, structural or
organisational concerns, or a lack of scientific basis. Other
commonly requested changes concerning the structure and design
of the guidelines have evolved over four years of application. Those
suggestions involve a user-friendly summary, with higher focus on
non-scientific applications for tourism and recreational use. They
also involve the inclusion of report forms for activities and incidents
and suggest a better link to other guidelines such as those by
COMNAP. Some of the improvements proposed by the NAC like the
advice to use RPAS with return-home functions or with on-board
GPS are actually already part of the RPAS Guidelines (v 1.1) from
2018.
From the results described above the recommendation can be
derived that the Environmental Guidelines for operation of
Remotely Piloted Air-craft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (v 1.1)
should be revised regarding their content as well as their structure
in the near future (for specific proposals see WP14). Further, some
NCA have expressed their wish to discuss the experiences with the
usage of the RPAS guidelines within the web-based discussion
forum for NCA at the ATS-website (www.ats.aq).
Reference
Harris, Colin M., Heike Herata, and Fritz Hertel. 2019.
“Environmental Guidelines for Operation of Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (RPAS): Experience from Antarctica.” Biological
Conservation 236: 521–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biocon.2019.05.019 available also at http://www.iau.gub.uy/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/Environmental-guidelines-for-operation-
of-Remotely-Piloted-Aircraft-Systems.pdf
Attachment
Questionnaire regarding the use and benefit of the RPAS guidelines
http://www.iau.gub.uy/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/
Environmental-guidelines-for-operation-of-Remotely-Piloted-
Aircraft-Systems.pdf
In 2018, ATCM adopted Resolution 4 (2018) ‘Environmental
guidelines for the operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica’. Further, ‘The Committee had noted the
importance of reviewing and revising the guidelines, as appropriate,
to reflect the current state of scientific knowledge of the
environmental impacts and benefits of RPAS, and had encouraged
support for further related research’ (see Final Report ATCM41).
This questionnaire ties in with the above-mentioned decisions of the
Committee regarding the future revision of the RPAS Guidelines.
For this task, we would like to get feedback from the potential
users. Although the guidelines are also used by the actual operators
of the drones (scientists, journalists, etc.), they are particularly
important for those carrying out the environmental impact
assessments for authorising the planned use of drones.
Please note that all information we receive will be evaluated
anonymously, i.e. it will not be possible to draw conclusions about
individual survey participants. Thank you!
Are drone operations in Antarctica part of the activities of members
of your nation?
⃝ Yes
⃝ No
⃝ I do not know
Do you know the Environmental Guidelines for operation of
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica?
⃝ Yes
⃝ No
Have you/your authority worked with these guidelines?
⃝ Yes
⃝ No
⃝ No, but we intend to do it in future
⃝ I do not know
Are the guidelines a requirement of the permitting process or the
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)?
⃝ Yes
⃝ No
How many applications connected with the use of RPAS in
Antarctica do you usually have each year? Please fill the following
table:
Journalism
Science
Tourism
Logistics
Other
Applications
(If precise numbers are not available, please estimate)
What is the proportion of permit applications that include RPAS use
in the total number of applications?
…..... %
(If precise numbers are not available, please estimate)
Do you consider the current version of the guidelines (v1.1) as
useful for your permitting process or EIA?
Very useful
Useful
Adequate
With limitations
Not useful
Do you think the guidelines are …
too strict
strict
well balanced
weak
too weak
What/which aspects do you miss in the guidelines? (e.g. size/
weight limits, reporting forms, minimum distances to wildlife)
…………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………
What should/could be improved?
…………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………
