Diversity and inclusion in the Australian Antarctic program
Diversity and inclusion in the Australian Antarctic program
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) is committed to increasing
diversity across all aspects of the Australian Antarctic Program
(AAP) and ensuring that all employees and expeditioners feel
welcome and respected. To this effect, a range of initiatives have
been delivered over recent years, with work in this space continuing
as a priority.
Background
The AAD as the Governmental organisation coordinating and
delivering the AAP is responsible for a large community of
employees and Antarctic expeditioners. The AAP brings together
people from a wide range of Australian and international
organisations. People are located at head office, on Antarctic
research stations, in the field and on Australian Antarctic vessels. As
with other Antarctic programs, our Antarctic workplaces are also
personal, living and social places. The AAD seeks to ensure that all
employees and expeditioners are safe, welcome and respected, and
free from any discrimination, and is committed to increasing
diversity across all aspects of the AAP. The AAD has implemented a
range of initiatives to support this commitment, outlined below.
The establishment of an AAD inclusion, diversity and gender equity
working group to promote equity, diversity, inclusion and respect
across the AAD and AAP.
Engagement of a professor from the University of Tasmania to
undertake research into barriers and challenges for women in the
AAP.
The AAD is now focusing on addressing the findings of this research
and recommendations.
A review of the AAD’s Expeditioner Personal Qualities (which
underpin recruitment and performance activities) to ensure that we
are selecting people into the AAP that share our values.
The new Personal Qualities were introduced in 2021 and are the
focus of our current recruitment and selection campaign, and the
redesign of our performance reporting framework.
An increased focus on diversity and inclusion across the AAD’s
recruitment activities including imagery, social media activity and
targeted advertising focussed on underrepresented groups.
Diversity has also been a focus for our broader social media
presence.
Introduction of new lines of clothing and equipment in women’s
sizes and designed to accommodate women’s needs in field
environments.
Promoting inclusion through our AAD/AAP seminar series topics
and speakers, and addition of preferred gender pronouns to
signature blocks.
Celebrating international days of recognition including
International Women’s Day (IWD), International Day Against
Homophobia, Biphobia, Interphobia, and Transphobia (IDAHOBIT)
across the AAD and AAP.
Alongside these initiatives, a range of resources have been rolled
out across the Program including ensuring participants in the AAP
understand behavioural expectations and are appropriately
equipped to respond to inappropriate behaviour through activities
such as:
Introduction of Bystander training for all expeditioners (as well as
head office staff)
Pre-departure briefings for expeditioners, focussed on behavioural
expectations and increasing awareness about organisational
resources and pathways for reporting inappropriate behaviour.
Additionally, recent updates to our AAP Field Manual now address
gender specific issues including menstruation, as well as sexual
harassment and assault.
In 2021 a cultural change program was commenced for the AAD,
drawing on an external specialist cultural consulting organisation as
a delivery partner. This is on ongoing program to improve
behaviour, communication, diversity and application of our core
values across both head office and on station. A new Alcohol and
Drug policy for the AAP has been adopted, with a focus on ensuring
a positive and welcoming culture on our stations.
In future actions, the AAD is in the initial stages of engaging a
Diversity and Inclusion specialist to work with us to develop a
deliver a diversity and inclusion action plan this year. This work
will be aligned with our Department’s diversity and inclusion
strategy and associated action plans.
