ASOC report to the ATCM
ASOC report to the ATCM
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be attending the XLIV Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work
over the last year.
ASOC’s Secretariat is located in Washington, DC, USA, and its
website is https://www.asoc.org. ASOC has 24 member
organizations active in a wide range of Antarctic Treaty countries
who are committed to the preservation of Antarctica as a place for
peace and science. We are pleased to report that the International
Cryosphere Climate Initiative has re-joined ASOC since the XLIII
ATCM.
Although the ongoing pandemic and current global affairs prove
undoubted difficulties to the work of the ATCM, it is now more than
ever, that Consultative Parties need urgently to address the impacts
of climate change in Antarctica and its surrounding ocean. In the
words of the UN Secretary-General on the publication of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Working Group III
Report “Mitigation of Climate Change” in April, “The jury has
reached a verdict. And it is damning…It is a file of shame,
cataloguing the empty pledges that put us firmly on track towards
an unliveable world......Climate scientists warn that we are already
perilously close to tipping points that could lead to cascading and
irreversible climate impacts.” ASOC therefore encourages the ATCM
to rise to the occasion and provide urgent protection to vulnerable
ecosystems and prevent irreversible damage at this time of rapid
change.
2021 marked several major Antarctic anniversaries, including the
60th anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, the
30th anniversary of the Madrid Protocol on Environmental
Protection, and the 40th meeting of the Commission for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).
Furthermore, the 40th anniversary of the CAMLR Convention
coming into force was celebrated earlier in 2022. These milestones
highlight the need to embark on a new era of Antarctic preservation
and conservation, including designating new protected areas,
assigning emperor penguins the status of Specially Protected
Species, and responding to the impact of climate change.
Intersessional Activities
Many of ASOC’s activities in 2021 focused on celebrating and
reflecting on the above-mentioned anniversaries. Some highlights
are listed below, together with other intersessional activities.
On March 30, 2021, The Pew Charitable Trusts organized a
workshop at The Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
in Washington, DC. Twenty international experts discussed how
changes in the Southern Ocean impact global climate regulation,
marine ecosystems and human communities, and the policy
responses needed to address climate risks. The report echoed grave
concerns about the ongoing climate crisis. Pew also supported
various technical and management focused events throughout the
last year including: A Global Dialogue on Biodiversity, Law and
Governance with the University of Colorado, Macquarie University
and Wuhan University and a task force planning for the Second
Southern Ocean Decade workshop in September 2021.
In June 2021, ASOC launched and promoted its online digital story
map during last year’s ATCM. The story map, Securing the Next
Thirty Years of Antarctic Protection, features infographics,
animation and video on black carbon pollutants, climate change,
current status of some penguin species, and also protected areas. It
also highlights Antarctic governance and environmental
protection issues, and reiterates the importance of the ATS to secure
full-scale Antarctic environmental protection.
ASOC also organised a public outreach campaign on Southern
Ocean protection. In September 2021, musicians from around the
world took part in a virtual performance called OnlyOne Antarctica.
The virtual concert, supported by the Blue Nature Alliance, in
collaboration with Lookport and OnlyOne was streamed live across
social and media channels including Tencent in China and
Lookport. The concert was a success with over 270,000 views across
multiple platforms.
OnlyOne and SeaLegacy hosted a public Antarctic art exhibit in
New York City in September 2021. The exhibit, Antarctica: The
Greatest Sanctuary featured photography from ocean
conservationists Paul Nicklen, Cristina Mittermeier, Andy Mann,
and John Weller showing the power and beauty of Antarctica.
Panels of the exhibit were also on display at the Our Ocean
Conference in Palau in April 2022.
ASOC participated in the international conference Antarctica:
Present and Future in Madrid, Spain, on October 4, 2021. This
conference welcomed ministers, leading scientists, experts and
representatives of the NGO community from around the world to
commemorate the 30th anniversary of the Madrid Protocol. The
event reviewed the achievements since the implementation of the
Protocol and reflected on challenges ahead for the next thirty years
of Antarctic protection.
ASOC also participated in the virtual fortieth CCAMLR meeting in
October of 2021; and at the virtual SC-CAMLR symposium in March
2022. During the CCAMLR meeting, ASOC shared on its social
media platforms messages from Antarctic youth to the countries
that govern Antarctica. Video participants expressed their reasons
for valuing Antarctic conservation and their vision for future
Antarctic protection.
At the IUCN World Conservation Congress in Marseille (September
2021), Pascal Lamy and Geneviève Pons – “champions” of ASOC
Member Antarctica2020 – delivered a petition to the President of
France Emmanuel Macron of 1.5 million worldwide signatures that
call for the protection of Antarctica. The petition was subsequently
handed over to the European Commission President Ursula von der
Leyen, and to the President of Spain Pedro Sánchez.
ASOC has participated via the Friends of the Earth International
(FOEI) delegation in the meetings of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), including the meetings of the Maritime Safety
Committee and its Navigation, Communications, and Search &
Rescue sub-committee and a correspondence group which have
adopted guidelines for fishing vessels and pleasure yachts operating
in polar regions and developed mandatory regulations on
navigation and voyage planning for these vessels in polar regions.
ASOC has also contributed to work at the IMO on marking and
reporting of abandoned lost and discarded fishing gear and
developed an infographic on marine plastic pollution from shipping.
ASOC attended the 26th Conference of Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, supporting a WWF
event on blue carbon at the Panda Pavilion and several official side
events. ASOC member the International Cryosphere Climate
Initiative hosted a Cryosphere Pavilion, which included many
Antarctic climate-related events.
ASOC member Agenda Antarctica published the 8th volume of its
publication Antarctic Affairs with a focus on the 30th anniversary of
the Protocol.
Throughout the past twelve months ASOC contributed to
intersessional discussions at the online ATCM and CEP fora
including discussions on climate change, protected areas, and
tourism. Additionally, ASOC appreciates working with other
observers and experts including SCAR, IAATO, and COMNAP.
Support for policy-relevant science and science communications
Greenpeace undertook an expedition to the Antarctic Peninsula
region with a focus on the remote Weddell Sea (January-March
2022). Sea ice in Antarctic waters has reached the lowest extent on
satellite record since 2017. This enabled the expedition to reach
into the Weddell Sea, where it conducted a deep submarine dive
believed to be the southernmost scientific dive in a crewed
submarine. The expedition completed 12 research dives in 10 days.
The southernmost dive took place in the Weddell Sea at
65°03.624’S, 055°54.300’W, on 9 March 2022. Researchers
documented and identified an abundance of life and vulnerable
ecosystems on the Antarctic seafloor. This expedition is part of
Greenpeace’s “30x30” campaign to protect thirty percent of the
global ocean by 2030. Research conducted from this scientific dive
will be used to identify and designate Vulnerable Marine
Ecosystems and secure the crucial protection it urgently needs.
In March 2021, with the support of the Blue Nature Alliance, ASOC
partnered with the Museum of Natural History in Paris, France to
develop biodiversity indicators for Southern Ocean conservation
planning. The project will produce a map of bioregions based on
species phylogenetic diversity (phyloregions). Identification of
phyloregions is a powerful method that allows researchers to map
distance among species assemblages (“phylogenetic turnover”)
between regions and determine priority areas for conservation.
In August 2021, ASOC gave a presentation on climate change and
Southern Ocean resilience at an online lecture series organised
jointly with Lomonosov Moscow State University Marine Research
Center and the International Humanitarian Cooperation in the
context of several ocean and climate science events devoted to the
launch of the UN Decade of Ocean Science.
Concluding remarks
ASOC is delighted to attend the XLIV ATCM as the world continues
to navigate multiple global crises. The Antarctic Treaty is one of the
most successful multilateral treaties in history and has successfully
promoted a spirit of international cooperation for decades. The
milestone anniversaries celebrated in 2021 give us reason to reflect
on strengthening Antarctic cooperation and to address the dual
crises of climate change and biodiversity loss. Successful Antarctic
governance requires increasing the commitment to full-scale
Antarctic environmental protection.
There is an overwhelming political will to address the threats to the
health of Antarctica, including adopting new comprehensive
protection measures such as marine protected areas, expanding the
system of specially protected areas, assigning Specially Protected
Species status to the emperor penguin, and taking action on climate
change. ASOC urges ATCPs, and all Antarctic bodies and actors, to
constructively and fully engage in international discussions that
restore the ambition of the Antarctic Treaty system.
