Response to comments on the draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation (CEE) for the Scott Base Redevelopment
Responses to comments on the draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation (CEE) for the Scott Base Redevelopment
An information paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was
prepared by New Zealand for the proposed Scott Base
Redevelopment. The final CEE was approved under New Zealand’s
Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act (1994) and the Parties
were notified through Secretariat Circular 12/2021 on 14 October,
2021 that New Zealand is proceeding with the Scott Base
Redevelopment, based on the final CEE. This paper provides a
response to the comments received from the Intersessional Contact
Group (ICG) established in accordance with the Procedures for
intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs (CEP XX Final Report,
Appendix 3).
Background
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was
prepared by New Zealand for the proposed Scott Base
Redevelopment. On 12 February 2021, New Zealand notified the
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) Chair of the
availability of the draft CEE for the ‘Scott Base Redevelopment’.
Notification of the availability of the CEE was circulated via CEP
Circular 5 (16 February, 2021). The draft CEE was made available,
in English, for download via the CEP Workspace on the website of
the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty: https://www.ats.aq/devAS/
EP/CEPWorkspace and the Antarctica New Zealand website:
https://www.antarcticanz.govt.nz/sbrceedraftfornotification.pdf.
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration
of Draft CEEs (CEP XX Final Report, Appendix 3) an Intersessional
Contact Group (ICG) was established, convened by Spain, to review
the draft CEE. ICG correspondence is available to CEP Members and
Observers via the CEP Forum, which also provided the Non-
Technical Summary (NTS) translated into the official Treaty
languages.
New Zealand appreciates the efforts of ICG participants who
provided valuable comments on the draft CEE, and thanks Spain for
convening the ICG and providing an excellent summary of the
responses (ATCM XLIII, WP10 Report of the intersessional open-
ended contact group to review the draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation prepared by New Zealand for the ‘Scott
Base Redevelopment’).
The comments from the Parties’ feedback from the ICG, from
discussions during the meeting, from the CEP advice and from the
New Zealand general public were addressed in the final CEE and
where available, the final CEE incorporated further design and
construction information that became available since the circulation
of the draft CEE. A response to the ICG comments is provided in
Attachment 1.
There were no significant changes to the predicted environmental
impacts and the conclusion of the CEE remains that the proposed
activities are likely to have a ‘more than minor or transitory impact
on the Antarctic environment’. The final CEE was approved under
New Zealand’s Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act (1994)
and the Parties were notified through Secretariat Circular 12/2021
on 14 October, 2021 that New Zealand is proceeding with the Scott
Base Redevelopment, based on the CEE.
Future updates on progress with the Scott Base Redevelopment
New Zealand will provide periodic updates to the CEP on the Scott
Base Redevelopment project as it progresses. It is anticipated that
the information provided will consist of the final design and
construction methodology, information on the RIWE replacement,
data and results from the monitoring programme as the project
progresses and any changes to the activity (in line with the
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
(Resolution 1 (2016)). In addition, we will make the final
Construction Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) and sub-
plans and the Project Safety Plan available.
All reasonable attempts will be made to facilitate an independent
audit of the proposed Scott Base Redevelopment. Representatives
from one or two National Antarctic Programmes will be invited to
Christchurch and Scott Base to audit the Scott Base Redevelopment
activity against the assessment provided in the CEE. Key elements
of the audit will be to assess whether the mitigation measures are
being applied and that the monitoring programme is effective and
being undertaken as described. The audit will also be used as an
opportunity to review the effectiveness of the impact assessment
process that was undertaken for the Scott Base Redevelopment
project and to identify any improvements that can be made. The
findings of the audit will be reported to the CEP.
