Methodology for evaluating vulnerability to climate change in
environmental impact assessments
Methodology for evaluating vulnerability to climate change in
environmental impact assessments
Information Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
The objective was to implement a qualitative methodology for
climate change risk analysis to be incorporated into the initial
environmental impact assessments carried out for infrastructure
works. The methodology involves determining the exposure, threats
and vulnerability in order to establish the risks involved and finally
propose adaptation measures to minimise the impact.
Introduction
The impacts of the risk of damage due to climate change are a
growing concern as they reduce the predictability of future
infrastructure needs and increase the vulnerability of populations
and assets worldwide. In this regard, Resolution 1 (2016) states that
one of the aims of the guidelines is "where appropriate, assist
proponents to give consideration to the possible implications of
climate change for proposed activities and their associated
environmental impacts". For these reasons, the objective of being
able to establish a methodology that allows the incorporation of a
climate change risk analysis into its environmental impact
assessments was set.
Methodology Guidelines
To establish the methodology, the definitions and guidelines
established by the IPCC (IPCC 2014) were followed. This
Methodology was designed in this first stage to be applied mainly to
infrastructure projects, but it is expected to be extended to all types
of activities in the future. Among the many methodologies that
exist, we take as a basic reference “Hagenlocher, M.,
Schneiderbauer, S., Sebesvari, Z., Bertram, M., Renner, K., Renaud,
FG, Wiley, H. & Zebisch, M. (2018). Climate Risk Assessment for
Ecosystem-based Adaptation: A guidebook for planners and
practitioners.”
The methodology is based on the determination of the components
of the risk of damage due to climate change: Hazard, Exposure and
Vulnerability. Based on these concepts, a risk assessment was
designed that allows the consideration of the potential for damage
due to climate change of a particular project. At this stage of
development, we propose a qualitative approach to determine the
nature and scope of disaster risk through the analysis of possible
threats and the evaluation of existing conditions of exposure and
vulnerability that in concert could cause damage to people,
property, services, livelihoods and the environment.
Qualitative methodology
The methodology used is based on the information and specific
knowledge about the project design provided for the preparation of
the preliminary environmental impact assessment and the scientific
knowledge available on climate change in Antarctica:
Environmental Factor: environmental variable that has an impact
on the activity being assessed.
Observed impacts: Refers to (already observed) changes in the
physical environment or in the wildlife resulting from climate
change, added to existing climate variability, that have significant
deleterious effects on the composition, resilience or productivity of
natural or managed ecosystems, or in the functioning of socio-
economic systems, or in natural and human health and well-being
from extreme weather and climate events, and from climate change.
Threats: natural or man-made phenomena that have the potential to
cause harm to people or property.
Exposed values: elements of the analysed activity that could suffer
damage due to the threats of climate change.
Risks: “The potential for consequences where something of value is
at stake and where the outcome is uncertain (...). Risk results from
the interaction of vulnerability, exposure and hazard (...)” (IPCC
2014a, p. 40). A climate risk is the potential for specific climate-
related consequences (climate shocks) that can affect assets, people,
ecosystems, culture, etc.
Hazard: Potential occurrence of a physical event or trend of natural
or human origin, or a physical impact that can cause loss of life,
injury or other negative effects on health, as well as damage and
loss in property, infrastructure, means of subsistence, provision of
services, ecosystems and environmental resources.
Vulnerability: attributes of exposed elements that can increase (or
decrease) the potential consequences of a specific climate hazard. In
accordance with Wilches-Chaux (1993), we consider the following
vulnerabilities useful for analysing climate change risks in Antarctic
activities:
Natural Vulnerability: Human beings and their constructions have
certain conditions of temperature, humidity and other
environmental variables for which they were designed.
Physical Vulnerability: This refers especially to the location of
human constructions in risk areas, and to the deficiencies of their
physical structures in terms of their ability to “absorb” the effects of
these risks.
Technical Vulnerability: This refers to inadequate construction
techniques in risk areas. Although this vulnerability could be
included within Physical
Vulnerability, its expressions are so specific that they warrant a
separate sub-section.
Adaptation: Process of adjustment to the actual or projected climate
and its effects. In human systems, adaptation aims to moderate or
avoid harm or to take advantage of beneficial opportunities.
Example of Use
The first use case was in the evaluation of the installation of a field
of solar panels at the Marambio Base. Based on the changes in the
observed and expected climate on Seymour Island, it was possible
to determine in a specific way that a clear positive trend can be
observed in the increase in the average annual average temperature.
However, although Seymour Island is located in the continuous
permafrost zone, with ground temperatures close to –5°C and a
thickness of approximately 200 metres (Silva Busso, Sánchez and
Fresina, 2000), the observed and expected changes in temperatures
have significant effects on the dynamics and thickness of the active
layer of permafrost (top layer of permafrost that thaws in summer
and refreezes in autumn).
Climate change is a phenomenon that has the potential to cause
damage to property, and in this specific case, the increase in
temperatures in the Seymour Island area will expose the structures
of the photovoltaic plant to the threat of greater melting of the
permafrost, which will thaw to a greater depth risking decreased
support for the pillars buried in the ground.
Table1: risk matrix for the installation of the solar panel field
In this way and in order to take into account the threats of climate
change for the proposed activity, the threats, risks, exposed values,
hazards and adaptation measures to be taken into account to reduce
vulnerability are described in Table 1 of the photovoltaic plant
during its useful life. Based on the impacts already observed and
future scenarios, it is expected that the infrastructure of the solar
panel field (buried pillars) will be exposed to the threat of increased
thermal erosion of the permafrost, which will in turn cause an
increase in the depth of thawing in the area of the pillars and
therefore these will be left entirely buried in the active (thawed)
layer and as a consequence the entire structure may become
unstable or suffer partial collapse.
Conclusions
In order to comply with the requirements of Resolution 1 (2016) -
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica, a
qualitative methodology was established in this first stage that
allows adaptation measures to be obtained in preliminary
environmental impact assessments with the aim of reducing the
vulnerability of infrastructure projects due to exposure to and
hazards deriving from climate change.
Bibliography
Annex, I. Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica.
GIZ and EURAC 2017: Risk Supplement to the Vulnerability
Sourcebook: Guidance on how to apply the Vulnerability
Sourcebook's approach 2017: Risk Supplement to the Vulnerability
Sourcebook.
GIZ, EURAC & UNU-EHS (2018): Climate Risk Assessment for
Ecosystem-based Adaptation: A guidebook for planners and
practitioners, Bonn: GIZ.
IPCC 2014a: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Working Group
II Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press.
Hagenlocher, M., Schneiderbauer, S., Sebesvari, Z., Bertram, M.,
Renner, K., Renaud, FG, Wiley, H. & Zebisch, M. (2018). Climate
Risk Assessment for Ecosystem-based Adaptation: A guidebook for
planners and practitioners.
Silva Busso, A., Fresina, M., & Sánchez, R. (2000). Characterization
of the hydrogeological behavior of Marambio (Seymour) Island,
Antarctica. In I Joint Congress on Groundwater (p. 292).
Turner, J., Bindschadler, R., Convey, P., Di Prisco, G., Fahrbach, E.,
Gutt, J., Hodgson, D., Mayewski, P. & Summerhayes, C. (2009).
Antarctic climate change and the environment. SCAR
Wilches-Chaux, G. (1993). La vulnerabilidad global. Los desastres
no son naturales, 11-44.
