The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report
2022 to the XLIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report
2022 to the XLIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
This paper presents the annual report of The Scientific Committee
on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting. For ease of consideration, the main features of the report
are presented as an infographic (attachment 1).
Background
The mission of SCAR is to advance Antarctic research, including
observations from Antarctica, and to promote scientific knowledge,
understanding and education on any aspect of the Antarctic region.
To this end, SCAR is charged with the initiation and international
coordination of Antarctic and Southern Ocean research beneficial to
global society. SCAR provides independent and objective scientific
advice and information to the Antarctic Treaty System and other
bodies, and acts as the main international exchange of Antarctic
information within the scientific community. Descriptions of SCAR’s
activities and scientific outputs are available at: https://
www.scar.org/.
Science Priorities
SCAR’s three Scientific Research Programmes (https://
www.scar.org/science/srp/) are the main vehicles through which
SCAR facilitates and coordinates science in, from and about
Antarctica.
Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation (Ant-ICON) is looking at the conservation and
management of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, focusing on
research to drive and inform international decision-making and
policy change.
Ant-ICON hosted a community engagement session targeted at
early- and mid-career researchers in September 2021. Two
community workshops were organised in March and April 2022 to
focus on the human dimensions of Antarctic conservation and
management. The Programme will also be convening a mini-
symposium and two parallel sessions at the upcoming 10th SCAR
Open Science Conference (https://scar2022.org/).
INStabilities and Thresholds in ANTarctica (INSTANT) is a cross-
disciplinary programme looking at quantifying Antarctica’s
contribution to past and future global sea-level change, helping
decision-makers to better anticipate, manage, and adapt to sea-level
rise.
INSTANT held a successful kick-off workshop over three days in
February 2021 to identify themes and sub-committees and develop
a detailed work plan for the Programme. INSTANT is funding four
fellowships to support early-career researchers from under-
represented regions. The first round of the fellowships opened in
early 2022.
Near-term Variability and Prediction of the Antarctic Climate
System (AntClimnow) is looking at near-term Antarctic climate
variability and trends, understanding contemporary climate change,
and modelling future climate projections.
AntClimnow hosted a launch event in June 2021 to identify
opportunities for future collaborations and engagement. The
Programme launched a yearly scheme to support the development
and stewardship of Antarctic climate-monitoring datasets. Two
inaugural awards for the grants were awarded in 2021. The call for
the 2022 scheme opened in March 2022.
Recent Developments
In addition to the synopsis of key outcomes and activities of SCAR
presented in Attachment 1, SCAR’s three Science Groups, Research
Programmes, and several specialised subsidiary groups have
undertaken a wide variety of activities and produced many outputs,
a range of which are formally presented at this meeting, including
in the SCAR Lecture.
As part of the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development (2021-2030), SCAR coordinated the
Southern Ocean Task Force (https://www.sodecade.org), which was
set up to develop the Southern Ocean Action Plan launched in April
2022. The work of the Task Force was presented at the Southern
Ocean Decade and Polar Data Forum Week 2021 and the UN Ocean
Decade Laboratories. Further detail is provided in IP107 UN Decade
Southern Ocean Action Plan.
A new SCAR film, "Peace and Science", gives an insight into the
important work of SCAR, specifically its three Scientific Research
Programmes (Ant-ICON, INSTANT and AntClimnow) and the vital
scientific questions they address. The film was produced and
directed by John Weller and is available on YouTube (https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=9kXPRrWf_H4), with subtitles
currently available in English, French, German, Spanish and
Portuguese.
SCAR featured in the new Unlocking Science series, produced for
the International Science Council (ISC) by BBC StoryWorks
Commercial Productions. The dynamic article "What Antarctica can
teach us about climate change" (http://www.bbc.com/storyworks/
specials/unlocking-science/what-antarctica-can-teach-us-about-
global-climate-change/) highlights how SCAR brings together
scientists from different disciplines and countries to make more
precise predictions about future climate change.
SCAR organised two events at the UNFCCC COP26 meeting in
Glasgow, November 2021: an official Side Event titled “Antarctic
and Overshoot Scenarios: Risk of Irreversible Sea-Level rise” and, as
part of Polar Oceans Day at the Cryosphere Pavilion, an event titled
“Antarctic Marine Ecosystems Under Pressures: Protection Needs
Action Locally and Globally”. SCAR also joined a call for an
UNFCCC Cryosphere Dialogue as part of future meetings. Further
detail is provided in WP29 Antarctica in a Changing Climate –
Implementation of ATCM Resolution 8.
Training, support and development of the Antarctic community
continue to be fundamental to SCAR and, with limited activities
available to SCAR Groups, additional funds were directed to the
SCAR Capacity Building schemes. As a result, in 2021 SCAR
awarded five early-career Fellowships, with two further SCAR
Fellowship applicants being funded by COMNAP. SCAR also
awarded three Visiting Scholarships. Further detail is provided in
IP005 Early Career Opportunities: Antarctic Fellowships &
Scholarships.
SCAR is working with Polar Educators International (PEI), the
International Arctic Science Committee (IASC) and the Association
of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) on a project to update the
Polar Resource Book of educational resources, created as a legacy of
the International Polar Year 2007-2008. The partners have already
supported the online publication of the materials from the original
book and are now investigating funding for the next stage of the
project, which will include updating existing resources and creating
new material. More information is available at https://
polareducator.org/featured-resources/prb-2/.
SCAR’s newly-established Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI)
Action Group is tasked with broadly looking at how EDI issues can
be effectively dealt with within SCAR and what practical actions are
relevant for the organisation. Following an open call for volunteers
initiated in 2021, over 150 responses were received and allowed the
leadership structure of the
Action Group to be established and responsibilities are being
assigned. Work has already begun on auditing existing information
about diversity in leadership positions, applications to award
schemes, and attendance at meetings and conferences. Priorities for
the coming year have been identified and include building a
baseline of relevant SCAR and community data to guide the work of
the group, reviewing existing codes of conduct and how to promote
best practice, providing feedback and guidance on the SCAR
Capacity Building activities, and engaging the many existing
volunteers in support of these and other activities. More details are
available at https://www.scar.org/capacity-building/edi/home/.
Dr Keith Reid has been appointed as the new editor of the Antarctic
Environments Portal. From 2008 to 2021, he was the Science
Manager at the Secretariat of the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). His work focuses
on the use of science in conservation of the Antarctic and on the
interface of science and policy.
SCAR and IAATO are undertaking a collaborative project to develop
a systematic conservation plan for the Antarctic Peninsula, aimed at
facilitating the concurrent management of biodiversity, science and
tourism (ATCM XLII IP24 Systematic Conservation Plan for the
Antarctic Peninsula Project Updates; ATCM XL IP166 Systematic
Conservation Plan for the Antarctic Peninsula). Following the
finalization of stakeholder engagement workshops, initial analyses
and scenarios were created. During the review, it was identified
that further clarification on certain visitor site data needed to be
incorporated. Dr Jasmine Lee was contracted on a short-term basis
by IAATO in late 2021 to address these. Upon finalization, IAATO
will discuss the results with its members and SCAR, and prepare
information for stakeholders, including the CEP.
In February 2022, SCAR, together with IASC, the Prince Albert II of
Monaco Foundation and the Oceanographic Institute of Monaco,
signed an MoU on the “Polar Initiative” (https://www.fpa2.org/en/
initiatives/the-polar-initiative-012), the first activity of which was
the Scientific Symposium: From Arctic to Antarctic 'The Cold is
Getting Hot!', held from February 24-25th in Monaco. As part of the
Initiative, the Foundation will also fund an additional SCAR
Fellowship each year for at least four years, beginning in 2022.
Selected Forthcoming Meetings
10th SCAR Open Science Conference. 1-10 August 2022, online.
(https://scar2022.org/)
The theme of the conference is “Antarctica in a Changing World”.
The conference will be hosted by the National Centre for Polar and
Ocean Research (NCPOR), an autonomous organization under the
Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES), Government of India. It will
feature a comprehensive schedule of meetings, symposia, virtual
side events and social activities, daily plenary lectures and poster
sessions in an innovative online format, facilitating interactions and
collaboration among researchers in different time zones across the
globe.
