Analysis of the accuracy of the location coordinates of some
Historic Sites and Monuments
In support of WP 52: Proposal for Modifications to the Location
Coordinates of Nine Historic Sites and Monuments
Analysis of the accuracy of the location coordinates of some
Historic Sites and Monuments
Information Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
During a review of the information on HSMs, inaccuracies were
detected in the location of some HSMs using Geographic
Information System (GIS), which did not provide a correct location
for them. For this reason, the objective was to carry out a review of
the location coordinates of the HSMs in the management of which
Argentina participates and to evaluate the need to propose a review
of all the coordinates to achieve a precise location in the mapping.
This IP complements WP 52 “Proposal for Modifications to the
Location Coordinates of Nine Historic Sites and Monuments”.
Revision of coordinates
In accordance with the Guidelines for the designation and
protection of Historic Sites and Monuments (Annex to Resolution 3
(2009)), paragraph 4: “The Party or Parties that nominated and/or
are undertaking management of a Historic Site or Monument should
keep the site or monument under review to assess whether:
the site or monument still exists in whole or in part;
the site or monument continues to meet the guidelines outlined in
the previous paragraph;
the description of the site or monument should be amended and
updated when necessary;
the location and if possible the limits of the site or monument are
on its topographic maps, hydrographic charts and in other relevant
publications.
Based on what is established in point “d)”, Argentina detected that
in some of the most widely used Geographic Information Systems
for Antarctica (SCAR Antarctic Digital Database/ADD, Quantarctica,
etc.) the location of some of the HSMs in the management of which
Argentina participates presented inaccuracies.
One case analysed was that of HSM 42: Laurie Island Observatories,
which includes the area of Scotia Bay, Laurie Island, South Orkney
Island, in which are found: stone hut built in 1903 by the Scottish
Antarctic Expedition led by William S. Bruce; the Argentine
meteorological hut and magnetic observatory, built in 1905 and
known as Moneta House, and a graveyard with twelve graves, the
earliest of which dates from 1903. For example, in the viewer of the
Digital Topographic Database “SCAR ADD map viewer (ADD)”, the
coordinate indicated is some way
out to sea instead of being the location point of the HSM on the
island. For this reason, a process of reviewing the information of
each of the HSMs in which Argentina is one of the parties in charge
of their management began.
In the specific case of the coordinates, a detailed review has led to
the conclusion that a more precise position could be established
with respect to that currently appearing in the list of HSMs
(Measure 3 - 2021). The general problem that has been detected is
that expressing coordinates to the nearest minute in effect means
taking discrete staggered jumps spaced almost 2 kilometres (1 852
metres = 1 nautical mile) apart in latitude, with no intermediate
alternatives (and in longitude multiplying by the cosine of the
latitude).
In this way, even if we have reliable coordinates (for example with
about 5 metres of error or even less) corresponding to the
intermediate range between two values per minute (read XX.5
minutes), a few centimetres of error are enough to possibly tilt the
rounding incorrectly towards the inappropriate lower or upper
value. That deviation can reach almost half a minute (almost 926
metres in latitude; almost 926*COS(Lat) in Lon), even if the
rounding is correct.
The quality and resolving power of current Antarctic maps and
images (SCAR Antarctic Digital Database / ADD, Quantarctica,
Google Earth, etc.), offer the possibility of using coordinates with a
format with greater resolving power than a whole minute. The
format with decimal degrees and minutes is widely used in air and
maritime navigation. A hundredth fraction of a minute represents,
in latitude, approximately 20 metres of ground resolution.
It should be noted that when sites were surveyed on the ground
(often with a simple handheld GPS receiver properly used), the
resulting coordinates could be displayed to the hundredth of a
minute or to the second, the latter reflecting some 30+ metres in
distance on the ground in latitude), an option that we have chosen
in this first revision. In all cases, the coordinates recently surveyed
with handheld GPS navigators refer, by default, to the World
Geodetic System WGS 84, which is widely used.
It is also important to highlight that, in the Database of the
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat for Historic Sites and Monuments,
information can be provided in any of these formats, and the system
is prepared to receive them with up to four decimal places in
seconds, or up to six decimal places in decimal degrees. Therefore,
if the coordinates given for an HSM are greatly simplified by
rounding, for example by using only whole degrees and minutes,
then it is likely that in most cases the end result of the HSM
location on the map may not be accurate. This same situation could
be occurring with ASPAs and ASMAs (although this situation has
not been evaluated in this review).
Conclusion
Considering that the objective of the databases that use geographic
information is to locate the sites in a consistent way, and that
finally the HSMs can be represented in a cartographic interface
accessible to the general public and in a precise way, considering a
revision of the location coordinates of the HSMs and preparing a
proposal of common criteria for the use of geographic coordinates,
would be a great contribution to the system.
