Group-size effect on vigilance and flight initiation distances of
Adélie penguins in south-eastern Antarctica
Group-size effect on vigilance and flight initiation distances of
Adélie penguins in south-eastern Antarctica
Submitted by Delegation of China
Summary
Distances between the humans and animals to trigger the animals’
vigilance are commonly called Vigilance Initiation Distances (VID),
and the distances for the birds to feel threatened and then escape
are called Flight Initiation Distances (FID). The 36th Chinese
National Antarctc Research Expedition (CHINARE-36) has found
that the VID for Adélie Penguins in response to the approaching of
the 22, 000t R/V Xue Long when they were in groups on floating
ices was about 76.22 m, and the corresponding FID was about
56.77 meters.
China’s Research to Find out the VID and FID
For the Adélie Penguins, there was little research about their VID
and FID to potential disturbances form human activities. To fill the
knowledge gap, the CHINARE-36 conducted a survey on these
parameters of Adélie Penguins in the Cosmonaut Sea, the
Cooperation Sea, and Prydz Bay from December 2019 to January
2020. The result was that Adélie Penguins in groups on floating ices
would become alert when the 22,000t R/V Xue Long approached to
a distance of about 76.22 m (VID), and that the birds would escape
when the distances were about 56.77 m (FID). The VID and FID of
individual birds in the same circumstances would be shorter. The
CHINARE-36 has also done similar experiments on some other birds
and mammals at the sea, and the data of which are under collation.
Suggestions
The VID and FID experiment and data could be used to support the
future development of possible guidelines for vessels operation,
with a view to keep safe distance in order to avoid or reduce
disturbance to the animals at sea in the Antarctic Treaty Area. CEP
could encourage members to conduct such research with their
national program, and encourage SCAR and IAATO to report their
related data and results for future consideration. China is willing to
contribute more related scientific data in the future to support the
work of the ATCM and CEP.
