Definitive eradication of the presence of a Lepidoptera at Carlini
Base
Definitive eradication of the presence of a Lepidoptera at Carlini
Base
Information document submitted by Argentina and Germany
Summary
In December 2020, specimens of a non-native Lepidoptera were
detected in the Dallmann Laboratory's food storage facility at
Carlini AFB. The species was confirmed to be the Flour Moth
(Ephestia kuehniella; Zeller, 1879). Upon detection, specimens of
different stages of the life cycle (eggs, larvae, pupae and adults)
were recorded. Through the application of the Response Protocol
and eradication and control measures, the definitive eradication of
the species was achieved.
Early detection and initial response
During ATCM XLIII (2021), through IP 098, Argentina and Germany
notified that in December 2020 the presence of a non-native species
(NNS) of insect (Lepidoptera) in different stages of its life cycle was
detected in the food storage facilities of the Dallmann Laboratory at
Carlini Base (-62.23°S, 58.66°W). Immediately the scientific staff of
the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) brought the episode to the
attention of the staff of the Environmental Management Program of
Argentina to coordinate measures to be taken for the initial
response according to the Response Protocol of the Non-Native
Species Manual (CEP, 2019).
Figure 1: Image of the initial moment when the moth specimens
were detected in the Dallman Laboratory food storage room.
Figure 1: Image of the initial moment when the moth specimens
were detected in the Dallman Laboratory food storage room.
A detailed inspection of the rest of the station was carried out and
the presence of this species was not recorded in the different
buildings or outdoors. A first taxonomic classification was made by
means of photographs and larvae and adults were preserved to be
sent for their definitive taxonomic determination (Figura 1).
In order to immediately eradicate the population present in the
warehouse researchers from the Patagonian National Center
(CENPAT) in the city of Puerto Madryn (Argentina) and the
Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria (INTA) from Río
Gallegos, were consulted on the actions to be taken. All the
specimens found were collected in bags, as well as all the packets of
flour that were in the deposit. The entire place was disinfected, and
all the material collected was subsequently incinerated to ensure
the elimination of the eggs present in the flour packages.
Immediate Eradication
Based on consultations with CENPAT and INTA specialists and
confirmation of NNS status, the station´s scientific staff were told
what immediate measures were necessary for eradication. In this
way, all packages of flour contaminated with the presence of the
moth were introduced into closed bags to ensure that they do not
continue to colonize the depot. The entire depot was then cleaned
and disinfected by collecting all the material and put it in the bags
along with the contaminated flour bags for incineration.
To ensure the elimination of all specimens and stages of the NNS,
the depot's heating was shut down for more than a month so as to
achieve the drastic decrease of the temperature of the site below the
known values for the survival of the specimens of this species
(Pakyari et al, 2018). The specialists consulted suggested that this
was the most environmentally appropriate measure as it did not
involve the use of chemicals (insecticides) and therefore the
environmental impact was non-significant (Annex I of the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol)).
The specialists consulted ensured that at a temperature below 7 to
10°C, the species does not develop its life cycle and would therefore
affect the specimens of this species present in the facility. For this
reason, it was decided to extend the shutdown of the facility's
heating for more than a month to ensure the full effect of the
measure. This thermal stress was considered especially sufficient to
eliminate, the eggs and larvae found in the storage facility. As for
adults it is considered that there is no oviposition at less than 7°C
and the latest published results indicate that the lower limit for
immature stages is 9°C (Pakyari et al, 2018).
Biological classification and characteristics
Subsequently the material collected and preserved at the Carlini
Base was sent to Instituto de Ciencias de la Tierra y Ambientales
(INCITAP) of La Pampa, Argentina, where the samples were
analyzed. The result of the biological classification confirmed that
the observed species belonged to the Order Lepidoptera and within
this, to the Family Phycitidae (Figura 2). The species was identified
as Ephestia kuehniella, known as "flour moth". According to INTA
manuals, this species is catalogued as a Lepidoptera harmful to
food. The species is frequently found in flour,
grain and in places where starchy products are stored. It is a
lepidopteran widely distributed in all temperate, tropical and
subtropical regions of the world.
Figure 2: Morphology of the collected specimens. 1. Female adult.
Wing venation. 3. Male genitalia, ventral view. 4. Aedeago. (Result
of specimen processing in the Instituto de Ciencias de la Tierra y
Ambientales (INCITAP) from La Pampa, Argentina)
Adults are moths measuring 18 to 25 mm in wing expansion. The
forewings are leaden grey, being transversely furrowed by dark
zigzag lines, and there are also some inconspicuous dark maculae.
The hind wings are greyish white, bordered with visible hairs. The
eggs are deposited on the food of future larvae or in places close to
them, in a number of approximately 200; a week later they hatch
and at their maximum development reach 15 mm in length, have a
whitish or pinkish colour; they have in the prothorax and in the last
urothorax a darker colour than in the rest of the body. After
weaving the cocoon, they pupate and remain in this state for 10 to
15 days. It takes 8 to 10 weeks to reach the adult stage.
Long-term eradication
Based on what was suggested by the specialists and the measures
implemented (collection, cleaning, incineration and lowering the
temperature), these actions are feasible in the medium and long
term to ensure the eradication of the NNS found. If the presence of
this species may be recurrent in the reservoir, INTA personnel have
suggested the use of some insecticides that may eventually be used.
However, depending on continuous measures of low or no
environmental impact, the use of chemical products was not
implemented waiting to verify that the species has not been
observed again in the Station.
After the initial actions, control and biosecurity measures were
coordinated with the German Environmental Agency, in addition to
consultations with INTA personnel in Argentina, the UBA in
Germany was informed that the following long-term control
measures were established, since it is considered that it is not
possible to detect the presence of eggs in the flour in advance:
(1) Permanent control and cleaning of the warehouse facilities
where the moths were found.
(2) Control and surveillance of the areas and buildings surrounding
the Dallmann Laboratory to ensure that no specimens of this species
are observed,
(3) Installation of glue traps for early detection of specimens of this
or other insect species (this action was eventually not necessary).
More than a year after the initial record of moths was made, and as
a result of periodic monitoring of the facilities and the environment,
no new specimens of this species have been detected in any of the
stages of their life cycle. Therefore, it can be affirmed that the
eradication efforts and the permanent control and biosecurity
measures have been successful.
Conclusion
Non-native species discovered in the Antarctic Treaty Area may be
imported anthropogenic species (associated with human activities).
In accordance with Annex II of the Protocol, human-introduced
species must be eradicated, while natural populations and long-term
residents must be protected.
The detection at Carlini Station of a possible and then confirmed
allochthonous species (Ephestia kuehniella), was notified to the
national authorities and this allowed coordinating the necessary
tasks for an immediate response, immediate eradication,
preservation and identification of specimens, long-term eradication
and monitoring and control of the detection site. The main task is
the establishment of mitigation measures that will be incorporated
into logistical procedures to prevent the reintroduction of this or
other food-associated species. The species has not been observed
again in the station facilities and we consider it to have been
eradicated, although periodic control tasks will continue to be
carried out.
Bibliography
Pakyari, H., Amir-Maafi, M., Moghadamfar, Z., & Zalucki, M.
(2019). Estimating development and temperature thresholds of
Ephestia kuehniella: toward improving a mass production system.
Bulletin of entomological research, 109(4), 435-442.
CEP (2019) Non-native species manual, 2019 edn. Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat, Buenos Aires. https://documents.ats.aq/ATCM42/WW/
ATCM42_WW008_e.pdf
