Revised Tourism Management Policy for Vernadsky Station,
Galindez Island
Revised Tourism Management Policy for Vernadsky Station,
Galindez Island
Information Paper submitted by Ukraine
Summary
In 2011 in pursuance of the ATCM recommendations (paragraph
245, Final Report XXXIII ATCM) Ukraine presented its policy
regarding visits by tourists and nongovernmental expeditions to
Vernadsky station (XXXIV ATCM Information Paper IP-110). This
policy was revised after the last year discussion under the issue of
developing Site Guidelines for the Argentine Islands included in the
CEP 5YWP for the intersessional period 2021/22.
Like a number of other Parties developed its national procedures
relating to visitors to their Antarctic stations, Ukraine has prepared
it in a format of Visitor Site Guidelines, facilitating tourist vessel
expedition crew comprehension and use (without, however, seeking
ATCM/CEP endorsement). Ukraine would appreciate that these
revised guidelines be included in the IAATO Field Operations
Manual in order to apply them during visits to those facilities by
their associated operators and individuals.
Vernadsky Antarctic Station
Year-round Vernadsky Station, operated by Ukraine, is situated on
the Marina Point in the NW of Galindez Island, one of the largest
islands in the Argentine Islands (along with Winter Island and Skua
Island), lying 5-6 km NW of the Antarctic Peninsula (Graham Coast,
Kyiv Peninsula).
This area has several significant features. Firstly, this area
experiences long-term regional climate warming fastest on the
planet. Secondly, the area with the glaciers disintegration and, as a
consequence, with changes in the basic types of Antarctic
ecosystems. Thirdly, this area is one of the richest in terms of
biodiversity in the West Antarctic Peninsula, with important
assemblages of species including considerable coverage of old moss
banks and lichens communities, invertebrates, and breeding
colonies of birds and marine mammals, which are very sensitive to
observed global changes. In particular, the site is recognised as
being one of the southernmost recorded Gentoo penguin colonies as
well as a number of other confirmed breeding bird species.
That is way this is an area of particular interest to ongoing and
planned scientific research. Meanwhile, Vernadsky station (as the
Argentine Islands as a whole), has been regularly visited by tourists
since 1968, and it has seen a growth in visitor numbers in recent
pre-COVID years. According to the IAATO statistics, this site is
amongst the twenty most visited sites along the Antarctic Peninsula.
Therefore, the special location of the area allows studying complex
environmental processes and conducting the comprehensive
monitoring of environmental parameters in Antarctica. In view of
the observed high number of visitors and spatial trends in ship-
borne tourism, this area requires special management to ensure that
all important environment values are protected and sustained in the
long-term.
Tourism Management Policy for Vernadsky Station
In order to minimize possible impacts on the environment and
avoid interference with scientific investigations and station work
schedules, the revised guidelines include more restrictions on access
and number of visitors ashore. For the first time it is suggested to
designate the landing requirements not only for the cruise ships, but
for the private yachts as well. Nevertheless, these guidelines
applicable to visitors to Vernadsky station’s facilities zone, while
yachting and small boat cruising without landing within the
internal waters of the Argentine Islands are not restricted.
Moreover, a special visitor route is developed to divert visitors
away from the station facilities to alternative attractions, namely
the top of the ice cap offering glacial scenery. In addition, the
revised guidelines also include the CCAMLR Environmental
Monitoring Program (CEMP) site on Galindez Island, managed by
Ukraine, as well as the inter-islands water areas, which Ukraine
intends to include as one of the scientific reference areas in the
newly proposed MPA in Domaine 1 (para 6.11-6.12 of the SC-
CAMLR-38 Report).
Compliance with the attached guidelines should be observed by all
visitors requesting a visit to Vernadsky station, whether it is carried
out as part of an activity organised by an IAATO member operator
or an independent operator. In this regard, Ukraine would
appreciate that these revised guidelines (developed within the
framework of national procedures, without seeking ATCM/CEP
endorsement) be included in the IAATO Field Operations Manual.
