The Ice Memory Programme
The Ice Memory Programme
Information Paper submitted by France and Italy
Summary
The purpose of this paper is to provide an update about the Ice
Memory Programme within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM), following its initial presentation
during the 42nd ATCM meeting in Prague in 2019. The worldwide
importance of the Ice Memory (IM) Programme, launched in 2015,
was acknowledged by UNESCO (through the solicitation of its
French and Italian National Commissions), calling on its Member
States to support the initiative. The IM Programme features
international scientific collaboration between national Antarctic
programmes.
The first phase of the Programme is currently underway, and
involves collecting ice cores from the deep layers of key endangered
glaciers along the world before they lose their ability to preserve
environmental history in optimal conditions. The second phase of
the Programme involves the long-term storage of these ice cores for
future generations of scientists. The safest long-term storage place
on Earth is the Antarctic plateau, where the ice never melts, even in
summer. Mean annual temperatures are such that cold storage will
be possible for hundreds to thousands of years, even in the current
context of global warming. The IM Programme initiators therefore
intend to store on the Antarctic plateau the precious samples
collected in the endangered glaciers.
Discussions are still needed between ATCM Parties and observers on
the Programme’s next steps, given that collaboration and
endorsement by Parties would be beneficial as the goal of the
Programme is of global importance to humanity. This means
launching a process that complies with the Antarctic Treaty and its
Protocol on Environmental Protection (Madrid Protocol), especially
Annex I on Environmental Impact Assessment.
Background
The Ice Memory (IM) Programme was launched by France and Italy
in 2015. Its international dimension has grown following
contributions by Russia and Switzerland. The international scientific
community is now working to make it a global initiative in the
coming years. A notable progress toward this goal was the creation
of an Ice Memory Foundation (FIM) in January 2021, under the
auspice of the Foundation University Grenoble-Alpes in France,
supported actually by 7 founding research institutions (4 in France,
2 in Italy, 1 in Switzerland) and open to new international founders
during the following steps. The FIM strategic board includes at the
moment researchers from France, Italy, Switzerland, Russia, China
and the United States.
At a later stage of the Programme, a governance framework will
need to be defined with involvement of the ATCM Parties which
plan to contribute to the long-term storage of ice cores in
Antarctica, particularly to ensure this complies with the Antarctic
Treaty and the Madrid Protocol.
Goals of the IM Programme
The IM Programme is based on the observation, made 60 years ago,
that the natural snow and ice forming glaciers contains
environmental information for periods ranging from decades to
hundreds of thousands of years. Natural snow and ice are mainly
constituted of water vapour, which condenses and solidifies in the
atmosphere to form snowflakes. During this natural process,
impurities are trapped in snowflakes and buried in snow
precipitation for long periods of time.
Every year, new snow covers earlier precipitation. Under this
accumulated weight, snow layers densify until they become
impermeable ice. The resulting glacier flows towards lower
altitudes, powered by gravity. In mountain ranges, glaciers end up
becoming rivers. In Greenland and Antarctica, they mainly result in
icebergs, which leave the coast and melt in seawater.
Around the world, glaciologists seek to study glaciers that contain
the oldest possible information stored in their depths. When they
identify these glaciers, they drill through them until they reach
bedrock. This drilling results in several sections of ice core
measuring generally one metre in length and 8 to 10 centimetres in
diameter. Their total accumulated length can reach 100 to 250
metres for mountain glaciers, and up to 3,700 metres in Antarctica.
Small sections of these ice cores are used for geochemical and
physics studies in laboratories. In some cases, scientific
investigations are non-destructive and the ice core samples remain
untouched. They are used to research past climate conditions
(temperature and precipitation levels), atmospheric concentrations
of greenhouse gases (GHGs), natural and anthropogenic aerosols,
the intensity of desert dust events, sea ice surface area, radioactive
fallout from nuclear testing, volcanic activity, solar activity, and the
intensity of cosmic rays. For example, ice cores have been used to
demonstrate how GHGs affect natural climate variability, and how
human activity has resulted in accelerating levels of GHGs over the
past 200 years.
Although the ice caps in Antarctica and Greenland are not yet
threatened by climate change to the point that they will disappear
in the short term, this is not the case for mountain glaciers at low or
medium latitudes, nor of smaller ice caps in the Arctic or sub-
Antarctic areas. The surface areas and volumes of most glaciers
around the world are shrinking rapidly. As this happens, we are
losing forever precious information on the history of our planet.
The overall goal of the IM Programme is to: 1- Collect an ice core
archive from the deep layers of key endangered glaciers before they
lose their ability to preserve environmental history in optimal
conditions; 2- Store these ice cores on a long-term basis (possibly
hundreds to thousands of years) for future generations of scientists
and humanity in general.
The idea underlying the IM Programme is that scientific ideas and
technologies will continue to evolve in the future, making new
discoveries possible using ice cores. However, for this to happen,
snow and ice cores must be available to future generations of
scientists when valuable glaciers will have gone forever from the
surface of the planet, the resulting ice cores being protected from
the harmful effects of climate change and becoming the only
remains of extremely precious environmental archives accumulated
over centuries to millennia before global warming definitely
affected the glaciers.
Relationship between the IM Programme and ATCM and CEP
activities
The goal of the IM Programme is to ensure the safest possible cold
storage of the ice core archive collected for this Programme. Safe
storage should be guaranteed for the longest possible periods,
possibly up to several centuries to millennia.
Currently, no cold storage chamber is capable of guaranteeing the
conservation of ice cores with 100% certainty. In other words, long-
term conservation is threatened by the risks of technical and
economic failure. Indeed, there are recent examples of commercial
storage failures that led to the definitive loss of previous ice core
archives. Consequently, the IM Programme involves creating a
repository (or series of repositories) in Antarctica, where the ice
core archive will be stored on a long-term basis. The Antarctic
plateau is naturally very cold and does not experience melting, even
during summer in the southern hemisphere. Mean annual
temperatures are such that cold storage will be possible for
hundreds to thousands of years, even in the context of current
global warming scenarios.
France and Italy, which jointly run the Concordia research station
on the Antarctic plateau, have agreed to support the Programme at
Concordia station where ice cores collected as part of the IM
Programme could be transported using existing logistical means.
This means to give the logistic assistance in the building and
maintenance of the future repository and in the management of the
access and transportation of the ice cores.
Other interested Parties are warmly welcome to forward proposals
to build repositories on the Antarctic plateau, taking the
commitment to provide the necessary logistical long term means for
construction, transportation, monitoring and maintenance. The
participation of other interested Parties in the building of
repositories could lead to the creation of an international repository
network, which would facilitate the constitution of ice core archives
by the country managing the
repository where these are stored, through its national Antarctic
programme. Interested Parties could also contribute by facilitating
the transportation of ice cores from different places of the world to
the Concordia station repository, once built. The Ice Memory
initiative would have therefore a beneficial effect in terms of
increasing collaboration among Parties. However, such scheme is
not mandatory, France and Italy being ready to collaborate with
other Parties in order to take in charge the transfer to Concordia
station of IM samples resulting from their own drilling projects.
As every activity carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area, the
creation of a long-term storage repository will need to follow the
requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection, and the appropriate authorization
process. To minimize the impact, the environmental aspects will be
considered since the planning activities, and the decommissioning
phase will be examined too. The implementation near Concordia
Station, will allow to use the available expertise and logistics. An
environmental impact assessment will be carried out and will be
completed in accordance with the provisions of Annex I of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection. France and Italy will
collaborate during all the process. Future access to the IM ice cores
will rely on agreements made through the National Antarctic
Programs managing the repository.
Design of the ice core repository
To ensure that ice cores are stored in optimal conditions, not only
must the temperature be kept well below 0°C, but variations in
temperature must also be avoided as they could damage the
physical and chemical information in ice cores. For this reason, the
IM Programme will involve storage of the cores at approximately 10
metres depth below the surface.
At this depth, due to temperature smoothing by thermal diffusion,
the snow temperature corresponds to the mean annual temperature
for any given site, meaning that seasonal variations in temperature
in the atmosphere are smoothed out at the corresponding depth.
At the time of the WP41 submitted to the 42nd ATCM meeting in
Prague in 2019, two different concepts of repository were under
evaluation: the first one had foreseen the construction of a metallic
structure, made of interconnected shipping containers with
reinforced roofs to bear the weight of accumulated snowfall. The
second one involved accommodating a set of normal containers
placed on sledges inside a set of buried ice caves of around 5 m
diameter each. This second concept brought the advantage of a
lower environmental impact during both construction
(approximatively 7 days of work for each cave) and
decommissioning, as the ice caves are obtained by putting thin
layers of snow (using a snow blower) over an inflatable balloon that
is deflated and removed once the roof is solid, leaving the ice cave
with an arched roof only made of snow on its top. The access to
these caves would be initially via a slope that would be buried once
the cave is closed, and then via traps prepared in the upper part
during construction.
The second concept was retained for a pilot scale trial
implementation and stability assessment at Concordia station,
considering its lower environmental impact.
The ice cave repository concept, with containers installed inside
parallel snow caves
During the 2018-2019 summer campaign, in the immediate vicinity
of Concordia station, a first pilot snow cave was built, under
technical coordination of ENEA-UTA in Italy and manpower help
from IPEV in France. A second pilot cave succeeded during the
2019-2020 summer campaign, made with an improved procedure.
Snow was blown on top of the inflated balloon through several
successive steps of a few tens of centimetres each, using a large
snow blower (4 meter width), leaving time between each sequence
for the snow to sinter and to become denser. A complete 3D model
was obtained on both pilot caves using a laser scan. Sensors were
placed to study the vertical temperature profile inside the cave.
These data coupled with analysis of deformation and of ice cores
extracted from the ice cave roof allowed to evaluate grain sintering
of the snowflakes, the overall strength of the construction and to
feed a 3D model of snow / ice deformation developed in France, in
order to estimate the life span of future snow caves.
Construction of a pilot snow cave at Concordia station during the
field campaign 2019-2020. The resulting snow cave with the arched
roof made of snow can be visualized in the lower right picture.
Modelling of IM snow cave deformation
To assess the duration over time of such a facility, computer
simulations were performed. The Elmer/Ice finite-element software
for ice sheet, glaciers and ice flow modelling was used to model the
temporal deformation of a snow cave in the conditions of Concordia
station (Brondex et al., 2020). Different scenarios were evaluated to
compare the deformation rate, depending on the shape and density
of the snow layers recovering the cave and making the columnar
structure alongside.
Simulations of the temporal evolution of the shape of a snow cave
under Concordia conditions. Original shape (@0a), shape after 50
years of deformation (@50a) and after 100 years of deformation
(@100a). From left to right : using a standard snow density profile
(black), with blown snow focused on the top of the cave (green),
with blown snow on top and alongside the cave (blue), with blown
snow following a T-shape.
The results from the simulations appear encouraging. When
building a snow cave using blown snow on top and alongside the
cave, the snow cave would loose about half of its original height
after one century of deformation. Simulation results indicate that
the need to reconstruct the IM snow caves will be unfrequent, albeit
requiring regular monitoring. A precautionary approach could
consider rebuilding the ice caves every few decades. A process
requiring about 30 days of work and no extra material.
The status of the IM drilling operations
To date, the IM consortium, made up of French, Italian, Russian and
Swiss scientists involved in the mountain fields (others may join in
the future), has drilled into four mountain glaciers with a view to
collecting ice cores and achieving the Programme’s goals. The first
drilling operation took place at the Col du Dôme glacier, near the
summit of Mont-Blanc in the French Alps, at an altitude of 4,300
metres. Three ice cores were successfully retrieved down to bedrock
in 2016. In 2017, another drilling operation took place on Nevado
Illimani in Bolivia, at an altitude of 6,300 metres. Here, two ice
cores were retrieved down to bedrock. In 2018, a Swiss-Russian
team successfully drilled two ice cores at Belukha glacier in the
Russian Altai Mountains. Lastly, a Russian team retrieved two ice
cores from Mount Elbrus in the Russian Caucasus. These ice cores
are all stored in commercial freezers in Grenoble, France, or in
Switzerland or in Russia, pending the construction of the long-term
storage repository in Antarctica.
A fifth IM operation was conducted on the Grand Combin glacier in
the Alps, at the Swiss-Italian border, on Fall 2020. Unfortunately,
after about 20 metres of drilling, the operation was stopped due to
the too warm snow/ice conditions encountered, illustrating that for
some glaciers such as Grand Combin, it is already too late. In June
2021, a sixth IM operation was successful on the Colle Gnifetti
glacier in the Swiss Alps, recovering two ice cores down to 82
metres of depth, encompassing 10,000 years of environmental
history. The next IM drilling project is expected to take place on
Kilimanjaro (Tanzania).
Current governance of IM: the Ice Memory Foundation (FIM)
On January 18th, 2021, seven founding research institutions have
signed the agreement officialising the creation of the Ice Memory
Foundation (FIM) under French law. From France: French national
center for scientific research (CNRS), University Grenoble-Alpes,
French national institute for research and development (IRD) and
the French polar institute IPEV. From Italy: Italian national center
for scientific research (CNR) and University Ca’Foscari in Venice.
From Swizerland: Paul Scherrer Institute.
The missions of the FIM are the following:
Define, run and ensure the implementation of the IM Programme at
the strategic, scientific and technical level, in particular within the
framework of the drafting of a charter laying down the conditions
for membership of this Programme and access to the IM heritage by
the entire international scientific community,
Develop fundamental links with international and national
institutions in order to ensure the sustainability of the IM
Programme,
Coordinate communication with the stakeholders involved in the IM
Programme,
Coordinate and contribute to ensure the implementation of the
fundraising campaigns required for the implementation of the IM
Programme,
Coordinate the establishment of long-term governance and ensure
the timely transfer of the IM Programme to (a) sustainable
institution(s).
The FIM is open to new founders wanting to contribute to the
international IM endeavour.
Important questions for the ATCM and CEP
Could importing “foreign material” to Antarctica result in the
introduction of biological material and invasive species?
Bacteria, pollen and other microorganisms are naturally present in
Antarctica, transported long distances by atmospheric aerosols from
places such as South America. For instance the few available
estimates concerning pollens indicate values of around 20 to 30
pollen particles per kilogramme of surface snow.
In principle, the IM project’s ice cores could introduce bacteria that
are not naturally found in Antarctica, but that are present in the
atmosphere over mountain glaciers in remote regions and then
incorporated in the ice. However, it is known that human beings are
themselves a source of bacterial contamination as they expel in
their immediate environment a large number of bacteria, from their
skin and from their respiration. The human emission rate in the
atmosphere has been evaluated at 40 millions of bacteria per person
and per hour, corresponding to about 30 milligrams of bacteria
being dispersed in its immediate environment from any human
being per hour (Qian et al., 2012). This implies that Antarctica is
already contaminated by non-native bacteria expelled by the
thousands of expeditioners sent to Antarctica each year by all
Parties to the ATCM, with a large bacterial variety resulting from
the wide geographical origin of expeditioners. It has already been
demonstrated that the Antarctic snow pack thus harbours diverse,
active and viable microbial populations that represent almost all the
major phylogenetic groups (Antony et al., 2016).
As long as the Ice Memory ice cores will remain frozen in the
repository, they will not risk to release non-native living organisms
into the Antarctic environment and they will not increase the
existing contamination due to expeditioners. In addition, specific
procedures concerning packaging, transportation and handling will
be applied to limit or even suppress the possible risk of dispersion
in the environment in case of sample melting.
Who will be responsible for the ice core repositories in the long
term?
We suggest that the leaders of national Antarctic programmes, who
are in charge of the research station where the ice core repository is
located, be responsible for securing it and granting access to future
research projects.
Any sub-sampling operation would be decided on/accredited by a
suitable international research committee on the model of the
current International Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences (IPICS), an
international group composed of all ice core scientists from around
the world. It would be
carried out in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty
(on informing the ATCM of activities taking place in the Antarctic)
and Article 3 of the Madrid Protocol (on conducting activities in
Antarctica).
Why not storing the Ice Memory heritage ice cores in an industrial
freezer next to research laboratory outside Antarctica ?
It could appear easier to store the Ice Memory ice cores nearby a
research facility of one or several of the ATCM Parties, as this is the
case for most of the currently drilled and analysed ice cores in the
world. However, experience has shown that unfortunately accidents
happen, leading to the loss of extremely precious samples. We know
of such accidents that took place in Canada in 2017, leading to the
loss of part of the world’s largest collection of ice cores from the
Canadian Arctic (The Guardian, 2017). Other commercial freezer
failures have been experienced for instance in Russia (at Moscow,
loss of precious ice core samples from the Elbrous glacier) or in
France (loss of samples for the Vostok ice core), usually due to
human error. The IM ice cores are expected to be stored untouched
for decades to centuries. The naturally cold conditions provided by
the high plateau in Antarctica are guaranteed.
Transfer of IM ice cores to Concordia station will rely on a reliable
logistical chain already in place and active nearly each Antarctic
field season to transfer ice core samples in the opposite way, from
Concordia station to Europe. As a reminder, about 40% of the
EPICA ice cores are still stored in a cave at Concordia. Nearly each
year, one or two scientists are present at Concordia station to sub-
sample the EPICA ice core archive at the request of the EPICA
consortium. IPEV / ENEA then ensure the safe cold transfer of the
sub-samples back to Europe.
References
Antony R., Sanyal A., Kapse N., Dhakephalkar P.K., Meloth T. and
Nair S.
Microbial communities associated with Antarctic snow pack and
their biogeochemical implications
Microbiological Research, volume 192, 192-202, doi.org/10.1016/
j.micres.2016.07.004, 2016.
Brondex J., Gagliardini O., Gillet-Chaulet F. and Chekki M.
Comparing the long-term fate of a snow cave and a rigid container
buried at Dome C, Antarctica
Cold Regions Science and Technology, n° 180, Article number
103164, DOI: 10.1016/j.coldregions.2020.103164, Dec. 2020.
Qian J, Hospodsky D., Yamamoto N., Nazaroff W.W. and Peccia J.
Size‐resolved emission rates of airborne bacteria and fungi in an
occupied classroom
Indoor Air, 22, 339–351, 2012.
The Guardian
22,000 years of history evaporates after freezer failure melts Arctic
ice cores
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/apr/16/arctic-
ice-cores-melt-university-alberta-canada
