Winter Targeted Observing Periods and Further Plans of the Year of
Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH)
Winter Antarctic Targeted Observing Periods and Further Plans of
the Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH)
An Information Paper submitted by WMO
Summary
This report is an update to that provided to ATCM XLIII - CEP XXIII
in 2021. Recent activities undertaken in the Antarctic as part of the
World Meteorological Organization's (WMO) Polar Prediction
Project (PPP) are summarized. The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP),
which is a hallmark activity of the PPP, has galvanised extra
observation and modelling efforts in both the Arctic and Antarctic.
From July 2019, the Polar Prediction Project moved into its
Consolidation Phase. This final phase of PPP (until end of 2022) is
crucial to synthesize the data and research from the Preparation
and Core Phases, to determine the long-term success of YOPP.
YOPP-SH (Southern Hemisphere) is currently running a second
Special Observing Period (SOP), mid-April to mid-July 2022,
coinciding with the rapid expansion of the sea-ice cover. The
analysis of these results will continue into 2023/24.
In late 2021 the World Weather Watch Scientific Steering
Committee agreed to the extension of YOPP-SH and the Model
Intercomparison Project (MIP) to the end of 2023 to allow the
results from these PPP activities to be reported and actioned within
the WMO decision making framework.
Introduction
PPP is coordinating international research with the main goal of
significantly improving weather and sea-ice prediction capabilities
in the polar regions, on time scales from hours to seasonal. It is part
of the World Weather Research Programme (WWRP) of WMO, with
close links to its sister programme, the WMO/IOC-UNESCO/ISC
World Climate Research Programme (WCRP).
The YOPP Core Phase and – to some extent also its Consolidation
Phase – included Special Observing Periods and a Target Observing
Period (aligned with the MOSAiC ice drift - https://mosaic-
expedition.org/) in the Arctic and Antarctic to increase the number
of atmospheric and oceanographic observations. Extra radiosondes
were launched from polar meteorological stations, and additional
buoys were deployed from research vessels. The additional data
enables improved representation of polar key processes in
uncoupled and coupled models used for high-quality prediction in
polar regions.
Contributions to the Antarctic Special Observing Period
The first Antarctic Special Observing Period (SOP) took place from
16 November 2018 to 15 February 2019. An overview of the
activities during the YOPP-SH SOP is available from the PPP
website, in particular from the YOPP Observations Layer.
An evaluation of global model forecasts during the Antarctic SOP
confirmed that extratropical Southern Hemisphere forecast skill is
lower than in the Northern Hemisphere with the contrast being
greatest between the Antarctic and Arctic (Fig. 1).
Figure 1: Anomaly correlation coefficient of operational global
models for the 500-hPa geopotential height field for (top)
Antarctica (solid lines) vs the extratropical Southern Hemisphere
(dashed lines), and (bottom) the Arctic (solid lines) vs the
extratropical Northern Hemisphere (dashed lines), during the
respective summers. Verification is against each model’s own
forecast. Notice the superior forecast performance for the Arctic
shown by the larger anomaly correlation coefficients vs the
Antarctic (solid colors). The Australian BOM SH performance (gray,
top) is degraded during the SOP because of numerical instability
over
Antarctica. Subsequently, their new ACCESS-G model version has a
forecast performance approaching that of the related UKMO
(source: Bromwich et al., 2020; Fig. 5).
Observing system experiments show that the additional radiosondes
yield a better description of atmospheric conditions over Antarctica
and as a result improve the forecasts of strong cyclones impacting
the Antarctic coast. SOP data have been applied to study an
atmospheric river event that was challenging to forecast and that
impacted southern South America and the Antarctic Peninsula
(Bromwich et al., 2020). Seasonal predictions by coupled
atmosphere–ocean–sea ice models struggle to capture the spatial
and temporal characteristics of the Antarctic sea ice minimum.
Winter Antarctic Special Observing Period in 2022
The second SOP from mid-April to mid-July 2022 is now underway.
This period coincides with the rapid expansion of the Antarctic sea-
ice cover. The goal of the winter SOP is to improve forecast
capabilities during the non-summer months as nations contemplate
expanding to year-round scientific field investigations. In
recognition of limited personnel and resources at this time of year,
the Targeted Observing Period (TOP) approach from the MOSAiC
TOP (see above) is being adopted.
It is expected that four TOPs of ~5 days duration will be scheduled
during the SOP with the focus on major oceanic cyclones,
atmospheric rivers, and related events. The Antarctic Peninsula and
Weddell Sea along with East Antarctica and the greater Ross Sea
region are of particular emphasis. The primary additional
observations will be radiosonde ascents although additional
instrumentation has been added to many stations, particularly in
the Antarctic Peninsula to aid in the investigation of the
atmospheric river events. Expanded oceanic observations are also
planned.
The recent dramatic warning event in the Eastern Antarctic was
used as a test event for the forecasting and analysis activities for the
TOPs. In general, the current numerical weather prediction model
forecasts gave at least 120 hours (5 days) lead time on the extreme
temperature rises but this was an extreme event with the study
events expected to be of a lessor scale.
YOPP-SH Data
The YOPP Data Portal is a metadata catalogue that connects to data
held by the different data centres contributing to YOPP, including
data centres that are connected to the WMO Information System’s
(WIS) Global Telecommunication System (GTS).
A GTS monitoring page set up by Kevin Manning (NCAR, Boulder,
CO) has proven extremely useful for planning the data denial
experiments. This archive has led to the decision to collect all the
detailed radiosonde ascents from national operators and
reformatted into a standard format by Steve Colwell (BAS FTP site).
Radiosonde flights have also been archived by the British Antarctic
Survey and the University of Wisconsin also has a data centre for
Antarctic observations that may not be in the Portal.
YOPP-SH Modelling and Forecasting
Modelling efforts, e.g., with the Polar Weather Research and
Forecasting model (PolarWRF) are based around the YOPP
Supersites with enhanced verification and data assimilation efforts.
Data denial experiments by different operational centres, such as
Météo France, were carried out using extra observations during the
YOPP-SH Special Observing Period. Extra observations from the
SOP were also used in a range of data assimilation techniques to
evaluate the forecast impact in the Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction
System (AMPS). The work includes data denial experiments
resulting in a more advanced data assimilation approach. The
Chilean Weather Service is using the Polar WRF model for its
Antarctic Peninsula forecasts. Further studies of this type are
expected using the data from the Winter SOP which will highlight
seasonal differences.
YOPPSiteMIP
In order to best use observations to understand the sources of
forecast error in polar regions, the YOPP Supersite Model Inter-
comparison Project (YOPPsiteMIP) aims to use observations from
YOPP Supersites to do process level assessment of the performance
of different forecast models in the Arctic and Antarctic. Efforts are
carried out to synergistically combine information from Arctic and
Antarctic Observatories and Numerical Weather Forecasts to further
both the understanding of the mechanisms of the polar environment
and to improve model forecast skill. High frequency model data is
being archived for a number of the Antarctic sites to support these
comparison and process investigation studies.
Sea ice prediction in Antarctica
One of the flagship activities of YOPP-SH is the Sea Ice Prediction
Network South (SIPN South), initiated in 2017 and that has run
without interruption since then. SIPN South was launched due to
the increasing need for sea ice information in the Southern Ocean,
the existence of predictability mechanisms for summer sea ice
recently suggested in the scientific literature, and the lack of
knowledge regarding the skill of state-of-the-art operational
forecasts at the seasonal time scale.
In five years, SIPN South has received more 52 contributions from
20 unique groups representing five continents, totalling more than
906 forecasts (most forecasts are expressed as ensembles). Forecasts
conducted from the 2020-2021 summer season (Fig. 2) are
currently being analyzed and a scientific paper is in preparation to
investigate the skill of contemporary dynamical models and
statistical models in predicting summer Antarctic sea ice at the
global and regional scales.
SIPN South will continue running for the next years, and an
additional exercise will be conducted during the Targeted
Observing Period of fall-winter 2022. Sea ice forecasts from YOPP
activities were used as part of the logistic support by the expedition
involved in the recent discovery of the Endurance.
Figure 2: Forecasts of total Antarctic sea ice area for the 2021-2022
melting season (submitted before 1st December 2021) contributed
by 15 groups. Verifying observations are in black.
Outreach
Second Season of The IcePod
In the second season of the IcePod focus was placed on the user
perspective. Two episodes from the second series interview tour
guides who work in the Antarctic. Details of the episodes in series
two can be found here
Meetings
YOPP-SH Community
The YOPP-SH community is meeting monthly online in two calls so
that people from all time zones can attend. The seventh Year of
Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere meeting will be held
in person and online, from 6th and 7th of August at the Pyle Centre
at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. The meeting is organized
by the Byrd Polar and Climate Research Center, Columbus, Ohio,
USA and will, again, be aligned with the annual Workshop on
Antarctic Meteorology and Climate (4th and 5th of August). During
the meeting the first results from the Targeted Observing Periods
(TOPs) will be discussed. Registration for the meeting is available at
this link.
YOPP Final Summit
The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) Final Summit will take place in
Montreal (QC), Canada, 29 August - 1 September 2022, it was
delayed from May 2022 due to COVID-19. The conference will
bring together the polar prediction community, from operational
centres and academia, to environment services and polar prediction
users
and northern communities, to showcase the successes of YOPP and
contribute to the legacy of the Polar Prediction Project (Fig. 3). The
YOPP in the Southern Hemisphere effort will provide an important
contribution to the summit where highlights of the YOPP-SH effort
will be showcased. See more on the Final Summit here.
Figure 3: The YOPP Final Summit is scheduled to take place 29
August to 1 September 2022 in Montréal, Canada
PPP encourages Antarctic Treaty Parties to share information about
the YOPP Data Portal to enable the national research communities
to make use of the portal and to contribute their own data via their
national data centres in an effort to build a comprehensive polar
meteorological database.
For further details please contact office@polarprediction.net
@awi.de in the first instance.
