The Act on the Promotion of Polar Activities of the Republic of
Korea
The Act on the Promotion of Polar Activities of the Republic of
Korea
Information Paper submitted by the Republic of Korea
Background
In April 2021, the government of the Republic of Korea enacted the
Act on the Promotion of Polar Activities (hereinafter referred to as
the ‘Polar Act’). The purpose of this Act is to promote the activities
of the Korean Polar Program in the Arctic and Antarctic, and to
increase Korea’s contribution towards addressing the global
challenges faced by humanity, such as climate change.
The Polar Act is based on the basic principle that the polar regions
shall exist for the common good of humanity and all activities shall
be carried out while recognizing the importance of environmental
conservation. The Act is also grounded in the understanding that it
is the obligation of each Consultative Parties to cooperate and
establish Antarctica as a region of peace under the Antarctic Treaty
system.
The Polar Act is a new development that is distinguishable from the
existing ‘Act on Antarctic Activities and Antarctic Environmental
Protection’ (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Antarctic Act’), which is a
legislation that contains the commitment to the protection of the
Antarctic environment and regulations to implement the provisions.
The Polar Act was enacted to facilitate and promote Korea’s polar
activities and build competencies in research and development
(R&D), operation and safe management of polar infrastructure, and
environmental protection in the polar regions. The ‘Polar Act’ also
aims to support activities such as education and training, economic
cooperation in the Arctic, international cooperation and outreach.
Act on Activities in the Antarctic Area and the Protection of
Antarctic Environment (Antarctic Act)
Act on Promotion of Polar Activities in the Polar Regions (Polar
Act)
Nature
Restriction on and permission of activities in Antarctica
Systematic support for and promotion of Activities in the Arctic and
Antarctica
Significance
Domestic legislation to support the international law; A law enacted
for domestic implementation of the Antarctic Treaty
Globalization of domestic policies; provide systemic support for
activities in the Polar regions
Objective
Peaceful use and environmental protection of the Antarctic
Sustainable development of the polar regions, environment
protection, support for and systemic promotion activities in the
polar regions
Scope
Activities in the Antarctic such as scientific research and
environmental management
Activities in both the Arctic and Antarctic
Table 1 – Comparison of the Antarctic Act and the Polar Act
The Korean government plans to introduce the ‘Basic Plan for the
Promotion of Polar Activities’ every five years from 2023, based on
the Polar Act, in order to present a more detailed direction on how
the objectives of the Act will be met.
Key Provisions
The Polar Act encourages activities related to the polar regions and
developing government policies for supporting Korea’s polar
activities. The aim of the Act was to develop a system for
comprehensive support. The Articles of the Polar Act contains
provisions that would serve as a foundation for support and related
to research and development (Article 8), training of human
resources with an expertise in the polar region (Article 9),
promotion of economic cooperation in the Arctic (Article 10),
facilitation of international cooperation (Article 12), and education
and outreach (Article 15).
In addition, the enactment of the Polar Act provides a legal
framework for universities, research institutes, and businesses in
Korea to utilize Korean polar research infrastructure, namely
research stations in Antarctica and icebreaking research vessels
more efficiently (Article 6).
In order to fulfill the goal of the Polar Act, the Korean government
plans to produce ‘Basic Plan for the promotion of polar activities’
with a view to developing detailed plans for policies suggested by
the Polar Act. It will contain the following: to stimulate investment,
establish the ‘Integrated Polar Information System’ to systematize
the collection and management of the data observed in the polar
regions, and to set ‘Safety Management Guidelines’ for
infrastructure management to enhance operational safety.
With the enactment of the Polar Act, Korea now has the legal basis
for promotion of polar activities, the policy basis for development
of the detailed promotion plans on a five-year basis, and supporting
system to implement projects such as ‘Integrated Polar Information
System’ and ‘Safety Management System.’
Expected outcomes and Plan for Follow-up Action
In particular, the Korean government plans to promote the three
follow-up actions for the Polar Act.
First, the government will establish the ‘Basic Plan for the
Promotion of Polar Activities’ every five years, to present the goals,
strategies, and tasks for the Korean polar activities. The first Basic
Plan will be applied to the year 2023-2027. Before the Act was in
effect, the ‘Basic Plan for the Promotion of Research Activities in
Antarctica’ was only pursuant to the Antarctic, but the Act will now
enable Korea to establish ‘Basic Plan for the Promotion of Polar
Activities’, which will be more comprehensive and encompass both
poles.
Second, the government plans to build systems that can practically
support the promotion of polar activities such as the ‘Integrated
Polar Information System’ and the ‘Safety Management System.’
Currently, the observation data was collected and managed by each
research institutions and researchers. The new information system
will now be able to gather and manage data, systematize its
management by standardization of exchange methods and
systematic classification. The integrated data platform will be able
to provide improved accessibility and convenience of using the
data. In addition, the government plans to build the system for
preventing accidents in the polar regions by laying out the ‘Safety
Management Guidelines’ for the infrastructure and enhancing the
supervision of the infrastructure operators.
Third, the Act will establish a cooperative ecosystem where the
government, businesses, the academia, and research institutions can
jointly conduct research projects more seamlessly.
Lastly, the Act aims to address issues of the polar regions, which
consists of Arctic and Antarctic, two regions with significant
differences in circumstances and environments in better integrated
manners. However, there are room for improved efficiency through
harmonization of the policies, especially in infrastructure
management, education and outreach, and response to climate
change.
