Scientific and Science-related Cooperation with the Antarctic
Community and Responses to COVID-19
Scientific and Science-related Cooperation with the Antarctic
Community and Responses to COVID-19
Information Paper submitted by Korea (ROK)
Overview
The Republic of Korea has been a Consultative Party since 1989,
and highly values the cooperation with other Parties in the spirit of
the Antarctic Treaty. This report is prepared to inform the
Consultative Parties and the wider Antarctic community of the
current status of logistical operation in response to COVID-19 and
highlights of the Korean scientific activities during 2021-22
Antarctic summer season.
Research Highlights of 2021-22 Antarctic summer season
Field research programs were scaled-down during 2020-21 season
in order to prevent any breakout of COVID-19 among those working
in Antarctia. Based on the experience of dealing with the pandemic
during the past two years, the Korean Antarctic Program applied
strict preventative measures such as vaccination and quarantine.
Scientific activities were able to resume at a similar scale compared
to pre-pandemic seasons.
The Antarctic King Sejong Station, located at the tip of the Antarctic
Peninsula, remains as the key research site for the Korean Antarctic
Program and scientific collaboration. During the 2021-22 summer
season, the station welcomed 91 Korean and international visitors,
from 37 research and expert groups, and have supported their
research activities and station maintenance projects on-site.
Ecosystem Science is the focus of the research in areas nearby King
Sejong. During last season, research teams have conducted field
studies on microbiology and marine environment, which will
contribute to identifying the correlation between environmental
changes and ecosystem responses in the region. Geophysical survey
and atmospheric observation were carried out in collaboration with
the Turkish and Malaysian Antarctic program. Monitoring activities
for terrestrial ecosystem and environmental and ecological
contamination were conducted, in order to investigate effects of
Antarctic station operation on the environment.
The Antarctic Jang Bogo Station has become the base camp for
scientific research in the Ross Sea and the Northern Victoria Land
for the Korean Antarctic Program. During this summer season, 93
scientists and experts from multiple disciplines have visited Jang
Bogo for station maintenance projects and for the participation into
land-based and ocean-going field expeditions in the nearby areas.
Last season, an expedition team continued their traverse route into
the inland of Antarctica, securing a route over a thousand
kilometers that connects Jang Bogo with Concordia Station being
operated by French and Italian Antarctic programs. The route has
provided an opportunity to conduct geophysical survey of the
continent, and will be able to accommodate subglacial lake and
deep ice core drilling, as well as astronomical observations. In an
effort to investigate the impact of environmental changes on
Antarctic ecology, bio-loggers were deployed to study the seals
inhabiting near the station. Another team was able to successfully
hatch Antarctic silverfish in captivity.
Changes in the ocean environment and biodiversity are being
studied to better understand the ecosystems in the Ross Sea Marine
Protected Area. Ice sheet retreat and ocean circulation are
also a large part of the research taken place on IBRV Araon, which
carried out research with 10 research teams on board.
One Korean scientist visited Vostok Research Station, operated by
the Russian Antarctic Program, during 2021-22 season to
investigate anthropogenic and natural characteristics of
atmosphere-ice sheet exchanges as a part of international deep ice
coring network program.
Proactive Measures against COVID-19
As an operator of Antarctic research infrastructure, Korea has
cooperated with other national Antarctic operators to prevent and
control the spread of the virus to ensure the safety of those working
in the field. In contrast to the previous season, field activities in
2021-22 were carried out with a semblance of normalcy due to
progress in vaccination programs and the development of anti-viral
treatment.
The Korean Antarctic program and its managers participated in
relevant COMNAP meetings and in the preparation for the
“COVID-19 Outbreak Prevention and Management Response
Guidelines”. All Antarctic visitors’ onsite quaranteen protocol and
logistic timeline were in compliance of the guidelines as well as the
protocols layed out by the gateway cities, Punta Arenas, Chile and
Christchurch, New Zealand.
To aviod exposing research stations to the virus, rigorus screening
protocals were put in place. Only those who were fully vaccinated,
i.e. who are at least 14 days after completing their final dose, were
allowed to travel on a commercial flight to a gateway city after
receiving negative PCR test results. Upon arriving at the gateway
city, the travellers were quarantined for 14 days before continuting
their travel to Antarctica.
Same vaccination and PCR test criteria were applied to those
embarking IBRV Araon. All crew and staff quarantined inside Araon
for 7 days before the ship departed the port. In order to minimize
outside contacts, the crew were equipped with protective clothing
and disinfectants when coming to contact with the staff at the port
of call.
The stations and vessel were equipped to deal with the possiblity of
an outbreak. Antigen test kits and medication for treating COVID-19
(Regkirona) were supplied to the year-round infrastructures upon
consultation with healthcare professionals. Negative pressure
isolation quarters and facility were prepared on Araon as well as at
the King Sejong Station. The personnel were trained with a manual
on how to respond in case of an outbreak. Personal protective
equipment (PPE) that were made available to the personnel include
protective clothing, helmets, goggles, and equipment such as
disinfectant spray, plastic covers, and negative pressure transfer
equipment.
International Cooperation
The Korean Antarctic program recognizes the importance of
international cooperation in dealing with emergency situations,
including responses to COVID-19. Although the movement between
the stations were largely restricted as a part of preventative
measure, great efforts were made to ensure logistics supplying the
stations were on schedule. The Korean program closely cooperated
with the New Zealand and Chilean programs with the aid of the
Korea-New Zealand Antarctic Cooperation Centre (KNACC) in
Christchurch and Korea-Chile Antarctic Cooperation Center
(KCACC) in Punta Arenas, as both cities are gateway to Korean
Antarctic stations.
Amidst the challenges posed by COVID-19, the Korean researchers
and operators of Antarctic programs will continue to collaborate
with other Consultative Parties and support the new members of the
Antarctic research community.
