Banning Hydrocarbon Extraction in Antarctica Now: Reducing the
Risks and Impacts of Global Climate Change
Banning hydrocarbon extraction in Antarctica now:
Reducing the risks and impacts of global climate change
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Summary
The Madrid Protocol prohibits mineral resource activities apart
from scientific research under Article 7. As with the rest of the
Protocol, this prohibition is open-ended, but can become open for
review and possible amendment after 2048. While the rationale for
the mineral resource prohibition was, and remains, the protection
of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated
ecosystems, a subset of mineral resources – hydrocarbons – are also
of global significance as potential contributors to anthropogenic
climate change. If 60% of known global reserves must remain in the
ground if we are to meet the Paris Agreement targets of keeping the
global temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels,
Antarctic hydrocarbon reserves cannot be used at all. A compelling
case exists for Parties agreeing to ban hydrocarbon extraction in
Antarctica now, rather than leaving this to be resolved through
decisions around the general mineral resources’ prohibition
post-2048.
Mineral Resources and the Article 7 Prohibition under the Madrid
Protocol
The 1991 Madrid Protocol’s Article 7, Prohibition of Mineral
Resource Activities declares that “Any activity relating to mineral
resources, other than scientific research, shall be prohibited.” What
“Mineral Resources” are is not specified in the Protocol, although
the Final Act of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative
Meeting says that it does not include ice. However, the Convention
on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities
(CRAMRA), adopted in 1988 but not subsequently brought into
force, and essentially replaced by the Madrid Protocol, does. In
Article 1, paragraph 6 it defines “Mineral Resources” to mean “all
non-living natural non-renewable resources including fossil fuels,
metallic and non-metallic minerals”. This may be taken as the sense
in which Mineral Resources were understood by the Parties at the
adoption of the Madrid Protocol. Fossil fuels are ordinarily
understood as the three natural-occurring substances crude oil,
natural gas and coal, which are commonly also referred to as
“Hydrocarbons”.
While Article 7, like the entire Madrid Protocol, is open-ended in
application, through Article 25 a mechanism is provided for a
pathway to modification or amendment after 2048. While we hope
that Parties will not seek to modify or amend the Protocol in ways
that open up mineral resource activities after 2048, that time
horizon is now just twenty-six years ahead.
The Case for Banning Hydrocarbon Extraction in Antarctica Now A
fuller case, and sources, are provided in Patrick Flamm and Alan D.
Hemmings, ‘Now and Never: Banning Hydrocarbon Extraction in
Antarctica Forever’, German Institute for Global and Area Studies
(GIGA) Focus Global, No. 1, February 2022. DOI: https:/
doi.org/10.57671/gfgl-22012. https://www.giga-hamburg.de/en/
publications/giga-focus/now-and-never-banning-hydrocarbon-
extraction-in-antarctica-forever  
The position that Parties arrived at in 1991 with the Madrid
Protocol reflected a decade of discussion within the Antarctic Treaty
system around the issue of mineral resource activities and the
safeguarding of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and
associated ecosystems. The concern was, properly, that activities
conducted in Antarctica should not compromise the environmental
values of the region. The judgement was reached that conducting
mineral resource activities apart from scientific research (in which
the Antarctic Treaty system had confidence and great expertise)
would be likely to cause damage to the Antarctic environment, and
that this was unacceptable. That judgement remains valid.
However, because the Antarctic Treaty system’s approach to
Antarctic mineral resources ran in parallel to the emerging global
concern about anthropogenic climate change, without the two being
fully integrated, the Madrid Protocol did not (beyond the undefined
“dependent and associated ecosystems”) explicitly consider the
implications of any Antarctic minerals extraction for the global
environment. The Protocol’s Art. 3(2)(b)(i) states that activities in
the Antarctic Treaty Area shall be planned and conducted so as to
avoid adverse effects on climate and weather patterns.
The international discussions around climate change proceeding at
the global level, inter alia the 1992 United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, 2015
Paris Agreement and the 27 Conferences of the Parties (COP)
including that in Glasgow in 2021 and COP 28 in Sharm el-Sheikh
7-18 November of this year, have progressively revealed the
imperative of capping CO2 emissions and limiting temperature
increase. Article 2 of the Paris Agreement refers to “Holding the
increases in global average temperature to well below 2°C above
pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature
increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, recognising that this
would significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change”.
The 2021 Glasgow Climate Pact called the 2020s a “critical decade”
for meeting the Paris Agreement targets.
Research conducted in Antarctica has been a major contributor to
understanding the scale and trajectory of anthropogenic climate
change in Antarctica and globally. The picture revealed is
progressively worsening without the international system yet
adequately responding. Current assessments are that some 60% of
the planet’s hydrocarbon reserves need to remain in the ground if
we are to keep the global temperature rise by 2050 below 1.5° C
above pre-industrial levels.
Antarctica’s hydrocarbons are, as yet, not fully assessed, and thus
are not included in the known hydrocarbon reserves. However, they
(and especially oil and gas) are the focus of considerable
international interest, strategic positioning and elite and public
discourse around Antarctic futures and the geopolitical
consequences of this. Hydrocarbon reserves in Antarctica may well
be substantial in global terms. If 60% of what we know about
cannot be used, it is clear that no hydrocarbons from Antarctica
should ever be extracted.
Banning Extraction Now
The case for introducing a ban on the extraction of Antarctic
hydrocarbons now, rather than chancing to the fate of the existing
general mineral resources moratorium post-2048 is that, whereas
any lifting of the present prohibition will pose significant risk to the
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems,
the extraction of hydrocarbons poses a global and potentially
existential threat at an altogether higher level. Agreeing to ban the
extraction of Antarctic hydrocarbons now would be without
prejudice to the more general mineral resources prohibition under
the Madrid Protocol. Aside from the obvious benefit for the global
environment, such a ban will relieve the Antarctic Treaty system of
some significant pressures around resource rivalry which may be
impediments to Antarctic governance in the common interest. It
would also signal serious intent to tackle the global imperative to
de-carbonise society in the common good more generally, and
reinforce earlier hortatory statements by Parties. Resolution 6
(2016) adopted by ATCM XXXIX in Santiago recalls inter alia that
in accordance with its Article 25, the Protocol does not expire in
2048, and confirms ongoing commitment to the prohibition on
Antarctic mineral resource activities, other than for scientific
research as well as support for the Antarctic Mining Ban. The
Washington Ministerial Declaration on the Fiftieth Anniversary of
the Antarctic Treaty (2009) and ATCM declarations in Prague
(ATCM XXXII, 2019) and Paris (ATCM XXXIII, 2021) also reaffirm
the mining ban.
Mechanism for Enacting the ban on Hydrocarbon Extraction
Consultative Parties can secure such a ban through a collectively
agreed Measure at the ATCM. The ban should state that further to
the provisions of Article 7 of the Protocol the extraction of all
hydrocarbon (fossil fuels) shall be prohibited to reduce the risks and
impacts of climate change. The Measure could state that it is
without prejudice to the existing Madrid Protocol Article 7
prohibition of all other mineral resource activities apart from
scientific research.
