Developments to enhance the safety of pleasure yachts and fishing
boats operating in the Antarctic Treaty area
Developments to enhance the safety of pleasure yachts and fishing
boats operating in the Antarctic Treaty area
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Summary
This paper provides information on the latest developments at the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) pertinent to the safety
and operation of vessels, particularly pleasure yachts and fishing
boats, in the Antarctic Treaty area. It calls on the ATCM to:
make the “Guidelines for Safety Measures for Pleasure Yachts of
300 Gross Tonnage and above not engaged in trade Operating in
Polar Waters” a requirement of any permits issued for pleasure
yachts planning to operate in the Antarctic Treaty area,
bring forward experience of challenges with implementation of the
Polar Code and support review of the Polar Code by the IMO, and
support the mandatory marking and reporting of lost fishing gear
through MARPOL Annex V.
Introduction
When the International Maritime Organization’s (IMO)
International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code)
was developed, it was recognised that a major gap in the Code was
the omission of a range of vessels including pleasure yachts, small
cargo ships under 500 gross tonnes (GT), and fishing vessels. A
small number of IMO Member States were keen from the beginning
of the negotiations to develop the Polar Code to include these
vessels, also known as non-SOLAS vessels Non-SOLAS vessels is a
term used generally to describe a wide range of vessels not certified
under the International Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) Convention, it
includes fishing vessels, pleasure yachts not engaged in trade, and
cargo ships of less than 500 gross tonnage. It should be noted
however that Chapter 5 of the SOLAS Convention addressing safety
of navigation is applied to all ships on all voyages and so does
include these “non-SOLAS” vessels. ; however, it was considered
expedient to focus initially on larger cargo vessels and passenger
ships and address non-SOLAS vessels during a second phase of
development.
Vessels in the Southern Ocean
ATCM42_ip107 rev.1 ATCM42_ip107 rev.1 Data Collection and
Reporting on Yachting Activity in Antarctica in 2018-19. Presented
by United Kingdom, Argentina and Chile in conjunction with
IAATO. submitted by the United Kingdom, Argentina and Chile, in
conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour
Operators (IAATO) shows that in the 2018-19 season, the last full
season before the coronavirus pandemic, 50 yachts were either
sighted in or reported an intention to sail to Antarctica. This
included 43 authorised vessels (19 IAATO members and 24 non-
IAATO members), and 7 vessels which appeared to be unauthorised.
CCAMLR records List of authorised vessels | CCAMLR show that in
the same season 45 fishing vessels were authorised to fish in the
waters of the Southern Ocean. IAATO’s 2018-19 figures for
seaborne tourism in ATCM42_ip107 rev.1 ATCM42_ip140 rev.1
IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism: 2018-19 Season and
Preliminary Estimates for 2019-20 Season. indicate that 56 ships
and yachts operated in the region, including presumably the 19
yachts identified in ATCM42_ip107 rev.1. Even allowing for
research, resupply ships and other occasional vessels in the
Southern Ocean, it is likely that more than half of the vessels
operating in the Southern Ocean are non-SOLAS vessels and are
therefore not covered by the IMO’s Polar Code. These figures, while
not a complete assessment
of all vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty area, indicate the
importance of developing safety regulation for non-SOLAS vessels.
Guidance for pleasure yachts and fishing vessels (non-SOLAS
vessels) in polar waters
Since the Polar Code came into effect in January 2017, work to
develop provisions for non-SOLAS vessels has focused on fishing
vessels and pleasure yachts. While some IMO Members felt that
measures for non-SOLAS vessels should be mandatory and identified
the 2012 Cape Town Agreement The Cape Town Agreement of 2012
on the Implementation of the Provisions of the Torremolinos
Protocol of 1993 relating to the Torremolinos International
Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977 (2012 Cape
Town Agreement). – which seeks to enhance safety onboard fishing
vessels - as a potential mechanism for introducing mandatory
provisions for fishing vessels operating in polar regions, most of the
provisions have been developed as non-binding guidelines.
In May 2021, two sets of Guidelines Guidelines for Safety Measures
for Fishing Vessels of 24m in length and over Operating in Polar
Waters. MSC.1/Circ.1641. Issued 24 June 2021.Guidelines for
Safety Measures for Pleasure Yachts of 300 Gross Tonnage and
above not engaged in trade Operating in Polar Waters. MSC.1/Circ.
1642. Issued 14 May 2021. were adopted that addressed fishing
vessels of 24m and over in length, and therefore are applicable to
all fishing vessels operating in the Southern Ocean, and pleasure
yachts of 300 GT and above. Work continues to develop guidelines
for cargo vessels between 300 – 500 GT and for yachts engaged in
commercial operations.
The Guidelines are similar, addressing a broad range of safety areas
including construction and watertight integrity; machinery and
electrical installations; fire protection, detection, extinction and
fighting; life-saving appliances and arrangements;
radiocommunications; and voyage planning. See Annex 1 for a
comprehensive list of safety areas included in each set of
Guidelines.
It is already nearly one year since the two sets of Guidelines were
adopted, and the 2021/22 season should have seen the first
application and experience of using the Guidelines. ASOC proposes
that over the coming years it will be important to monitor the use
and application of the Guidelines to ensure rigorous application,
confirm the guidance is “fit for purpose” for the environments in
which they are to be applied, and to learn from the experience.
Identification of challenges and gaps will be a priority and further
consideration of the need to make any aspects of the Guidelines
mandatory.
Navigation and voyage planning
Despite the majority of the safety measures for non-SOLAS vessels
being developed as guidance, some measures are being considered
for mandatory application. Chapter 9 of the Polar Code on
navigation and Chapter 11 on voyage planning will be applied in a
mandatory manner. The discussion of navigation and voyage
planning measures is anticipated to be completed in June 2022;
however, it will be 2028 before these provisions enter into force.
Reviewing the Implementation of the Polar Code
In April 2022, five years after the Polar Code came into effect,
ASOC member WWF has launched a report identifying challenges
and gaps in implementing the Polar Code Review of Perceived Gaps
and Challenges in the Implementation of the Polar Code. WWF
Arctic Programme. March 2022. Review of Perceived Gaps and
Challenges in the Implementation of the Polar Code | WWF Arctic
(arcticwwf.org). The report is a study of commentary from a variety
of sources on the implementation of the Polar Code and makes
substantive recommendations with respect to the implementation
and potential review of the Polar Code. Much of the report is based
on experience of the implementation of the Polar Code in the
Arctic, although there is some reference to challenges experienced
in the Antarctic.
In a document submitted to the XLIII ATCM ATCM43_IP057
Implementation of the IMO Polar Code in Spain: Certification of the
Research Vessel (RV) Sarmiento de Gamboa. Presented by Spain. , a
range of challenges were identified, including difficulty with the use
of goal-based standards, problems with identifying polar service
temperature, difficulties in carrying out risk assessments, and the
provision of life-saving equipment.
There is no requirement for a formal review of the Polar Code.
However, the accompanying guidance on methodologies for
assessing operational capabilities and limitations in ice (POLARIS
Guidance) was due to be reviewed only four years after the Polar
Code took effect in 2021.
ASOC believes that although there is still work underway to extend
the provisions of the Polar Code to non-SOLAS vessels, it is also
important to consider the implementation of the Polar Code to date
and to identify whether in practice it has delivered expectations. It
would be valuable for ATCPs to submit further information on the
experience and challenges experienced with the implementation of
the Polar Code.
Marine plastic litter from ships
In 2018, the IMO adopted an action plan on marine plastic litter
from ships. However, the coronavirus pandemic has slowed
progress on the identified measures, which include consideration of
making marking of fishing gear mandatory, promoting the reporting
of the loss of fishing gear, and facilitating the delivery of retrieved
fishing gear to shore facilities. Work has been undertaken
considering how to facilitate and enhance reporting the accidental
loss or discharge of fishing gear and the information that needs to
be reported to Administrations and the IMO, as well as reporting
mechanisms and modalities. However, a correspondence group
considered that there remained much work to still be done. At the
IMO’s Pollution Prevention and Response sub-committee in April
2022, the terms of reference for a further correspondence group
were agreed. The work to be undertaken will include consideration
of and drafting of amendments to the International Convention for
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) Annex V to
provide for the reporting mechanisms, the modalities and the
information to be reported. With respect to the mandatory marking
of fishing gear, opinion on the appropriate route is divided and it
was decided to seek further advice from the IMO’s Marine
Environment Protection Committee on the possible regulatory
options.
ASOC believes that both the marking of fishing gear and recording
of lost gear is essential to combat the problem of ghost fishing gear
in the Southern Ocean.
Recommendations
Key actions for the ATCM:
Require demonstrated compliance with the “Guidelines for Safety
Measures for Pleasure Yachts of 300 Gross Tonnage and above not
engaged in trade Operating in Polar Waters” before issuing any
permits for pleasure yachts planning to operate in the Antarctic
Treaty area.
Bring forward experience of challenges with implementation of the
Polar Code and support review of the Polar Code by the IMO.
Support the mandatory marking and reporting of lost fishing gear
through MARPOL Annex V.
Annex 1: Chapters of the non-SOLAS vessel Guidelines
Guidelines For Safety Measures For Fishing Vessels Of 24m In
Length And Over Operating In Polar Waters
Guidelines For Safety Measures For Pleasure Yachts Of 300 Gross
Tonnage And Above Not Engaged In Trade Operating In Polar
Waters
Construction and watertight integrity
Construction and watertight integrity
Stability
Machinery and electrical installations
Machinery and electrical installations
Life-saving appliances and arrangements
Fire protection, fire detection, fire extinction and fire fighting
Fire protection, fire detection, fire extinction and fire fighting
Protection of persons on board
Radiocommunications
Life-saving appliances and arrangements
Navigational equipment
Emergency procedures, musters and drills
Drills and emergency instructions
Radiocommunications
Other safety measures, including medical equipment, reserve
supplies, voyage planning
Shipborne navigational equipment and arrangements
Other safety measures, including anchoring and towing
arrangements, fuel and other flammable fluid tanks and systems,
emergency equipment, crewing, training, voyage planning
