Update on current initiatives for a more structured sample and data
collection of environmental contamination in the Antarctic
Update on current initiatives for a more structured sample and data
collection of environmental contamination in the Antarctic
Information Paper submitted by Germany, Italy, Australia, United
Kingdom, United States of America and Sweden
Summary
There is growing evidence that the Antarctic is increasingly exposed
to chemical stressors. Antarctica is impacted by global issues such
as climate change and long-range transport of chemicals.
Furthermore, expanding tourism and research activities (including
logistical activities serving their conduct or preparation) can affect
the pristine environment. To date, there is a lack of systematic
approaches and data to study and assess chemical pollution of the
Antarctic environment and to derive knowledge-based measures for
its protection.
In particular, synergies between the Environmental Specimen Banks
(ESBs) and National Antarctic Programs (NAPs) can be a
straightforward way to guarantee that current and future
monitoring actions will be representative and continuous,
procedures will be harmonized, quality control of the analytical
data will be established, and that future generations will be offered
the opportunity for retrospective studies. A systematic and efficient
sample and data collection plan should also improve the effective
use of scientific information, accelerate decision-making for
environmental protection measures and, consequently, promote the
future conservation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent
and associated ecosystems.
The purpose of this paper is to outline the progress that has been
made in establishing an international network – following ATCM
XLIII/IP021 submitted by Germany and Italy – aimed at promoting
and coordinating a more structured sample and data collection of
environmental contamination in the Antarctic. This paper follows
the discussion at the Expert Workshop ‘Act now – Legacy and
Emerging Contaminants in Polar Regions’ co-hosted by the German
Environment Agency (UBA) and the Institute of Coastal
Environmental Chemistry, Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon (Geesthacht,
Germany) in January 2022. In order to have a sufficiently
comprehensive and up to date data basis for this workshop and
further work, UBA has commissioned a report to review studies on
the occurrence of emerging organic contaminants (EOCs) in both
the Arctic and the Antarctic and to evaluate the long-range
environmental transport processes of EOCs via ocean currents and
the atmosphere from continental sources to polar regions.
Background
Antarctica is one of the planet’s last wildernesses, designated by the
Antarctic Treaty in 1959 as a ‘natural reserve, devoted to peace and
science’. In 1991, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) enshrined the protection of the
Antarctic environment because of its intrinsic value and its
importance as an area for scientific exploration, in particular
research essential to understanding the global environment.
Nevertheless, serious threats to the conservation of the Antarctic
environment do exist, including chemical contamination related to
various sources, such as research stations, scientific activities,
tourism and fishing operations, vessels incidents, and long-range
transport of legacy pollutants and contaminants of emerging
concern (CEC) from mid-latitudes. As a result, the presence of
persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and trace elements have been
detected in Antarctica (ATCM XXXI/IP097, ATCM XXXII/IP069,
ATCM XXXVII/IP008, ATCMXL/IP022). Furthermore, emerging
contaminants (e.g. flame retardants, pharmaceuticals and personal
care products,
microplastics) can be found in Antarctica (Waller et al., 2017,
Vecchiato et al. 2017, Dreyer et al. 2019,), although environmental
monitoring activities are still scarce in comparison to data from the
Northern Hemisphere. It is therefore not surprising that the
assessment of chemical contamination is becoming an important
topic of various research programs in Antarctica, including the
Italian National Antarctic Research Programme (PNRA), launched
in 1985 and arrived today at its 37th year of activity.
ESBs systematically archive samples from the environment for
future research and monitoring purposes (Küster et al. 2014). In
addition, the long-term preservation of representative specimens is
an important complement to environmental research and
monitoring plans. The first banking activities were set up in the
1960s in Sweden and Japan and then in the 1970s and 1980s in the
USA and in Germany, respectively. Today, around 30 national ESBs
are established around the globe, including the Italian Antarctic
ESB (BCAA), operating since 1994 within the PNRA (Soggia et al.
2001). UBA, to which the German ESB belongs, has initiated case
studies together with the Alfred-Wegener-Institute, Helmholtz-
Zentrum für Polar- und Meeresforschung (AWI) to explore the use
of samples from penguin colonies, coastal fish and krill for
contaminant analysis, including systematic archiving. Moreover,
UBA will commission a research project with funding from the
Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Nuclear
Safety and Consumer Protection to develop more detailed ideas
about systematic approaches to gathering data and information
about the chemical pollution and its impacts on the Antarctic
environment. The aim is to derive knowledge-based measures for
protecting the Antarctic environment.
The SCAR ImPACT (Input Pathways of Persistent Organic Pollutants
in Antarctica) Action Group was established in 2018 to facilitate
coordinated investigation and monitoring of chemical inputs into
the Antarctic. Through ATCMXLIII/IP137, the Action Group has
identified priority challenges for persistent organic chemical
research in Antarctica. The paper includes the identified priority
research gaps and proposed actions that resulted from a scoping
meeting of the group. It identified potential approaches for
coordinated research and monitoring efforts and outlined a set of
actions needed to align research on persistent organic chemicals in
the Antarctic with international efforts and existing global
monitoring frameworks.
Findings within the project ‘Emerging and legacy organic
contaminants in the polar regions’
The aim of the project ‘Emerging and legacy organic contaminants
in the polar regions’, funded by UBA, was to review studies on the
occurrence of EOCs in both the Arctic and the Antarctic and to
evaluate the long-range environmental transport processes of EOCs
via ocean currents and the atmosphere from continental sources to
polar regions.
The report indicates that legacy POPs in environmental media and
biota decline in both the Arctic and the Antarctic in response to
regional and international chemical management, e.g. the
Stockholm Convention. It has been observed, that reemission of
POPs that previously accumulated in polar environment can enter
the global cycle again following ice retreat, glacier melting and
permafrost throwing due to global warming. On the other hand, a
number of CECs has been reported in different environmental media
in the Arctic and Antarctic. Literature data showed that
environmental pathways such as atmospheric deposition, air-water
exchange and discharge from seasonal melting can interfere with
the biogeochemical cycling of CECs in polar regions. Local
emissions of certain CECs may occur near research stations,
harbours and tourism sites. Some EOCs such as per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs), chlorinated paraffins (SCCPs
and MCCPs) and organophosphate esters (OPEs) have been included
in long-term atmospheric monitoring programs of the Arctic
Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). Screening survey
for EOCs in environmental and biological matrices have been
carried out through national and regional research programs. Data
of CECs in Antarctic are scarce. Nevertheless, the long-range
environmental transport of CECs has been highlighted with their
occurrences in the ice core, snow and lake waters in polar regions.
The major findings for ten groups of CECs are presented in detail in
the UBA-Texte report “Emerging and legacy organic contaminants
in the polar regions” as well as in the related publication “Legacy
and emerging organic contaminants in the polar regions”.
Outcomes of the Expert Workshop ‘Act now – Legacy and Emerging
Contaminants in Polar Regions’
On 25 and 26 January 2022, experts from four continents met
online at the Expert Workshop ‘Act now – Legacy and Emerging
Contaminants in Polar Regions’ co-hosted by UBA and the
Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon and discussed potential impacts of
legacy and new hazardous chemicals, which accumulate in snow,
ice and wildlife. It was the first time that international experts from
contaminant research in polar regions, representatives from
regulatory chemical assessment and monitoring, ESBs, and
information and data platforms jointly discussed pressing chemical
pollution issues in the polar regions and opportunities for
collaboration. The goal of the workshop was to provide
recommendations for improving screening, monitoring, assessment,
co-operation and data sharing to provide environmental policy and
chemicals management with effective and reliable pollution data to
protect the polar environment. Members of the European
Commission, the Stockholm Convention, the Arctic Council, the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, ESBs and Data Centres
discussed together with the research community two questions
which were a common thread throughout the workshop: What are
the common goals and scientific bases for chemical research and
monitoring in the polar regions - and how do the respective
approaches differ for the Arctic and Antarctic?
The overarching outcome of the discussion during this Expert
Workshop is the need for more structured sample and data
collection of chemical contamination in Antarctica, through the
establishment of an international network, which brings together all
relevant actors and stakeholders, including the national research
programs in Antarctica, the ESBs and policy makers. While arctic-
wide assessments have already been prepared through the Arctic
Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP) within the Arctic
Council, such assessments are still missing in the Antarctic. The
ATCM together with the Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research
(SCAR ImPACT Action Group), the NAPs and Environmental
Agencies could use the proven frameworks and structures by AMAP
to strengthen their efforts to initiate a more structured sample and
data collection of environmental contamination in the Antarctic.
The Protocol and the work of the CEP together with a better
understanding of the current state of the Antarctic environment and
of the long-term effects of persistent contaminants on the organisms
and food chains, would enable the Antarctic Treaty Parties to make
necessary decisions or to take measures for the protection of the
Antarctic environment, wherever needed and to distinguish local
from global sources.
As a result of the workshop, the following strategic and technical
recommendations for contaminant research and monitoring in polar
regions were developed:
“Strategic recommendations:
Raise awareness among policymakers and the public about the need
to take better action against chemical pollution in the Arctic and
Antarctic,
Set up a network of all relevant actors and stakeholders, including
policy makers, regulators, the research community, non-
governmental organisations, indigenous communities and the
public,
promote polar environments as sentinels of the Earth's condition
and forcefully present their importance to the concepts of planetary
boundaries and the EU's goal of zero pollution ambition,
define stakeholder needs and make systematic use of polar pollution
data in regional and international chemicals management,
develop long-term perspectives for standardized monitoring:
establish chemical monitoring capacities and expertise in the
Antarctic and strengthen existing infrastructure in the Arctic,
support systematic environmental specimen banking to help
monitor temporal trends, support environmental research and
provide samples for future generations,
foster data repositories according to the FAIR data principles The
FAIR Data Principles are a set of guiding principles in order to make
data findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (Wilkinson et
al., 2016. The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data
management and stewardship) so that all polar contaminant data
are findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable, and link to
other data bases, e.g. EU IPCHEM, the Norman network.
Technical recommendations:
Establish harmonised workflows for collecting, shipping, processing,
and archiving of environmental samples, and their chemical
analysis,
connect monitoring approaches for long-range transport of
pollutants and the local chemical footprint from tourism, research,
and settlements,
integrate state-of-the-art chemical analysis methods, including mass
spectrometry and effects directed analysis to monitor contaminants
of emerging concern together with legacy pollutants,
link to innovative prioritisation and screening approaches and
explore advanced modelling approaches for chemicals in the
environment,
explore the use of innovative monitoring tools, such as passive
samplers, in extreme environments like the Antarctic where
operations and logistics are challenging,
generate data for POPs and CECs in the Russian part of the Arctic to
enable a more comprehensive circumpolar view and to investigate
large-scale spatial and temporal trends.”
The workshop report including the proceedings, abstracts of
presentations and the reports of the working groups can be
downloaded: https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/en/
node/94089%20.
Conclusions
Organic contaminants in polar regions have become significant
concerns because of their persistence, bioaccumulation and toxicity
potential. Climate change can alter the biogeochemical cycling of
POPs and CECs and amplify their effects on polar ecosystems.
Occurrences of POPs and CECs from long-range transport and local
discharge have left impacts on these fragile regions. Therefore,
actions are urgently needed to monitor the temporal trends of POPs
and to strengthen research of CECs in the Antarctic through
national and international research programs. Glacial ice and snow
have acted as secondary emission sources in the polar regions and
released POPs and CECs into the atmosphere and ocean. Future
research will need to understand the various biogeochemical and
geophysical processes under climate change and anthropogenic
pressures to be able to predict the environmental fates and the
toxicity risk of CECs in polar regions.
The cooperation between national research programs of Antarctic
Treaty Parties and ESBs is considered the easiest and most effective
way towards a more structured sample and data collection on
chemical contamination in the Antarctic, corresponding with the
requirements of the Protocol.
References
ATCM XXXI IP097, Antarctic Persistent Organic Pollutants Notes on
a Request from the Stockholm Convention.
ATCM XXXII IP069, SCAR report on Persistent Organic Pollutants in
the Antarctic: An Update
ATCM XXXVII IP008, Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in
Admiralty Bay - Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA 1):
Bioaccumulation and temporal trend.
ATCM XL IP022, Trace element contamination and availability
within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
ATCM XLIII IP021, A step towards a structured sample and data
collection of environmental contamination in the Antarctic.
ATCM XLIII IP137, Persistent Organic Chemicals in Antarctica: A
horizon scan of priority challenges
Dreyer A., Neugebauer F., Lohmann N., Rüdel H., Teubner D.,
Grotti M., Rauert C., Koschorreck J., 2019. Recent findings of
halogenated flame retardants (HFR) in the German and Polar
environment. Environmental Pollution 253: 850-863.
Gandraß J., Küster A., Ebinghaus R., Herata H., Xie Z., Koschorreck
J. (2022). Act now – Legacy and Emerging Contaminants in Polar
Regions – Workshop Report.
Küster A., Becker P.R., Kucklick J.R., Pugh R.S., Koschorreck J.
(2014). The international environmental specimen banks - let’s get
visible. Environmental Science and Pollution Research 22: 1559–
1561.
Soggia F., Abelmoschi M.L., Dalla Riva S., De Pellegrini R., Frache
R., Antarctic Environmental Specimen Bank-First 5 Years of
Experience. International Journal of Environmental Analytical
Chemistry 79: 363-378.
Vecchiato M., Gregoris E., Barbaro E., Barbante C., Piazza R.,
Gambaro G., 2017. Fragrances in the seawater of Terra Nova Bay,
Antarctica. Science of The Total Environment 593–594: 375-379.
Waller C.L., Griffiths H.J., Waluda C.M., Thorpe S.E., Loaiza I.,
Moreno B., Pacherres C.O., Hughes K.A., 2017. Microplastics in the
Antarctic marine system: An emerging area of research. Science of
The Total Environment 598: 220-227.
Xie, Z., Zhang, P., Wu, Z., Zhang, S., Wei, L., Mi, L., Kuester, A.,
Gandrass, J., Ebinghaus, R., Yang, R., Wang, Z., Mi, W. Legacy and
emerging organic contaminants in the polar regions. Science of The
Total Environment, 2022, 155376, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2022.155376.
