Early Career Opportunities: Antarctic Fellowships & Scholarships
Early Career Opportunities: Antarctic Fellowships & Scholarships
Summary
With 2021 marking the 10th anniversary of the COMNAP Antarctic
Fellowship Scheme for early career persons, and 2022 marking the
20th anniversary of the SCAR Fellowship Programme, CCAMLR,
COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR join together to mark the occasion and
to celebrate the combined efforts to enable early career persons to
advance their Antarctic careers. Each organisation contributes to
supporting early career persons under similar schemes and all four
organisations work together to advertise, promote and administer
the collection of available opportunities. This paper presents a
summary to date of all the schemes and encourages all Parties to
bring these opportunities to the attention of their early career
persons. The organisations note with thanks that the schemes have
only been possible due to continuing support from Parties, national
Antarctic programme members, SCAR organisations and the IAATO
membership.
Background to the Early Career Opportunities
SCAR initiated its opportunities for early career persons in 2002
through the SCAR Fellowship Programme. This was followed in
2010 with CCAMLR’s Scientific Scholarship Scheme. COMNAP,
learning from the SCAR scheme, launched its Antarctic Fellowship
Scheme in 2011. IAATO, drawing on the expertise of COMNAP and
in collaboration, established a similar fellowship in 2019. Beyond
the financial support provided to the individual recipient, the
schemes also aim to encourage involvement of early career persons
in Antarctic research endeavours, strengthen international capacity
and cooperation in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, and support
member countries with an emerging Antarctic research programme.
SCAR’s Fellowship Programme aims to encourage the active
involvement of early career researchers in Antarctic scientific
research and to build new connections and further strengthen
international capacity and cooperation in Antarctic research.
Awards up to US$ 15000 are possible. Since the initiation of the
programme, eighty-three SCAR Fellowships have been awarded.
https://www.scar.org/awards/fellowships/overview/
The CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship Scheme offers early career
scientists an opportunity to participate in the work of the Scientific
Committee and its working groups. The objective is to contribute to
capacity building within the CCAMLR scientific community in order
to help generate and sustain a sound basis of scientific expertise
able to support the requirements of CCAMLR in the long term.
Under the CCAMLR Scheme, eighteen Scholarships of up to AU$
30000 have been awarded. https://www.ccamlr.org/en/science/
ccamlr-scientific-scholarship-scheme
The COMNAP Antarctic Fellowship Scheme is designed to
encourage the active involvement of early career Antarctic persons
and to strengthen international capacity and cooperation through
international exchanges. The fellow’s project should contribute to
the objectives of the home or host national Antarctic programme.
Over the past ten years, eighteen Fellowships of up to US$ 15000
have been awarded. https://www.comnap.aq/comnap-antarctic-
fellowships
IAATO’s Antarctic Fellowship, each of up to US$ 15000, aims to
invest in the professional development of early career researchers
and further the understanding of human presence in
Antarctica. IAATO has awarded four Fellowships since 2019.
https://iaato.org/supporting-science/the-iaato-antarctic-fellowship/
Building a Record of Success
In 2016, SCAR and COMNAP convened a Fellowship Mini-
Symposium at the SCAR Open Science Conference in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. The Mini-Symposium included a presentation on the
results of an informal review of the fellowship programmes (see K.
Lochte, “What have we learned from the Fellowship Programme?”).
This informal review led to a refinement of the COMNAP and SCAR
Fellowship Programmes to better target under-represented groups
and to improve success from applicants from under-represented
countries. The Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS)
assisted, and provided a conduit through their Career Development
webinar series on “Writing for Success: Preparing Winning
Fellowship Applications”. Those webinars were held in English and
in Spanish. With opportunities available for 2022 and the
application round currently open, a further round of informative
webinars is being planned. These webinars are archived on the
APECS website and are a useful source of information for any
person considering preparation of an application.
We continue to look for ways to expand the early career
opportunities and to ensure that those who need the support are in
a position to apply to the schemes and to succeed. We encourage all
Parties to advertise these schemes throughout their early career
communities. We also take this opportunity to thank all who have
been involved to date for the continuing support.
Please refer to the links below to see the up-to-date lists of
successful Fellowship and Scholarship holders along with the
research or project that was completed because of the support
received. The combined list of successful fellows and scholarship
recipients makes for an impressive record.
CCAMLR Scholarship recipients: https://www.ccamlr.org/
node/87493
COMNAP Antarctic Fellowship recipients: https://www.comnap.aq/
comnap-antarctic-fellowships
IAATO Fellowship recipients: https://iaato.org/supporting-science/
the-iaato-antarctic-fellowship/
SCAR Fellowship recipients: https://www.scar.org/awards/
fellowships/fellows/
