Korea-Chile Collaboration in Antarctic Research
Korea-Chile Collaboration in Antarctic Research
Information Paper submitted by the Republic of Korea and Chile
During the past decade, Chile and the Republic of Korea have been
closely cooperating in the field of scientific research and
infrastructure operation in the Antarctic Peninsula region with the
year-round station King Sejong (Korea), Barton Peninsula and the
seasonal station Professor Julio Escudero (Chile-INACH), Fildes Bay,
King George Island. The cooperation effort was strengthened based
on Memorandum of Understandings (MOUs) between the Chilean
Antarctic Institute (INACH) and the Korea Polar Research Institute
(KOPRI), which paved way for the establishment of the Korea-Chile
Antarctic Cooperation Center in February 2016.
With a shared understanding of the importance of Antarctic region
in global climate change, the research groups of both countries have
been investigating how the climate change and other drivers
(Invasive species, marine pollution) would affect coastal marine and
terrestrial ecosystems of the Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. To
share the status of on-going research cooperation and explore new
research topics, a virtual workshop was hosted by KOPRI and
INACH in November 2021. This information paper provides a
summary of the joint programs and upcoming plans for new areas
of research grouped around seven working groups (WG), and is not
a complete description of the joint research efforts from both sides.
WG1, Paleoceanography
The Southern Ocean sedimentary records can indicate past
atmosphere-ocean-ice interactions in Antarctic marginal seas and its
links to the global climate system. Paleoceanography group has
plans to acquire sediment core samples during the expedition on
Chilean research vessel Karpuj and Korean Icebreaking research
vessel Araon. The sediment core samples collected from the
Antarctic Peninsula and the Ross sea region respectively, will be
able to shed light on the variability in past climatic events and
teleconnections through multi-proxy investigation.
WG2, Role of the Southern Ocean in Storage of Greenhouse Gases
The role of Southern Ocean as a sink of carbon dioxide is causing
ocean acidification and disrupting coastal ecosystems. Furthermore,
freshwater discharge from the melting glacier has a sharp impact on
the inorganic carbon cycle in the coastal environment. The research
reams will jointly perform carbon system monitoring connecting
King George Island, Bransfield Strait and Antarctic Peninsula, as
well as chemical and biological fluctuations in the coast of the
Antarctic Peninsula. It is expected that carbon system monitoring
would provide a time series of the Southern Ocean impacted by
accelerating glacier melt discharge.
WG3-4, Monitoring of Biodiversity and Management of Invasive
Species
The impact of climate change on Antarctic ecosystem includes
significant disruption of the distribution, abundance and
productivity of its inhabiting species, yet our knowledge of the
current status remains limited. Meta-analysis of species turnover
and its physiological responses by recording habit-based
biogeographic syntheses will give us a better understanding of
biogeochemical processes and climate driven responses in each
trophic species.
In addition, there are on-going efforts to identify and eliminate non-
native species in human settlements and its vicinities. The research
team, in cooperation with the operators of other Antarctic stations,
have analysed water and sediment samples from each research
station and
reported the results to the CEP. Works are underway to prepare a
management plan to prevent the spread and eradicate non-native
and invasive species.
WG5, Earthquake Monitoring
Recent reports of frequent earthquakes in the South Atlantic sector
of the Southern Ocean represent both safety concerns and scientific
challenges. Chile and the Republic of Korea are operating research
stations in the Antarctic Peninsula, and has been working closely
with other operators to ensure early detection of earthquakes using
real-time seismic server and bathymetry data. The research team
will install and deploy additional observation equipment, so that
more real-time and stable earthquake data can be added to those
obtained from the Chilean seismic station. The aim is to assist with
more timely and accurate earthquake prediction and contribute
towards developing emergency response plan.
WG6, Recovery of Antarctic Marine Fishery Resources
In order to understand the life cycle of fishes and aquatic
invertebrates, thermal, salinity ranges, as well as optimal breeding
conditions including reproduction and hatching, the research group
will focus on the survival conditions under captivity, and the
microbiome comparison between the captive and wild fish found in
Antarctica to identify differences due to habitat. The knowledge
about the growth of Antarctic species in captivity is one of the key
aspects that can contribute greatly towards preparing the new
aquariums for the Antarctic International Center (CAI), located in
the sector of Sandy Point, Punta Arenas. This building will be more
than 22,000 m2 in size, and have spaces for a museum,
laboratories, logistics, aquarium, and Antarctic-subantarctic forest.
The building will be able to provide support for Antarctic
researchers who conducts Antarctic investigation.
WG7, Monitoring of Marine Pollution
As King George Island hosts many year-round and summer-only
research stations, it is inevitably impacted by movement of human
population during field activities. Korean research team has
conducted a pilot study of marine litter in the vicinity of Antarctic
King Sejong Station, and will be conducting additional field studies
on marine litter with their Chilean counterparts in Ardley Island to
identify further criteria for data analysis and protocols. The
collected marine litter will also be compared with the Sub-Antarctic
(Punta Arenas) coastal litter for composition analysis.
Future Directions
The workshop identified further activities for improving and
reinforcing the cooperation between both institutions, such as: a) to
share research platforms and infrastructures for conducting studies
discussed by researchers from both countries, b) to promote
publication productivity and quality of research, c) to conduct field
survey during the 2021-22 Austral summer season based on the
discussions from the workshop. Findings from the field and future
activities will be dealt in detail through a follow-up workshop later
in the year, and will be shared with the greater scientific
community through presentations in international conferences, such
as the Open Science Conference organized by the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).
