Drafting and other proposals presented to the informal consultations convened in New York from 13 to 15 April 2005, which require further consideration
Drafting and other proposals presented to the informal consultations convened in New York from 13 to 15 April 2005, which require further consideration


Preamble

France:  insert two additional paragraphs:

“Recognising the necessity for Parties to establish in the future a comprehensive legal regime in accordance with article 16 of the Protocol to elaborate rules and procedures in respect of damage arising to the Antarctic environment and its dependent ecosystems;

Convinced of the necessity as a first step to take measures concerning the prevention of damage, contingency planning and liability applying to environmental emergencies in accordance with article 15 of the Protocol.”


Article 2bis

Italy:  delete “…or rules of customary international law.”


Article 5(1 bis)

UK (presented after the meeting, as requested by the Chair):  insert new paragraph 1(bis)

“1(bis)		Each Party shall require its operators to notify it immediately of any environmental emergency which they observe or encounter, whether arising from their own activities or not.  A Party which receives such notification shall immediately inform the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.”


Article 5(4)

Australia:  replace “all other affected Parties” with “all other Parties taking response action or involved in activities in the vicinity of the environmental emergency”

France:  delete “which has been provided by permanent observer delegations to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, and other organisations.”


Article 6(2)

Japan:  replace text from Chairman’s personal draft of 2/6/04 with:

“2(a)	When a non-State operator does not take prompt and effective response action though it should have been taken, the Party of the operator shall take necessary measures on it.

2(b)	When a State operator does not take prompt and effective response action, the Party of the operator shall be liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken into the fund established in Article 12.”


Article 6(5)

Australia:  replace “provided that”  with “except that”

Norway:  replace “shall be joint and severally liable provided that an operator which establishes that only part of the environmental emergency results from its activities shall be liable in respect of that part only” with “shall be joint and severally liable for all such damage which is not reasonably separable”


Article 7(1)

UK (presented after the meeting, as requested by the Chair):  insert the following additional sentence after “…or within three years of the date on which the Party bringing the action knew or ought reasonably have known the identity of the operator, whichever is later.”

“Except that where an action is brought against an operator in respect of an environmental emergency which that operator notified to its Party in accordance with article 5(1 bis), the action shall be brought within three years of the date of such notification.”


Article 7(4)

Australia:  amend to read  “Any dispute concerning the liability of a Party as a State operator…”


Article 7(5)

Australia:  amend to read  “Any dispute concerning the liability of a Party as a State operator…”


Article 8(1)

USA:  insert additional subparagraph 

“(c)	armed conflict, should it occur notwithstanding the Antarctic Treaty, or an act of terrorism directed against the activities of the operator”


Article 9

Norway:  insert two additional paragraphs

“Nothing in this Annex shall affect the liability or the right to limit liability of a shipowner under any applicable international convention, provided that the limits of liability under such a convention are at least as high as the limits in the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims 1996 as amended.

Nothing in this Annex shall affect the right of a Party to this Annex to apply higher limits than those in paragraph 1 on shipowners as defined in the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims1996 as amended, or on the registered owner of the ship as defined in any applicable international convention.”


Article 10

USA:  replace “to the extent that that Party fulfilled its obligations under this Annex in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Protocol”  with “to the extent that that Party took appropriate measures within its competence, including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance with this Annex”

Article 12(1)(c)

UK:  insert at the end of the sentence  “…except where the emergency arose from the activities of its own operator.”


Article 12(1)

Australia:  insert additional subparagraph:

“If the Party, for whatever reason, cannot obtain full reimbursement from the operator responsible for the environmental emergency.”


Article 13

Australia:  break the Article into three paragraphs, as follows:

“1.	The Annex may be amended or modified by a Measure adopted in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.”

2.	In the case of a Measure pursuant to Article 9(2) and in any other case unless the Measure in question specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes any extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the Measure.

3.	Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.”


USA:  insert commas into the first sentence of paragraph 2 above, to read  “In the case of a Measure pursuant to Article 9(2), and in any other case, unless the Measure in question specifies otherwise…”




