DRAFT COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION (CEE)

PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF HALLEY VI RESEARCH STATION, BRUNT ICE SHELF, CAIRD COAST, ANTARCTICA


DRAFT COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION (CEE)
PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF HALLEY VI RESEARCH STATION, BRUNT ICE SHELF, CAIRD COAST, ANTARCTICA
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

1.	Introduction

A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been carried out by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) for the proposed construction and operation of Halley VI Research Station, Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Antarctica. The draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998).

The UK Government has approved and endorsed the draft CEE.  It was released by BAS on 4 February 2005 and notification of the report was sent by Diplomatic Note to all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  At the same time e-mail notification was sent to all members of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) via the CEP Contact Mailing List. 

2.	Circulation and translation of the draft CEE

After informal consultations with the Chair of the CEP (Dr Tony Press), the UK has decided to submit the non-technical summary of the draft CEE as a Working Paper to the CEP.  This is to ensure that the non-technical summary can be translated into the four official Treaty languages.  The complete draft CEE has also been submitted as an Information Paper (and is available for download via the BAS website (www.antarctica.ac.uk/halleyvi/cee.html)).  In addition, the UK Delegation will make available CDs and colour printed copies of the draft CEE at CEP VIII. 

3.	Non-technical summary 

The non-technical summary from the draft CEE is attached at Annex A. This summary describes the proposed Halley VI project, the various station design concepts, alternatives, the local environment and the predicted environmental impact. It recommends preventative and mitigation measures and outlines gaps and uncertainties. 

BAS predicts that the operation of Halley VI will have substantially lower environmental impact compared to the present Halley V station. This is because of the smaller population, improved environmental management procedures, and the introduction of new technology to reduce fossil fuel consumption, minimise waste, and recycle and reuse water. In addition, Halley VI is being designed with a much longer design life (>25% longer) than its predecessors, and to be capable of being easily decommissioned and removed when it eventually closes.

The UK has concluded that the global scientific importance and value to be gained by the construction and operation of Halley VI, and the continued operation of the research facility by BAS on the Brunt Ice Shelf, outweighs the more than minor and transitory impact the station will have on the Antarctic environment and fully justifies the activity proceeding.

4.	Further information

The UK welcomes comments and feedback on the draft CEE. Comments and requests for further information about Halley VI should be directed to:

Dr John Shears, 
Environmental Officer,
British Antarctic Survey,
High Cross, Madingley Road,
Cambridge, CB3 0ET. UK 

Website:	www.antarctica.ac.uk
Telephone:	00 44 1223 221558
Fax:		00 44 1223 362616
E-mail:		jrs@bas.ac.uk	

April 2005
ANNEX A

DRAFT COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION (CEE)
PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF HALLEY VI RESEARCH STATION,
BRUNT ICE SHELF, CAIRD COAST, ANTARCTICA

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

1. 	Introduction

A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been carried out by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) for the proposed construction and operation of the UK’s Halley VI Research Station, Brunt Ice Shelf, Antarctica. The draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998). The Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 1, XXIII ATCM, 1999) were also consulted. The draft CEE describes the proposed activity, alternatives, the local environment and the likely environmental impact. It recommends preventative and mitigation measures and outlines gaps and uncertainties regarding the Halley VI project. 

At this stage of the CEE process (February 2005), the final design of Halley VI is still in preparation. Therefore, the draft CEE provides the overall design objectives for Halley VI, and explains the three design concepts being developed to identify the best solution. A key design criterion is that Halley VI must minimise impact on the Antarctic environment and comply with the Environmental Protocol. The predicted impact of Halley VI will not depend, therefore, on the final design chosen. The environmental effects of Halley VI will be substantially reduced compared to the existing station at Halley V by having fewer people working at the new facility, decreasing fossil fuel consumption, using new sustainable technologies and implementing new management procedures.

2. 	Description of the proposed activity

The UK has operated Halley Research Station on the Brunt Ice Shelf since 1956. The proposed activity assessed in this draft CEE is the construction and operation of Halley VI Research Station, which will replace the current Halley V station. The new facility will be located on the Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Dronning Maud Land (75º37’S, 26º06’W; February 2005). 

The UK plans to decommission, demolish and remove Halley V from Antarctica once Halley VI is built and fully operational. The clean-up of Halley V is not considered in this draft CEE, and instead will be the subject of a separate EIA.

The Brunt Ice Shelf is a floating ice sheet and is 200m thick. It is currently flowing at a rate of 550m per annum (February 2005) towards the Weddell Sea, but is slowing down. At irregular intervals, the ice shelf breaks off as icebergs. BAS has assessed that there is a growing risk that the ice on which the existing research station sits could be lost in a major calving event in the next decade. The UK has therefore decided to design and build a replacement station in a safe location on the Brunt Ice Shelf for initial operation in 2008/09. To cope with any future, major calving events the new station will be designed so that it can relocate.

Halley is one of the most important research locations in Antarctica for atmospheric sciences and snow chemistry. The first Halley was established as part of the International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957/58 and many scientific studies have continued uninterrupted since then producing globally important long-term monitoring datasets. It is the site where BAS scientists discovered the ozone hole in 1985. Since 1992 when Halley V opened, well in excess of 400 internationally peer-reviewed scientific papers have been published using data collected at the station. At present, Halley supports world-class research into atmospheric physics, geospace, atmospheric and snow chemistry, meteorology and ozone monitoring, and glaciology.

The overall objectives for Halley VI are to design, build and operate an Antarctic research station that:
    • minimises environmental impact and complies with the Environmental Protocol;
    • can withstand the extreme environmental conditions found on the Brunt Ice Shelf;
    • provides a safe, comfortable and stimulating place to live and work for 16 people in the austral winter and 52 people in the austral summer;
    • must be completed, commissioned and handed over to BAS for occupancy by the end of December 2008;
    • has a design life of 20 years;
    • allows the main buildings to be relocated by several kilometres, if necessary, during the life of the station;
    • is functionally efficient, fit for purpose and best value for money;
    • minimises the requirement for snow management in all aspects of the station’s operations;
    • has a lifetime maintenance strategy that takes into account the remoteness of the station and the limitations of logistics supply;
    • uses technology to reduce running costs;
    • reduces the use of fossil fuels through increased energy efficiency and maximises the use of renewable energy where practical and affordable; and
    • minimises risks to Health and Safety, and complies with all relevant UK Health and Safety legislation where reasonably practicable.

BAS aim is to reduce the number of technical staff working at Halley VI, both in winter and summer, compared to Halley V. Compared to staffing levels at Halley V in 2004/05, planned total winter numbers at Halley VI will reduce by 11% (from 18 to 16 staff) and in summer numbers will reduce by 26% (from 70 to 52 people). 

3.	Design competition for Halley VI

In June 2004, BAS, in association with the UK Royal Institute of British Architects, launched an international design competition to provide new and innovative ideas for the future development of Halley. There were 86 entries submitted from around the world of which six were asked to put forward concept designs. Of these six, three have been chosen by BAS to develop their ideas further and form an integrated team with a building contractor to bid for the Halley VI construction contract. The three design teams, and their concepts, are: 
    • Buro Happold and Lifschutz Davidson 
    • ‘icecraft’ buildings on telescopic legs;
    • FaberMaunsell and Hugh Broughton Architects
    • modular buildings and service pods on skis;
    • Hopkins/Expedition/atelier ten
    • ‘walking’ buildings using hydraulic legs. 

All three chosen concepts meet the requirements of the Environmental Protocol. The three design teams are currently undertaking a site visit to Halley V (February 2005). The announcement of the winning design will be made by BAS in September 2005. Planning assumes that construction of Halley VI will take place on the Brunt Ice Shelf during the austral summers of 2006/07 and 2007/08, with the construction team possibly wintering over in austral winter 2008. The completed station is due to be handed over to BAS in December 2008.

4.	Alternatives

Five options for the future of Halley Research Station have been examined:
    • discontinue scientific research at Halley;
    • attempt to extend the life of the existing facilities at Halley V;
    • move Halley V to a safer location on the Brunt Ice Shelf;
    • relocate and build Halley VI on the Lyddan Ice Rise (74o25’S, 20o45’W) to the north-east of the Brunt Ice Shelf; and
    • commission a wide range of different designs for Halley VI and build a new, replacement station on a safe location on the Brunt Ice Shelf. 

The first four options are not viable for a variety of logistical, engineering, scientific, environmental and safety reasons. Therefore, the UK has decided that the best practical option is to build and operate Halley VI at a safe site on the Brunt Ice Shelf beyond the furthest upstream limit of where the ice shelf is predicted to break off. 

5.	Description of the environment

Halley VI will be located on the Brunt Ice Shelf approximately 30km from its northwest coast. Average temperatures are –5oC in midsummer, falling to –30oC in winter, with an extreme maximum of +4.5oC and an extreme minimum –55.3oC. There is snowdrift on about 180 days per year. Annual snow accumulation is about 1m. The winds are predominately from the east-north-east. Mean annual wind speed is 7ms-1. Gales occur on average for 40 days each year. The average annual total sunshine is 1445 hours, and in winter the sun does not rise above the horizon for 100 days. There is total darkness for 55 days.

The Brunt Ice Shelf does not support any flora, and there are no breeding birds or mammals at the proposed location of Halley VI. The station may very occasionally be visited by small numbers of moulting Adélie penguins and emperor penguins. There is an emperor penguin colony of about 15,000 breeding pairs on the fast ice at ‘Windy Creek’, about 30km from Halley VI. Weddell seals are common on the sea ice adjacent to the ice shelf.

6.	Impact assessment and mitigation measures

The environmental impacts predicted at Halley VI have been identified on the basis of those recorded at Halley V, and using the 50 years of BAS experience of working on the Brunt Ice Shelf. 

On the Brunt Ice Shelf, the area most heavily disturbed by the construction and operation of Halley VI will be around the station itself and cover approximately 20km2. In addition, there will be disturbance along the traverse routes used by tracked vehicles operating to and from the supply ship moored at the edge of the ice shelf. 

The impacts related to the construction and operation of Halley VI are summarised in the draft CEE using impact matrices. They show that the environmental impacts are predicted to be:
    • air pollution and particulate deposition from atmospheric emissions produced by the combustion of fossil fuels;
    • disposal of grey water and human wastes and abandoned materials buried under the snow; and
    • contamination of snow and ice by minor fuel spills and leaks.

Of these impacts the most significant are air pollution and particulate deposition. The major source of additional atmospheric emissions, compared with operations today, will be from the extra ship visits to Halley during the construction phase. The matrices indicate that the environmental impacts identified as medium to high significance, such as major a fuel spill (>1000 litres), will be of very low-to-low probability.

Impacts of medium significance to scientific research at Halley VI are predicted, in the same way as today. Impacts predicted are the potential loss of atmospheric observations due to light pollution from station buildings and disturbance to electromagnetic observations from station electrical equipment and vehicles. There will also be some air pollution from station fossil fuel generators and vehicles that can affect air chemistry measurements, and disturbance to the snow surface could affect meteorological boundary layer experiments.

Prevention and mitigation measures have been identified to avoid or minimise all the impacts predicted. 

All construction works and operational activities at Halley VI will be in compliance with, and where practical exceed, the requirements of the Environmental Protocol. Stringent environmental conditions will be included in the building contract for Halley VI, and will be enforced through careful contract supervision by BAS. Appropriate environmental education, training and guidance will be provided for all staff and contractors working at Halley VI. All activities at Halley VI will be subject to a permit issued by the UK Foreign & Commonwealth Office under the Antarctic Act (1994).

BAS expects that the operation of Halley VI will have substantially reduced environmental impact compared to Halley V because of the reduced station population, improved environmental management procedures, and the introduction of new technology to reduce fossil fuel consumption, minimise waste disposal, and recycle and reuse waste water. In addition, Halley VI is being designed with a much longer design life (>25% longer) than its predecessors, and to be capable of being easily decommissioned and removed when it eventually closes, and this will contribute to reducing the impact.

7.		Environmental monitoring and management

Once the detailed design and technical specifications for Halley VI are complete, BAS will establish a station environmental monitoring programme to measure the actual impacts of the project in Antarctica. As a minimum, BAS will monitor atmospheric emissions (calculated on the basis of fuel used), wastes produced, and fuel spills. Long-term glaciological monitoring of the Brunt Ice Shelf will continue to provide early warning of a major calving event. Also, continuous measurements of black carbon aerosol will be made to identify pollution from station generators and vehicles. 

BAS plans to undertake an environmental audit of Halley VI during construction in 2006/07 or 2007/08 and in the first season of operations in 2008/09 to assess and verify the environmental impacts predicted in the CEE. 

8.		Gaps in knowledge and uncertainties

Gaps in knowledge and uncertainties have been identified in the draft CEE. The main uncertainties are the:
    • natural variability of the hostile environment at Halley VI, such as weather, sea ice or ice shelf conditions;
    • final design and detailed technical specification for the construction and operation of Halley VI will not be fully known until September 2005;
    • inability to be precise about the actual environmental impacts of Halley VI and the extent to which these impacts will be less than those observed at Halley V; and
    • changes in future activities at Halley VI over its design life of 20 years, especially the progressive introduction of renewable energy and water recycling technology and developments in BAS global science programmes beyond 2010.

9.		Conclusion

The UK considers that the construction and operation of Halley VI Research Station on the Brunt Ice Shelf will have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. The implementation of the preventative and mitigation measures outlined in this draft CEE will reduce environmental impacts, and BAS considers the overall impact of Halley VI will be substantially less than Halley V. 

The UK concludes that the global scientific importance and value to be gained by the construction and operation of Halley VI and the continued operation of the research facility by BAS on the Brunt Ice Shelf outweighs the more than minor and transitory impact the station will have on the Antarctic environment and fully justifies the activity proceeding.

10.	Further information

This draft CEE has been prepared by the British Antarctic Survey and has been approved and endorsed by the UK Government. It was released on 4 February 2005 and is available for download via the BAS website (www.antarctica.ac.uk/halleyvi/cee.html).

The UK welcomes comments and feedback on the draft CEE. 

If you would like further information on the CEE of Halley VI or would like to respond with comments then please contact:

Dr John Shears, 
Environmental Officer,
British Antarctic Survey,
High Cross, Madingley Road,
Cambridge, CB3 0ET. UK 

Website:	www.antarctica.ac.uk
Telephone:	00 44 1223 221558
Fax:		00 44 1223 362616
E-mail:		jrs@bas.ac.uk	



February 2005

