Outcomes of informal consultations convened by the Chairman of the Working Group on Liability in New York from 13 to 15 April 2005
Outcomes of informal consultations convened by the Chairman of the Working Group on Liability in New York from 13 to 15 April 2005

Article 2
Definitions

…

(c)	“Operator” means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non -governmental, which organises, in that Party’s territory, activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.   Except as otherwise indicated in this Annex, the operator of a Party is an operator which organises activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, in that Party’s territory, and 
    (i) those activities are authorised by that Party for the Antarctic Treaty Area, or
    (ii) in the case of a Party which does not formally authorise activities for the Antarctic Treaty Area, those activities are subject to a comparable regulatory process by that Party, 
and the terms “its operator” and “their operators” shall have a meaning accordingly.

…

(f)	“The Parties” means the States for which this Annex has become effective in accordance with Article 9 of the Protocol.

Article 5
Response Action

…

2.	In the event that an operator does not take prompt and effective response action, the Party of that operator and other Parties are encouraged to take such action, including through their agents and operators specifically authorised by them to take such action on their behalf.

…

Article 6
Liability

1.	An operator that fails to take prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies arising from its activities shall be liable to pay the costs of response action taken by [other] Parties pursuant to Article 5(2) to such Parties.

2.	When an operator should have taken prompt and effective response action but did not, and no response action was taken by any Party, the operator shall be liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken, into the fund established in Article 12.

…

6.	Notwithstanding that a Party is liable under this article for its failure to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships or aircraft owned or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service, nothing in this Annex is intended to affect the sovereign immunity under international law of such warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships or aircraft.
Article 7
Actions for Compensation

1.	Only a Party that has taken response action pursuant to Article 5(2) may bring an action against a non-State operator for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) and such action may [only] be brought in the courts of the Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence.   However, should the operator not be incorporated in a Party or have its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in a Party, the action may be brought in the courts of the Party of the operator within the meaning of Article 2(c).  Such actions for compensation shall be brought within three years of the commencement of the response action or within three years of the date on which the Party bringing the action knew or ought reasonably to have known the identity of the operator, whichever is later.   In no event shall an action against a non-State operator be commenced later than fifteen years after the commencement of the response action.

2.	Each Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain actions under paragraph 1.

3.     	Each Party shall ensure that there is a mechanism in place under its domestic law for the enforcement of Article 6(2) with respect to any of its non-State operators within the meaning of Article 2(c), as well as with respect to any non-State operator that is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in that Party.  Where there are multiple Parties that are capable of enforcing Article 6(2) against any given non-State operator under this paragraph, such Parties should consult amongst themselves as to which Party should take enforcement action.  Each Party shall inform all other Parties of this mechanism in accordance with Article 13 of the Protocol.

…
Article 8
Exemptions from Liability
…

b.	An event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character, which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either generally or in the particular case, provided all reasonable preventative measures have been taken that are designed to reduce the likelihood of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.

…
Article 9
Limits on Compensation 

1.	The maximum amount for which each operator may be liable under Article 6(1) or Article 6(2) of this Annex, in respect of each environmental emergency, shall be as follows:

    a. For an environmental emergency arising from an event involving a ship, the limit of liability shall be

i	[[1] million SDR for a ship with a tonnage between 0 and 300 tons;
ii	[2] million SDR for a ship with a tonnage between 301 and 2,000 tons;
iii	[6.5 to 10]  million SDR for a ship with a tonnage between 2,001 and [15,750 to 24,500] tons; and
iv	for a ship with a tonnage in excess of [15,751 to 24,501] tons, the following amount in addition to that mentioned in subparagraph c above:
	- for each ton from [15,751 to 24,501] to 30,000 tons, 400 SDR
	- for each ton from 30,001 to 70,000 tons, 300 SDR; and
    • for each ton in excess of 70,000 tons, 200 SDR.  

    b. For an environmental emergency arising from an event which does not involve a ship, [2 to 4] million SDR.

2.	Liability shall not be limited if it is proved that the environmental emergency resulted from an act or omission of the operator, committed with the intent to cause such emergency, or recklessly and with knowledge that such emergency would probably result.

3.	For the purpose of this Article, a ship’s tonnage shall be the gross tonnage calculated in accordance with the tonnage measurement rules contained in Annex I of the International Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships, 1969.

4.	For the purpose of this Article, “SDR” means the Special Drawing Right as defined by the International Monetary Fund. 

5.	For the purpose of this Article, “ship” shall have the same meaning as provided in Article 1(g) of Annex IV to the Protocol.

6.	The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties shall review the limits in paragraphs (1) and (2) every three years, or sooner at the request of any Party.  Any amendments to these limits, which shall be determined after consultation amongst the Parties and on the basis of advice including scientific and technical advice, shall be made under the procedure set out in Article 13(2)1.

  



