REVIEW OF THE ADMIRALTY BAY ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREA MANAGEMENT PLAN (ASMA No 1)
REVIEW OF THE ADMIRALTY BAY ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREA MANAGEMENT PLAN (ASMA No 1)
ADMIRALTY BAY, KING GEORGE ISLAND
SOUTH SHETLAND ARCHIPELAGO
Latitude  62º 01´21´´S – 62º14´09´´S
Longitude  58º 15´05´´W– 58º41´02´´W 
 

Introduction

Admiralty Bay is an area of outstanding environmental, historical, scientific, and aesthetic values.  It was first visited by sealers and whalers in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and relics from these periods still remain. The area is characterized by magnificent glaciated mountainous landscape, varied geological features, rich sea-bird and mammal breeding grounds, diverse marine ecosystems, and terrestrial plant habitats. Scientific research in Admiralty Bay in post IGY times has been performed in a more permanent way for some three decades now. The studies on penguins have been undertaken continuously in the area for 28 years, and is the longest ever done in Antarctica. Admiralty Bay also has one of the longest historical series of meteorological data collected for the Antarctic Peninsula, one of the areas of the planet most sensitive to climate change.

Admiralty Bay has become a site of increasingly diverse human activities, which are continuously growing and becoming more complex. Better planning and co-ordination of existing and future activities will help to avoid or to reduce the risk of mutual interference and minimize environmental impacts, thus providing an effective mechanism for the conservation of the valuable features that characterize the area.

Five parties: Poland, Brazil, United States, Perú and Ecuador have active research programmes in the area. Poland and Brazil operate two all-year round stations (Poland: Henryk Arctowski Station at Thomas Point; and Brazil: Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station at Keller Peninsula). Perú and United States operate two summer stations (Perú: Machu Picchu at Crepin Point; USA: Copacabana at Llano Point). Ecuador has a refuge at Hennequin  Point. There are several small removable and permanent installations elsewhere. 

The Area includes one ASPA (Nº 128 – former SSSI Nº 8) on the west coast of Admiralty Bay and one Historic Monument (N° 51: a grave) at Arctowski Station; and five graves at Keller Peninsula are under special attention.

In addition to numerous scientists, supporting personnel and research expeditions, Admiralty Bay is visited by an increasing number of tourists, the latter mainly as organized tourist ship expeditions and private yachts.
A Management Plan for designating Admiralty Bay and its surroundings (herein called the Area) as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA), under Annex 5 of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection (herein called Protocol), was jointly proposed by Brazil and Poland, in coordination with Ecuador and Perú and voluntarily adopted by the ATCPs at ATCM XX (Utrecht, 1996).   The document presented here is a revision of the former Management Plan, as required at ATCM XX.
1.0  Description of values

    • Aesthetic values

Admiralty Bay has basic physiographic and aesthetic values as one of the most typical examples of bay/fjord settings in the South Shetland Islands. The ice-free areas within Admiralty Bay are formed by recent and raised pebble-cobble beaches, recent and sub-recent moraines, mountainous peninsulas, rocky islets, spurs and nunataks. The terrain is heavily shaped by glacial, nival and coastal marine processes. These, together with the geological features of the area, add  to the great scenic beauty of the landscape.
 	
    • Environmental values

The area of Admiralty Bay is representative of the terrestrial, limnic, coastal, near-shore, pelagic, and fjord-bottom ecosystem of King George Island.

The marine ecosystem of the bay largely reflects the general environmental conditions prevailing in the South Shetland Islands.  However, there is a unique site, Napier Rock, at the entrance of the bay, where a rich and highly diverse benthic invertebrate fauna is found.  Fish are represented by fifteen species of Nototheniidae, many of them in young stages of development. Twenty four species of birds and six species of pinnipeds have been registered for the Area., but only thirteen species of birds and three species of pinnipeds actually breed within the Area. 

    • Scientific values

Diverse and continuous scientific activities have been undertaken in the Area for almost 30 years supported by the Polish Henryk Arctowski Station, by the Brazilian Comandante Ferraz Station and by the US Antarctic Program at ASPA Nº 128. Research activities at the Peruvian Machu Picchu Station (at Crepin Point) and at the Ecuadorian refuge (at Hennequin Point) have occurred intermittently during the summer. 

A Dutch expedition based at Arctowski in 1990-91 worked on the biology and geology of Admiralty Bay.  Both Arctowski and Ferraz stations have hosted many foreign scientists (Argentineans, Belgians, Chileans, Germans, former Soviets and Russians, New Zealanders, Americans, Uruguayans and others). There is a strong tradition of co-operation between Polish and Brazilian scientists in matters related to Admiralty Bay and the South Shetland Islands as a whole.

Many features of Admiralty Bay are of considerable scientific interest. The main themes of field and laboratory research at the Polish and Brazilian stations have been  marine and terrestrial biology, including physiology and adaptation of Antarctic fish and krill; taxonomy and ecology of the benthic fauna; vascular plants; mosses and lichens; terrestrial and marine ecology; migration and dispersion of birds. A long-term research project on the biology and dynamics of bird populations (mainly Pygoscelid penguins) has been carried out by the US Antarctic Program since 1976. This study is of relevance for the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP). Other studies include geology and palaeontology, glaciology and palaeoclimatology of the King George Island ice cap; and glacio-marine sedimentation in Admiralty Bay. A year-round seismic and Earth-magnetism observatory, established at Arctowski Station in 1978, is the only station of its kind in the South Shetland Islands.  Studies on atmospheric chemistry, geomagnetism, the ionosphere and astrophysics have been conducted at Ferraz Station since 1984. A meteorological station has been operational at Arctowski since 1977 and at Ferraz Station since 1984 to provide basic data and to support logistic operations.  Research on upper atmosphere winds is being developed at Machu Picchu Station using MST radar.  

A comprehensive study of the state of the environment in the Area is under way at Ferraz Station,  comprising the analysis of a series of biotic and abiotic parameters. Results will serve as a base-line for future monitoring of activities and for implementation of a strategy for environmental management of the ASMA (Appendix A).
	

    • Historic values

Sheltered deep harbours and accessible beaches ensured an early start to activities in Admiralty Bay. The bay offered protection for ships in the area during the sealing and whaling periods in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and ruins of installations related to the latter period still exist.   Whale bones cover the beaches and are part of the landscape, remaining as heritage of this period.

The Area was visited by the second French Antarctic Expedition Pourquoi Pas?, under Dr J B Charcot (1908-10), and by D Ferguson (1913-14), a geologist who took part in a British whaling expedition. Reports on minerals and rocks collected during these expeditions, published between 1910 and 1921, are among the first earth-science publications on Admiralty Bay and the South Shetland Islands as a whole. The famous British Discovery voyages of 1934 and 1937 collected more rocks, as well as plants and animals from the Area Results published from 1948 to 1964 constituted  a substantial contribution to knowledge of the geology of Admiralty Bay. Argentina established a refuge hut at Keller Peninsula in 1948 (since dismantled) and the work of Argentinean geologists in Admiralty Bay in 1953 concentrated on  fossil plants of the Tertiary age.

During the International Geophysical Year (1957-58), the UK Base "G", on Keller Peninsula, Admiralty Bay (opened in 1947 and closed in 1961), later dismantled, was the center of meteorological observations and glaciological and geological research. 

Establishment of the Polish Arctowski Station in 1977 at Thomas Point, of the Brazilian Ferraz Station at Keller Peninsula in 1984, and of the Peruvian Machu Picchu Station at Crepin Point in 1989 has provided a sound basis for permanent research in Biological, Earth and Atmospheric sciences, which continues up to now.  Ornithological research by US biologists began in 1976, with the establishment of Copacabana Station (unofficially called Pietr J. Lenie) covering the entire western side of Admiralty Bay, from Italian Valley (in Ezcurra Inlet) to Patelnia Point. Since 1985, ornithological research has also been occasionally undertaken at Keller Peninsula, by Brazilian biologists.


    • Educational and touristic values

Sites of ecological interest and scientific installations in the Area are frequently visited by tourists and participants in non-governmental expeditions, who have thus an opportunity to become familiar with Antarctic environment and activities.


2.0 Aims and Objectives

Taking into account that the Area is already the locus of multiple and continuous activities which  tend to become even more intense and diverse in the near future, the present Management Plan is designed to provide mechanisms for:

    • Improving the level of mutual assistance and co-operation among Parties operating in the Area;
    • Avoiding or minimizing the risk of mutual interference and cumulative impacts on the terrestrial and marine environments; 
    • Managing potential or actual conflicts of interest between different activities, including science, logistics and tourism;
    • Improving the understanding of natural processes at work in the Area which in turn will help to protect the environment from unnecessary disturbance;
    • Protecting important physiographic features, and the outstanding biological, ecological, historical and aesthetic values of the Area; and
    • Safeguarding the long-term scientific research in the Area.


3.0  Management Activities

The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:

    • Parties that have active research programmes within the Area shall establish an international Admiralty Bay Management Group, which will hold regular meetings (at a convenient time) to: 
        ◦ review the functioning and implementation of the Management Plan;
        ◦ facilitate communication between those working in or visiting the Area;
        ◦ monitor the Area to investigate possible sources of environment impact including cumulative impacts;
        ◦ promote the dissemination of information on this Management Plan to all parties operating in the Area, and all other visitors to the Area;
        ◦ maintain a record of activities in the Area.

    •     Parties that have active year-round research programmes within the Area shall consult amongst themselves with a view to:
        ◦ designating a person to coordinate the implementation of the Management Plan in the Area (designation will be for a 5 year period on a rotational basis)
        ◦ developing contingency plans for each station, as well as for the whole Area, for oil spills and any other accident with possible significant impact on the environment, including attendance in an emergency;
        ◦ establishing a waste management plan for the Area.

    • National Programmes operating within the Area, as well as all other visitors, shall undertake activities in accordance with the environmental Code of Conduct  contained in this Management Plan.

    • Wherever feasible, markers delimiting boundaries of already existing protected areas and other zones of ecological or scientific interest identified in this Management Plan                        and warnings for visitors about their nature shall be provided, and removed when no longer necessary.  

    • National Programmes that have active research programmes in the Area shall make arrangements with other parties that have installations and/ or structures now abandoned to consider their value. Conservation plans should be formulated if any of the installations are assessed to be of historical value. If not, plans should be formulated for their removal in accordance with the provisions of Annex III on Waste Disposal and Waste Management to the Protocol on Environmental  Protection. 

    • National Programmes operating in the Area shall ensure that all personnel in their programmes visiting the Area have been briefed on the requirements of the Management Plan and, in particular, on the Environmental Code of Conduct that applies within the Area. 

    • Tour operators visiting the Area should ensure that their staff, crew and passengers are briefed on, and are aware of the requirements of this Management Plan and supporting documentation.  

    • Copies of this management plan and supporting documentation, such as maps and appendices, shall be kept in appropriate stations and research hut facilities and be made available to all persons in the Area.   



4.0  Period of Designation
Designated for an indefinite period.



5.0  Description of the Area

5. 1  Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features

General description. The proposed ASMA of Admiralty Bay (62º 01´21´´S – 62º14´09´´S/
58º 15´05´´W– 58º41´02´´W ) comprises the terrestrial and marine areas immediately within the glacial drainage basin of this bay (Fig. 2). In addition, it includes ASPA Nº 128, part of which is outside the drainage basin area.

The Area is bounded by a line extending from its southern margin at Telefon Point  to The Tower, and then toward Jardine Peak intersecting the ice divide of the Warszawa ice-field, thence following this divide to the west of Ezucurra Inlet, north-eastward to enclose Mackellar and Martel inlets, and then southward through Ternyck Needle to Cape Syrezol on the eastern shore of, Admiralty Bay. The waters of Admiralty Bay and a small part of Bransfield Strait north of a straight line between Cape Syrezol and Telefon Point are also included in the ASMA. There are no fixed survey points available at the Area boundaries, but markers indicating the ASMA will be fixed at appropriate arrival points on land.	

The revised total area of the proposed ASMA is 360 km², of which 194 km² are ice covered, including 138 km² of Admiralty Bay Waters and an adjoining 7 km2 of the Bransfield Strait (Admiralty Chart N° 6258, 1968, London; Polish Chart Admiralty Bay, King George Island, 1:50,000, Battke, S, Warszawa, 1990; Site of Special Scientific Interest No.8 (SSSI no.8), King George Island, 1:12 500, ed. Department of Antarctic Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Pudełko R., 2002; Brazilian Chart Nº 25121, Baía do Almirantado, 1:40,000, 1984, Rio de Janeiro; Braun et al. 2001a and b; Arigony-Neto, 2001).

Approximately 90% of the land area within the proposed ASMA is ice-covered, the ice-free areas representing about 37 km².

Earth Science features. The glacial drainage basin is formed mainly by the main ice cap of King George Island which flows from north, east and west towards the trough of Admiralty Bay. At the head of the bay, the ice cap spills into three inlets: Ezcurra, Mackellar and Martel inlets.  Heavily crevassed outlet glaciers descend towards the sea becoming tidewater glaciers. Along the west coast, in the area of ASPA Nº 128, some glaciers descending from Warszawa Peninsula (ice cap) terminate on land; others form tidewater ice cliffs. The eastern coast of the bay, from Cape Syrezol to Hennequin Point, is bordered mainly by ice-cliffs of tidewater glaciers descending from Krakow Ice Field, and by rocky spurs and narrow beaches. In the whole area of Admiralty Bay intensive deglaciation is well documented.

Geomorphology of the area is dominated by glacial erosional and depositional landforms, pebble to cobble covered beaches and raised marine terraces. Igneous and sedimentary rocks outcropping around Admiralty Bay record a complex Cenozoic evolution of a volcanic island arc intercalated with terrestrial and glacial deposits.

Climate. The climate of the Area. is typical of maritime Antarctica. Based on data of more than 20 years obtained at the Polish Arctowski Station and at the Brazilian Comandante Ferraz Station, the local microclimate is characterized by an average annual temperature of around -l.8ºC and an average annual wind speed in the order of 6.5 m s-¹. Annual average precipitation is 508,5 mm, humidity is 82% and pressure is 991 hPa. The waters of Admiralty Bay have an average annual temperature range of -1.8° to +4°C, being well mixed by tides and strongly influenced by currents from the west of Bransfield Strait.

Flora.  In the adjoining ice-free areas of Admiralty Bay, the distribution of plant communities is closely related to geoforms and to the presence of birds and soil. Wherever edaphic conditions are favorable, mosses form strands which also contain lichen and fungi formations. The lichenized mycobiota is restricted to the rock fragments and rock outcrops, sometimes associated to bird colonies. The coastal areas are the most densely covered, being represented mostly by moss carpet formations. Near the Brazilian Station two of these areas occur, both of which are almost 300 m long. As elevations start up, showing rocky outcrops, crustose lichenes and mosses which grow directly on rock predominate.  The species are listed at Appendix B.

Birds.  Within the Area, 13 species of birds breed.  Three sympatrica1ly breeding Pygoscelid penguins make up 91% of the number and up to 95% of the biomass of the breeding community.   Other seabirds breeding in the Area are: southern giant petrel; blue-eyed shag; brown skua; south polar skua; Wilson's storm petrel; black-bellied storm petrel, cape petrel, kelp gull, Antarctic tern and American sheathbill.  The areas of ASPA Nº 128, Cape Vauréal, Chabrier Island and surroundings, are the most important bird breeding locations in Admiralty Bay. Around Vaureal Cape are found nests of all species mentioned above, including all of the Area´s blue-eyed shags and 50% of its giant petrels. The species are listed at Appendix C.

Mammals.  Six species of pinnipeds occur in the Area (Appendix C). The most frequent mammal during winter is the crabeater seal.  During summer, elephant seals and fur seals are the most frequent and abundant. Fur seals, once relatively rare, have increased in number in recent years. Elephant seals and Weddell seals breed in the area. Leopard seals are found throughout the year in varying numbers.  Ross seals rarely occur in the Area.  Humpback whale is the most frequent cetacean during summer.

Marine Ecosystem.  Macroalgae, predominantly Phaeophyta and Rhodophyta, characterize the shallow water bottom community down to 50-60 m depth.  With the exception of Nacella concinna, epifauna is practically absent in the intertidal zone.  The vagile benthos is abundant with a high variety and density of Amphipoda.  Below 4-5 m, substrata are typically sandy and dominated by Isopoda, particularly the genus Serolis.  With the increasing depth, vagile species such as Sterechinus, Neobuccinum and Parborlasia dominate.  In deeper waters, on a muddy and more stable substrata, sessile forms include sponges, anemones, the bivalve Laternula elliptica and tunicates, besides high-density concentrations of echinoderms such as Amphioplus acutus, Ophionotus victoriae and Odontaster validus.  Scavenger invertebrates include Labidiaster annulatus, Gliptonotus antarcticus, Parborlasia corrugatus and Neobuccinum eatoni. The species found in the area are largely the same as those observed on similar substrata at other sites in the region, indicating homogeneity in the benthic fauna of the Antarctic Peninsula and related areas.  Fishes are represented by fifteen Nototheniidae, mainly Notothenia neglecta, N. gibberifrons, N. coriiceps, Nototheniops nudifrons, Trematodus newnesi, T. borchgrewincki and Pleuragramma antarcticum, two Channichthydae species, Hapagiferidae and Zoarcidae.  



5.2  Access to the area 

In order to minimize the risks of accidents, environmental damage or harmful interference with research activities, pedestrians, ships, small boats, aircrafts and land vehicles entering and/or operating in the Area shall follow the Environmental Code of Conduct that applies within the Area. (see Section 8.0).


5.3 Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area

Main permanent structures in the Area (Fig. 2).

5.3.1. Henryk Arctowski Station (Poland)  - 62°09´34´´S – 058°28´15´´W
The station was established by Poland at Thomas Point on 26th  February 1977 as a facility for continuous scientific research and associated logistic operations of the Polish Antarctic Programme, and has been in year-round operation since then. It has dormitories with 10 berths in summer and up to 14 in winter; biological, meteorological and geophysical laboratories; storage facilities; a small hospital unit; double-walled fuel tanks with total capacity of 1,000 tonnes; hangars for boats and land vehicles etc. The station is equipped with two helicopter pads.

5.3.2. Comandante Ferraz Station (Brazil) – 62º05’07” S - 58º23’32”W
The station was established in 1984 on the eastern coast of Keller Peninsula as the base for scientific research and associated logistic operations conducted by  the Brazilian Antarctic Programme. It started year-round operations in 1986. The station consists of 64 containers including biological, chemical, meteorological and geophysical laboratories; dormitories with a capacity of 46 berths; storage facilities; a garage for land vehicles, diesel generators etc. Fuel is stored in 17 large double-walled steel tanks with a total capacity of 316,000 liters of diesel, and in a small tank (3,000 L) for gas. The station is equipped with one helicopter pad.

5.3.3 Machu Pichu Station (Perú)  -  62º05’30” S - 58º28’30” W 
The station was built in 1988 at Crépin Point, Mackellar Inlet. At present, it is used for summer operations only. The station covers an area of 205 m² and consists of three metallic modules including a dormitory, laboratory and workshop.

5.3.4 Copacabana Field Station (United States of America) - 62º10’45” S - 58º26’49” W 
(Unofficially called Pietr J. Lenie Station) at Llano Point, has been in use annually, during the summer, since 1978, for ornithological research, in close cooperation with Arctowski station.

5.3.5 Refuge  at Hennequin Point (Equador) - 62º 07' 16" S - 58º 23' 42" W
The refuge was built in 1989, and has occasionally been used since then during summer.


Minor and/or semi-permanent structures.

There are a number of minor structures in the area, such as (Fig. 3):

a. the remains of Italian hut Campo Bove at Italian Valley, Ezcurra Inlet;
b. an old whaling boat, on Keller Peninsula;
c. an assembled whale skeleton on Keller Peninsula;
d. wooden barrels from whaling period at Barrel Point, Ezcurra Inlet;
e. a collection of whaling harpoons assembled on the shores of Admiralty Bay, exhibited at Arctowski Station;
f. a group of five crosses and graves on Keller Peninsula. Four of these are British graves, with crosses erected in memory of members of British expeditions who perished at sea and on ice, and one was erected in honour of a deceased member of the Brazilian military; 
g. a wooden cross on top of Mount Flagstaff on Keller Peninsula;
h. two Brazilian emergency refuges on Keller Peninsula;
i. removable Polish caravans functioning as summer field laboratories (e.g. at Demay Point).

5.4  Location of protected areas within the ASMA (Fig. 2)

The following areas are currently designated within the proposed ASMA.	

5.4.1  ASPA Nº 128 (Western shore of Admiralty Bay)
	62º09´46´´S - 62º14´10´´S   –  58º25´15´´W - 58º29´58´´W
	This area is the site of long-term studies on bird biology performed by the US Antarctic Program.
	
5.4.2  Historic Site Nº 51, at Arctowski Station – 62° 10'S, 58° 28'W 
	This consists of the grave with a cross of Eng. W. Puchalski, an internationally acclaimed Polish nature photographer and director of Arctic and Antarctic nature films.


6.0  Special Zones within the Area

In addition to ASPA Nº 128 and Historic Site Nº 51, and to sites specified in section 5.3, the following zones were identified within the ASMA as being zones in which activities should be managed.

6.1 Zones visited by tourists and other visitors

• Arctowski and Ferraz Stations: movement of tourists and other visitors should follow the pre-established tour routes (Fig. 5). In the future, routes for tourists may be established at Machu Picchu Station and Ecuador field camp;
• Isolated laboratory modules, refuges and the area behind Ferraz Station: visits shall be only by small accompanied groups. 

6.2 Zones of scientific and/or ecological interest where access by tourists and other visitors should be managed (Fig. 4):

a.Fresh water lakes around Arctowski Station: example of freshwater environment; 
b. Italian Valley: concentration of seals;
c. Dufayel Island: concentration of seals;
d. Crépin Point: concentration of seals;
e. Area north-west of Ferraz Station: concentration of seals;
f. Area west of Ferraz Station: concentration of seals
g. Coastal area from Refuge Nº 1 (Ferraz Station) to Plaza Point: concentration of seals and penguins;
h. Northern flank of Base "G" hill on Keller Peninsula: concentration of terns;
i. Coastal area up to 7 m in shore, north of Base "G" hill: presence of vegetation banks;
j. Freshwater ponds near Arctowski and Ferraz stations: example of freshwater environment;
k.Ullman Point (Ullman Spur): concentration of seals;
1. Hennequin Point: concentration of seals; plant fossil localities;
m. Cape Vaureal - Chabrier Rock: breeding area for penguins, southern giant petrels and blue-eyed shags;
n. Shallow marine waters down to 100 m in front of: ASPA Nº 128, Martel, Mackellar and Ezcurra Inlets; Napier Rock and Monsinet Cove: diverse benthic communities and scientific experiments and concentrations of different species of adult and juvenile fish, (e.g. Notothenia rossii and Gobionotothen gibberifrons).


Although not officially designated as protected areas under Annex V of the Protocol, the zones listed above have considerable scientific/ecological interest as breeding sites and/or concentrations of birds and/or mammals, as feeding sites for birds and marine mammals, as sites of typical vegetation cover, varied marine habitats, or sites of special scientific interest.   Some of these zones, such as Chabrier Rock and Vaureal Cape, on the eastern shore of Admiralty Bay (Fig. 2) are of relevance for monitoring studies in connection with the objectives of CCAMLR.

Activities in all zones should be carried out with particular care to avoid or minimize disturbance of wildlife, trampling of vegetation and interference with on-going research. Except in connection with scientific activities, survival cache replacement, or emergencies, and essential station operations, the relevant zones on land above listed should not be visited during the critical bird breeding season from 1 October to 1 March. Freshwater lakes around Arctowski and Ferraz should be only accessed for the purpose of water supply and associated station operations, and for relevant scientific research.

The marine benthic and pelagic organisms are of considerable scientific interest and are fundamental links in the marine food chain of the area. They are critically linked to maintenance of the ecological balance including that of birds and marine mammals.


7.0 Maps

Figure 1: Location of ASMA Nº 1 in King George Island, Antarctic Peninsula
Figure 2: Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area – ASMA Nº 1
Figure 3: Location of Structures and anchoring sites
Figure 4: Location of  Zones of Scientific and/or Ecological Interest 
Figure 5A: Tour Routes – Comandante Ferraz Station
Figure 5B: Facilities Zone – Comandante Ferraz Station
Figure 5C: Tour Routes – Henryk Arktowski Station
Figure 6: Flora (colonized areas) and Birds (occurrence sites)


8.0 Code of Conduct

With regard to the provisions of Arts 4-6 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection on Area Protection and Management, the following Code of Conduct is proposed as a framework to guide:
• On-going and future research and logistic operations of the parties which have permanent and/or summer installations in the Area;
• Similar activities of other parties; and of visitors, including tourists entering the Area;


8.1  Access to and movement within or over the Area.

8.1.1. Ships

    • Anchoring inside Mackellar Inlet shall be undertaken with caution because of' the large number of rocks in its central part. It is recommended that only one ship at any time shall anchor in the inlet.
    • Anchoring inside Martel Inlet shall be limited to three ships as follows: two immediately offshore from Ferraz Station and the third at the eastern end of the inlet;
    • Anchoring inside Ezcurra Inlet shall be limited to two ships, one immediately east of Dufayel Island and the other south of Dufayel Island, opposite Italian Valley;
    • Caution shall be exercised when anchoring near Arctowski Station owing to strong currents and winds from different directions.

8.1.2 Yatchs 

    • Landing on the shore in front of Arctowski Station (Arctowski Cove and Halfmoon Cove), Ferraz Station (Visca Anchorage) and other installations, shall be made at the appropriate places shown in Fig. 3;
    • In addition to the provisions applicable to ASPA Nº 128 and except in case of emergencies and activities related to research, monitoring or replacement of survival food and fuel storage, small boats shall keep out of the areas of scientific and/or ecological interest identified in Fig 4.
8.1.3 Aircraft

    • Except in emergencies, or in the course of carrying out inspections under Article 7 of the Antarctic Treaty, helicopters ferrying scientists and visitors to and from Arctowski, Ferraz and Machu Picchu stations and Ecuador field camp shall notify the relevant station/camp leader well in advance of the estimated time of arrival. They shall land only on helicopter pads/landing sites indicated at each of the stations (Figs 2). There are no refueling facilities at the stations;
    • In addition to the provisions applicable to ASPA Nº 128, and except in case of emergency or research activities, no helicopter shall land in or nearby, or fly at altitudes of less than 600 m over the areas of biological/ecological interest shown in Fig. 4;
    • There are no landing sites for fixed-wing aircraft in the Area.

8.1.4 Land vehicles
	
    • Areas used by land vehicles for station and station-supported research operations shall, in general, be restricted from Arctowski up to Thomas Point, and between Ferraz Station and the isolated modular laboratories around Ferraz and refuges on Keller Peninsula. Areas within which most vehicle operation are constrained and routes between Ferraz Station and the modular laboratories and refuges are shown in Figs. 5A and B;
    • No land vehicles shall enter ASPA Nº 128;
    • Use of station vehicles to visit Plaza Point laboratories and refuges on the Keller Peninsula shall be conditional on previous arrangement with the station leader at Ferraz Station.	
    • Snow-mobiles and snow-cats shall be used only on ground covered by snow or ice.

8.1.5 Pedestrians (including members of private and tourist expeditions)

    • Areas of pedestrian activity are generally associated with stations and station-supported research operations.  All movement shall be undertaken carefully to minimize disturbance to animals, soil and vegetated areas, and not damage or dislodge flora.
    • Members of non-governmental and tourist expeditions visiting Arctowski and Ferraz stations shall use the routes shown in Fig. 5.A and B. These routes give the opportunity to observe wildlife and the station installations, while minimizing disturbance to station activities and the environment, and avoiding habitat degradation;
    • No person shall enter ASPA Nº 128, except to conduct scientific research in accordance with a permit issued under Art 3 of Annex 2 to the Protocol and with the approved management plan for the area.

8.2 Activities which may be conducted in the Area, which will not jeopardize the values of the area, and which are consistent with the Code of Conduct:

    • Scientific research; 
    • Logistical support of scientific research;
    • Visitation for the purpose of education or recreation, including tourism 
    • Management activities including maintenance or removal of facilities;
    • Media, arts, or other official national program visitors.

Further restrictions apply to activities within ASPA Nº 128. 

8.3 Installation, modification or removal of structures

Installation of new stations/refuges and modifications, or removal of already existing installations or other facilities in the Area, and location of field camps shall be done only after consultation with the Parties that have active research programmes in the Area, and in conformity with provisions of Article 8 and Annex 1 of the Environment Protocol and this Management Plan; in a manner that does not compromise the values of the Area.

Scientific equipment installed in the Area shall be clearly identified by country, name of principal investigator, contact details, and date of installation.  All equipment and associated materials shall be removed when no longer in use.

Field camps shall be located as far as possible on non-vegetated sites, such as on barren ash plains, slopes or beaches, or on thick snow or ice cover when practicable, and shall also avoid concentrations of mammals or breeding birds.  

8.4 Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit issued  under the provisions of Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals for scientific purposes is involved, the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica shall be used as a minimum standard.  

Taking of marine organisms for scientific purposes should be limited to that restrictedly necessary to meet the purpose of the research;

Seismic operations, particularly with the use of explosives shall be avoided and geological sampling of bottom sediments, particularly in shallow waters, shall be carried out with extreme care so as to minimise adverse impact on the environment, or interference with other scientific research under way on benthic ecology.


8.5  The collection or removal of materials not imported by the permit holder

Materials shall only be collected and removed from the Area for scientific, management or educational purposes, and shall be limited to the minimum necessary for those needs. 

Souvenirs, specifically rocks, minerals, fossils, eggs, flora and fauna, or any other material not brought into the area by the visitor, shall not be collected in, or removed from, the Area.  

It may be permissible to remove from the site materials such as beach litter, dead or pathological fauna or flora or abandoned relics and artifacts from previous activities.  


8.6  Visits by tourists, and non-governamental expeditions

Leaders of tourist and non-governmental expeditions wishing to visit Arctowski, Ferraz or Machu Picchu stations shall contact the Department of Antarctic Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences (02-141 Warsaw, Poland, Ustrzycka), the Comissão Interministerial para os Recursos do Mar (Ministério da Marinha, Esplanada dos Ministérios, 70055-900, Brasília, DF, Brazil), or the Dirección de Asuntos Antarticos, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores del Perú, (Lima, Perú) respectively, at least three months in advance of the planned visit to make the necessary arrangements. This does not preclude visits in emergency situations.

The State Party responsible for tour operators shall ensure that tour operators, their staff, tourists and other visitors are fully informed of, and comply with, the provisions of this Management Plan.

Tourists and other persons visiting the two stations shall be directed to the established tour routes (Section 8.1: Access).

Station personal and all visitors, including tourists, shall avoid walking on vegetation.

In order to avoid environmental impact, disturbance of wildlife and interference with on-going scientific research, landing at or entering of the special zones listed in section 6.2 shall not take place, except in connection with scientific research, operations of the nearby stations, survival cache replacement or emergencies. 


8.7  Disposal of waste

Disposal of waste generated by scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental or non-governmental activities in the ASMA shall be carried out in compliance with the provisions of Annex III of the Protocol.

All wastes, other than human and domestic liquid waste,  shall be removed from the Area.  


8.8  Requirements for Reports

Parties proposing to conduct, support, or authorize research or other activities in the Admiralty Bay ASMA are requested to inform the Parties that have active research programmes in the Area as far in advance as possible of their planned activities. This will enable greater integration to be achieved between research programmes, enhance cooperation and avoid cumulative impacts, facilitating monitoring and management of the Area. Where applicable, provisions related to environmental impact assessment as established in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty shall be followed.

Parties issuing permits to authorize entry into a designated protected area within the ASMA or carrying out research and taking of flora and fauna, are requested to provide the Parties that have active research programmes in the Area with copies of all permits issued in this regard in advance of the activities being undertaken.

The ASMA coordinator shall maintain a record, and provide summary descriptions of the reports of activities in the Area in the Annual Exchange of Information under the Antarctic Treaty for the preceding year.


8.9  Exchange of information

The ASMA coordinator shall maintain a record of notifications and provide information when requested.  

At the end of each summer field season, Parties shall notify other Parties of:

    • any activities carried out by its nationals or other parties including tourists and participants in non-governmental expeditions in the ASMA contrary to the provisions of this Management Plan ; and

    • steps taken to enforce the provisions of this Management Plan.


9.0 Supporting Documentation

A proposal prepared by Brasil and Poland, in coordination with Equador and  Peru, that Admiralty Bay, King George Island South Shetland Islands) be desiganted as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) 1996. Agenda item 20a XX ATCM WP 15 (Rev). Now reviewed.

Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, appended to Resolution 2 (1998) of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXII.  

Final Report of the Twelfth Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting . The Haque, 11-15 September 2000 Management Plan for Site of  Special Scientific Interest No.8 (ASPA 121),Western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland islands. 68-73

Final Report of the Twelfth Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting. The Haque, 11-15 September 2000 Management Plan for Site of  Special Scientific Interest No.34. (ASPA 151) Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands 95-102

AQUINO, F.E., FERRON, F.A., SIMÕES, J.C. E SETZER, A.W., Série temporal de temperatura média em superfície na Ilha Rei George. Revista do Departamento de Geografia/USP, 14 (2001) 25-32.

BÍCEGO, M.C., ZANARDI-LAMARDO, E., WEBER, R.R. 2003. Four-year of dissolved/ dispersed petroleum hydrocarbons on surface waters of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, Antarctica.  Rev bras. Oceanogr. 51:33-38.

BIRKENMAJER K., 2002 Retreat of Ecology Glacier, Admiralty Bay, King Georgie Island (South Shetland islands, West Antarctica), 1956-2001. Bull. of the Polish Academy of Sciences 50,1:15-29

CIAPUTA  P., & SALWICKA K., 1997. Tourism at Antarctic Arctowski Station 1991-1997 Policies for better management Pol.Polar Res.18(3-4) : 227-239

CORBISIER, T.N.; PETTI, M.A.V.; SKOWRONSKI, R.S.P. & BRITO, T.A.S. 2004. Trophic relationships in the nearshore zone of Martel Inlet (King George Island, Antarctica): 13C stable isotope analysis. Polar Biology 27(2):75-82.

DANI, N., SIMÕES, J. C., ARIGONY NETO, J., AHLERT, S. A Geographical Information System applied to the Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) of Admiralty Bay. Terra Nostra. Berlin: , v.2004/4, p.349 - 350, 2004. 0496-8978

HARRIS, C.M. Environmental management on King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Polar Record, v.27 n.16. p.1-24. 1991.

HEADLAND, R.K. & KEAGE, P.L., 1985, Activities on the King George Island Group, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Polar Record, 22 (140): 475­484.

JAŻDŻEWSKI K., DE BROYER C., PUDLARZ M., ZIERLIŃSKI  D., 2001 Seasonal fluctuations of vagile benthos in the uppermost sublittoral of a maritime Antarctic fjord. Polar Biol.  24:910-917

KULESZ J., 1999. Ichthyofauna of lagoons of the Admiralty Bay (King Georgie Island, Antarctica) in 1997. Pol.Arch.Hydrobiol.46,2:173-184

KEJNA M., 1999 Air temperature on King George Island, South Shetlands, Antarctica. Pol.Polar.Res. 20,3:183-201

LAPAG – LABORATÓRIO DE PESQUISAS ANTÁRTICAS E GLACIOLÓGICAS. CD-Room. Projeto Integração de dados ambientais da área AAEG da Baía do Almirantado. Porto Alegre: UFRGS, 2003.

MARTINS C. C., VENKATESAN M. I. & MONTONE, R. C. 2002. Sterols and linear alkylbenzenes in marine sediments from Admiralty Bay, Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 14(3):244-252.

MARTINS, C.C., BÍCEGO, M.C., TANIGUCHI,S. MONTONE, R.C. 2004. Aliphatic (Ahs) and Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in surface sediments in Admiralty Bay, King George Island, Antarctica: A regional survey of organic contaminants resulting from human activity. Antarctic Science, 16(2):117-122.

MONTONE, R.C., TANIGUCHI, S., WEBER, R.R. 2003.  PCBs in the atmosphere of King George Island, Antarctica. The Science of the Total Environment. 308, n. 1-3, p. 167-173.

NONATO, E. F., BRITO, T. A. S., PAIVA, P. C. D., PETTI, M. A. V. AND CORBISIER, T. N. (2000). Benthic megafauna of the nearshore zone of Martel Inlet (King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica): depth zonation and underwater observations. Polar Biol 23, 580-588.

OLECH M., 1996. Human impact on terrestrial ecosystems in west Antarctic. Proceed. Of the NIPR Symp.  Polar Biology, 9:299-306
PUTZKE, J. & PEREIRA, A B. 1990. Mosses of King George Island, Antarctica. Pesquisa Antartica Brasileira 2 (1): 17-71.

PRESLER P. AND FIGIELSKA E., 1997 New data on the Asteroidea of Admiralty Bay, King Georgie Island, South Shetland Islands . Pol.Polar \Res. 18,2:107-117

PRUSZAK, Z. (1980). Currents Circulation in the waters of Admiralty Bay. Pol. Polar Res. V1.

RAKUSA-SUSZCZEWSKI S.,1995 The hydrography of Admiralty Bay and its inlets, coves and lagoons (King Georgie Island, Antarctica). Pol.Polar.Res. 16,1-2:61-70

RAKUSA-SUSZCZEWSKI S., 1996 Spatial and seasonal variability of temperature and salinity in Bransfield Strait and Admiralty Bay, Antarctica Pol.Polar Res. 17(1-2) 29-42)

RAKUSA-SUSZCZEWSKI . S., 2002  King Georgie Island – South Shetland Islands, Maritime Antarctic Ecological Studiem, vol.154 L.Beyer and M.Bö(eds.) Geoecology of Antarctic Ice-Free Coastal Landscapes. © Sprinter-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2002 pp.23-39

ROBAKIEWICZ, M. and S. RAKUSA-SUSZCZEWSKI (1999). Aplication of 3D Circulation Model on Admitalty Bay. Pol. Polar Res. 1(20).

SALWICKA K. & RAKUSA-SUSZCZEWSKI S., 2002 Long-term Monitoring of Antarctic pinnipeds in Admiralty Bay (south Shetlands, Antarctica). Acta Theriologica 47 (4):443-457 

SCHAEFER, C.E.G..R.;  FRANCELINO, M.R.; SIMAS, F.N..B.; ALBUQUERQUE FILHO, M.R. (eds) 2004. Ecossistemas Costeiros e Monitoramento Ambiental da Antártica Marinha.  NEPUT, Viçosa, Minas Gerais, 192 pg.

SIMÕES, J.C., DANI, N., BREMER, U.F., AQUINO, F.E, ARIGONY NETO, J. 2004. Small cirque glaciers retreat on Keller Peninsula, Admiralty Bay, King George Island, Antarctica. Pesquisa Antártica Brasileira, v.4:

TATUR A., 2002 Ornithogenic Ecosystems in Maritime Antarctic – Formation, Development and Disintegration Ecological Studies Vol.154 L.Beyer and M.Bolter (eds) Geoecology of Antarctic Ice-Free Coastal Landscapes. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelber.

WHYTE, L.G. SCHULTZ, A. VAN BEILEN, J.B. LUZ, A.P. PELLIZARI V., LABBÉ, D. AND GREER, C.W. 2002. Prevalence of Alkane Monooxygenase Genes in Arctic and Antarctic Hydrocarbon-Contaminated and Pristine Soils. FEMS Microbial Ecology 41(2):141-5APPENDIX A

A study of the State of the Environment and 
the establishment of an Environmental Monitoring Programme
(Brazil)

A research network has been created to undertake an environmental impact assessment in Admiralty Bay, King George Island, where the Brazilian Antarctic Station “Comandante Ferraz” is located.    A comprehensive study of the state of the environmental of this region will allow a full evaluation of the impact of human activity generated by scientists, tourists and support personnel from the stations, and impact from current and past logistic operations. 

The network is constituted by 15 research groups from 10 Brazilian Institutions.  The groups are undertaking multidisciplinary studies of a series of biotic and abiotic parameters, aiming at the implementation of a strategy for environmental management.

Over a 20 year period, the Brazilian scientific community has studied various aspects of Admiralty Bay and its terrestrial surroundings. This has resulted in a set of biotic and abiotic data that needs evaluation so that environmental monitoring of the bay can be implemented in an efficient and effective manner.  There is the need for implementing a database and a geographic information system (GIS) with capability for continuous update and broad accessibility. Critical evaluation of the results shall indicate which variables are necessary for an efficient environmental impact assessment of Admiralty Bay. This information will also provide decision support for minimising possible environmental impacts in the region.

The integrated knowledge of the environment allows for the elaboration of a plan for organization and usage of the Antarctic Brazilian Station “Comandante Ferraz”. This is being done in accordance to its support capacity and technological developments for the Brazilian buildings in Antarctica, and coherent with the needs, logistics, and the Madrid Protocol.

The main objectives are:  

    • In the marine environment - to obtain measurements for the following parameters: physical (current, temperature, salinity, tides, wind and atmospheric pressure); chemical (organic hydrocarbons from petroleum, persistent organic compounds, chemical indicators of sewage, heavy metals, nutrients, chlorophyll, pH, alkalinity, dissolved oxygen and partial pressure of CO2 in the seawater); microbiological (microbiological indicators of faecal origin, xenobiotic and pathogen-degrading micro-organisms); biological (benthic communities structure and marine food web); and geological (bathymetry, bottom morphology, and distribution of sediments).

    • In the terrestrial environment - to conduct studies of the plant and animal communities through: their ecological distributions and relationships, aiming at the identification of species and indicators of environmental impact for future monitoring projects; pedological and micro-morphological characterization of soils of the area, including organic matter, biochemical cycles and heavy metals, as well as their spatial distribution (mapping). 

    • To include multiple controls in the detection of anthropogenic effects through asymmetrical analyses (these are univariate statistical analyses appropriate for the examination of data post impact, in which the parameter’s value in the disturbed area is compared to the mean value from control areas, in order to distinguish natural from anthropogenic impacts).

    • To conduct toxicity, bioaccumulation and biotransformation experiments, and evaluate marine organism responses to anthropogenic contaminants in the field and laboratory.

    • To implement a Geographical Information System (GIS) as a tool for spatial integration of data obtained by all projects within this research net, providing support to monitor the environmental impact caused by human activities and decision support for the ASMA management plan. Through the use of routine data analyses, the GIS will make available the necessary information to the planning of logistic, scientific and tourist activities. Also, it will provide multi-temporal information for environmental monitoring and impact studies in the area.

    • To elaborate a database of past and future data in adequate format to be made available on the Internet. 

    • To elaborate, together with SeCIRM (Interministerial Commission for the Resources of the Sea, manager of Proantar), a Guidance Plan and the Environmental Management Plan for the Antarctic Brazilian Station “Comandante Ferraz” (EACF), based on environmental data generated by this network.

    • To develop appropriate technologies for constructing a standard Antarctic module, adopting environmentally and adequately correct solutions for the implementation of  the Protocol of Madrid.

    • To elaborate a conduct manual for users of the Brazilian buildings in Antarctica, with specific focus on diminishing the environmental impact caused by the use of installations and equipment. 

The expected products are:  data worksheets to feed the GIS and generate the cartographic base with a scale adequate to the ASMA; thematic maps of environmental parameters for the ASMA; implementation of the GIS, making it available to the research community; and monitoring strategy and plan for the management of the ASMA. 





APPENDIX B

Preliminary plant checklist from adjacent ice-free areas to 
Admiralty Bay, King George Island


ANGIOSPERMAE

POACEAE 
Deschampsia antarctica Desv.

CARYOPHYLLACEAE
Colobanthus quitensis (Kunth) Bartl.


MOSSES

AMBLYSTEGIACEAE
Orthotheciella varia (Hedw.) Ochyra
Sanionia uncinata (Hedw.) Loeske 
S. georgico-uncinata (Mull Hal..) Ochyra & Hedenas
Warnstorfia laculosa (Müll. Hal.) Ochyra & Matteri
Warnstorfia sarmentosa (Wahlenb.) Hedenäs

ANDREAEACEAE 
Andreaea depressinervis Card.
Andreaea gainii Card.
Andreaea regularis Muell.

BARTRAMIACEAE
Bartramia patens Brid.
Conostomum magellanicum Sull. 

BRACHYTHECIACEAE
Brachythecium austrosalebrosum (Müll. Hal.) Kindb.
Brachythecium glaciale B.S.G. 

BRYACEAE
Bryum amblyodon Müll. Hal. 
Bryum argenteum Hedw.
Bryum orbiculatifolium Card. et Broth.
Bryum pallescens Schleich. ex Schwaegr.
Bryum pseudotriquetrum (Hedw.) Schwaegr.
Pohlia cruda (Hedw.) Lindb.
Pohlia drummondii (Müll. Hal.) A. L. Andrews in Grout 
Pohlia nutans (Hedw.) Lindb.
Pohlia wahlenbergii (Web. Et Mohr.) Andrews

DICRANACEAE
Anisothecium cardotii (R. Br. ter.) Ochyra 
Chorisodontium aciphyllum (Hook. f. et. Wills.) Broth.
Kiaeria pumila (Mitt. in Hook. f.) Ochyra – very rare.

DITRICHACEAE
Ceratodon purpureus (Hedw.) Brid. 
Distichum capillaceum (Hedw.) B.S.G.
Ditrichum hyalinum (Mitt.) Kuntze 
Ditrichum lewis-smithii Ochyra  

ENCALYPTACEAE
Encalypta rhaptocarpa Schwaegr. 

GRIMMIACEAE
Grimmia reflexidens Müll. Hal. 
Racomitrium sudeticum (Funck) Bruch & Schimp. in BSG. 
Schistidium amblyophyllum (Müll. Hal.) Ochyra & Hertel 
Schistidium antactici (Card.) L. I. Savicz & Smirnova 
Schistidium cupulare (Müll. Hal.) Ochyra
Schistidium falcatum (Hook. f. at Wils.) B. Bremer
Schistidium halinae Ochyra 
Schistidium occultum (Müll. Hal.) Ochyra & Matteri
Schistidium rivulare (Brid.) Pobp.
Schistidium steerei Ochyra
Schistidium urnulaceum (Müll. Hal.) B. G. Bell. 

HYPNACEAE
Hypnum revolutum (Mitt.) Lindb.
Platydictya jungermannioides (Brid.) Crum 
MEESIACEAE
Meesia uliginosa Hedw. 

ORTHOTRICHACEAE
Muelleriella crassifolia (Hook. f. et Wils.) Dus.

POLYTRICHACEAE
Polytrichastrum alpinum (Hedw.) G. L. Smith
Polytrichum strictum Brid. 
Polytrichum juniperinum Hedw.
Polytrichum piliferum Hedw.

POTTIACEAE
Dydimodon gelidus Card.
Hennediella antarctica (Angstr.) Ochyra & Matteri 
Hennediella heimii (Hedw.) Zand. 
Stegonia latifolia (Schwaegr. in Schult.) Vent in Broth.
Syntrichia filaris (Müll. Hal.) Zand. 
Syntrichia princeps (De Not.) Mitt.
Syntrichia saxicola (Card.) Zand. 

SELIGERACEAE
Dicranoweisia brevipes (Müll. Hal.) Card..
Dicranoweisia crispula (Hredw.) Milde
Dicranoweisia grimmiaceae (Müll. Hal.) Broth.


ALGAE

MACROSCOPIC CONTINENTAL ALGAE 
Prasiola crispa (Lightfoot) Menegh

MICROSCOPIC CONTINENTAL ALGAE
BACILLARIOPHYCEAE
Coscinodiscales
Orthoseira cf. dendroteres (Ehrenberg) Crawford

Naviculales
Amphora veneta Kützing 
Achnanthes lanceolata (Brébisson) Grunow 
Achnanthes marginulata Grunow
Caloneis cf. silicula (Ehrenberg) Cleve
Caloneis cf. schumanniana (Grunov) Cleve
Cocconeis sp., 
Fragilaria bidens Heiberg
Fragilaria capucina Desmazieres
Fragilaria construens f. binodis (Ehrenberg) Hustedt
Fragilaria pinnata Ehrenberg
Gomphonema parvulum (Kützing) Kützing
Hantzschia amphioxys (Ehrenberg) Grunow
Luticola muticopsis (Van Heurck) D. G. Mann
Luticola mutica var. ventricosa (Kützing) Cleve et Grunow
Navicula cf. bryophila Petersen
Navicula elginensis (Gregory) Ralfs
Navicula glaciei Van Heurck, 
Navicula phyllepta Kützing
Nitzschia agnita Hustedt
Nitzschia cf. fontifuga Cholnoky
Nitzschia frustulum (Kützing) Grunow
Nitzschia gracilis Hantzsch
Nitzschia homburgiensis Lange-Bertalot
Nitzschia cf. hybrida Grunow
Nitzschia inconspicua Grunow
Nitzschia perminuta (Grunow) M. Pergallo
Opephora olsenii Moeller
Pinnularia borealis Ehrenberg
Pinnularia ignobilis (Krasske) Cleve-Euler
Pinnularia microstauron (Ehrenberg) Cleve
Stauroneis cf. anceps Ehrenberg
Stauroneis cf. simulans (Donkin) R. Ross.

MACROSCOPIC FUNGI
Omphalina antarctica Sing.
Galerina moelleri Bas.

LICHENS AND LICHENICOLOUS FUNGI 
Acarospora macrocyclos Vain. 
Alectoria minuscula – Lindsay 
Arthopyrenia maritima Øvstedal 
Arthrorhaphis citrinella (Ach.) Poelt 
Austrolecia antarctica Hertel 
Bacidia stipata Lamb 
Biatorella antarctica Murray 
Bryonora castanea (Hepp) Poelt
Bryoria chalybeiformis (L.) Brodo et D. Hawksw. 
Buellia anisomera Vain. 
Buellia augusta Vain. 
Buellia cladocarpiza Lamb
Buellia coniops (Wahlenb. in Ach.) Th. Fr. 
Buellia granulosa (Darb.) Dodge 
Buellia latemarginata Darb. 
Buellia papillata (Sommerf.) Tuck.
Buellia perlata (Hue) Darb.
Buellia pycnogonoides Darb.
Buellia russa (Hue) Darb.
Buellia subpedicillata (Hue) Darb.
Caloplaca amniospila 
Caloplaca athallina Darb. 
Caloplaca buelliae Olech & Søchting 
Caloplaca cirrochrooides (Vain.) Zahlbr. 
Caloplaca citrina (Hoffm.) Th. Fr.
Caloplaca iomma Olech & Søchting 
Caloplaca millegrana 
Caloplaca psoromatis Olech & Søchting
Caloplaca regalis (Vain.) Zahlbr. 
Caloplaca siphonospora Olech & Søchting
Caloplaca sublobulata (Vain.) Zahlbr.
Caloplaca tetraspora (Nyl.) H. Oliv.
Caloplaca tiroliensis Zahlbr. 
Candelaria murrayi (Dodge) Poelt 
Candelariella hallettensis (Murray) Øvstedal
Candelariella vitellina (Hoffm.) Müll. Arg.
Carbonea vorticosa (Flörke) Hertel
Catapyrenium daedaleum (Kremp.) Stein 
Catapyrenium lachneum (Ach.) R. Sant. 
Catillaria corymbosa (Hue) Lamb 
Cladonia cariosa (Ach.) Spreng. 
Cladonia furcata (Huds.) Schrader 
Cladonia phyllophora Ehrh. ex Hoffm.
Cladonia pyxidata (L.) Hoffm. 
Coelocaulon aculeatum (Schreber) Link 
Coelocaulon epiphorellum (Nyl. in Crombie) Kärnef. 
Cystocoleus ebeneus (Dillwyn) Thwaites 
Dermatocarpon intestiniforme (Körb.) Hasse 
Haematomma erythroma (Nyl.) Zahlbr. 
Himantormia lugubris (Hue) Lamb 
Hypogymnia lugubris (Pers.) Krog 
Hypogymnia lububris (Pers.) Krog f. compactior (Zahlbr.) D. C. Linds. 
Japewia tornoensis (Nyl.) Tønsberg 
Lecania brialmontii (Vain.) Zahlbr. 
Lecania gerlachei (Vain.) Zahlbr. 
Lecanora dispersa (Pers.) Sommerf. 
Lecanora expectans Darb. 
Lecanora physciella (Darb.) Hertel 
Lecanora polytropa (Hoffm.) Rabenh. 
Lecidea assimilata Nyl. 
Lecidea atrobrunnea (Ramond ex Lam. et DC.) Schaer. 
Lecidea lapicida (Ach.) Ach. 
Lecidea sarcogynoides Körb.
Lecidea sciatrapha Hue
Lecidella aff. carpathica Körb. –
Lecidella stigmatea (Ach.) Hertel and Leuckert 
Lecidella wulfenii (Hepp) Körb. 
Leptogium puberulum Hue 
Massalongia carnosa (Dicks.) Körb. 
Mastodia tesselata Auct. 
Megaspora verrucosa (Ach.) Hafellner 
Microglaena antarctica Lamb 
Ochrolechia frigida (Sw.) Lynge 
Ochrolechia parella (L.) A. Massal. 
Pannaria hookeri (Borrer ex Sm.) Nyl. 
Parmelia saxatilis (L.) Ach. 
Physcia caesia (Hoffm.) Fürnr. 
Physcia dubia (Hoffm.) Lettau 
Physcia cf. wainioi Räs. 
Physconia muscigena (Ach.) Poelt 
Placopsis contortuplicata Lamb 
Poeltidea perusta (Nyl.) Hertel et Hafellner 
Polyblastia gothica Th. Fr. 
Porpidia albocaerulescens (Wulfen) Hertel et Knoph 
Porpidia crustulata (Ach.) Hertel et knoph 
Pseudephebe minuscula (Nyl. ex Arnold) Brodo et D. Hawksw.
Pseudephebe pubescens (L.) Choisy 
Pseudevernia pubescens 
Psoroma hypnorum (Vahl) Gray 
Ramalina terebrata Hook et Tayl. 
Rhizocarpon geminatum Körb. 
Rhizocarpon geographicum (L.) DC. 
Rhizocarpon polycarpon (Hepp) Th. Fr. 
Rhizoplaca aspidophora (Vain.) Redón 
Rhizoplaca melanophthalma (DC. in Lam. et DC.) Leuck. et Poelt 
Rinodina deceptionis Lamb 
Rinodina mniaraea (Ach.) Körb. 
Rinodina petermanii (Hue) Darb. 
Rinodina turfacea (Wahlenb.) Körb. 
Sphaeorophorus fragilis (L.) Pers. 
Sphaeorophorus globosus (Hudson) Vain. 
Sphaeorophorus cfr. melanocarpus (Sw.) DC. 
Staurothele gelida (Hook & Tayl.) Lamb 
Stereocaulon alpinum Laurer ex Funck 
Stereocaulon glabrum (Müll. Arg.) Vain. 
Tephromela atra (Hudson) Hafellner 
Thelocarpon cyaneum Olech et Alstrup 
Tremolecia atrata (Ach.) Hertel 
Umbilicaria aprina Nyl. 
Umbilicaria cfr. cristata Dodge et Baker 
Umbilicaria decussata (Vill.) Zahlbr. – 
Umbilicaria propagulifera (Vain.) Llano 
Umbilicaria rufidula (Hue) Filson 
Usnea acromelana Stirton 
Usnea antarctica Du Rietz 
Usnea aurantiaco-atra (Jacq.) Bory 
Verrucaria ceuthocarpa Wahlenb. 
Verrucaria cylindrophora Vain. 
Verrucaria dispartita Vain. 
Verrucaria elaeoplaca Vain. 
Verrucaria psycrophila Lamb 
Verrucaria tesselatula Nyl. 
Xanthoria candelaria (L.) Th. Fr. –
Xanthoria elegans (Link.) Th. Fr. APPENDIX C

Fauna recorded at Admiralty Bay, King George Island


Birds recorded at Admiralty Bay

Breeding species:

Pygoscelis adeliae
Pygoscelis papua
Pygoscelis  antarctica
Macronectes giganteus
Daption capense
Oceanites oceanicus
Fregetta tropica
Phalacrocorax bransfieldensis
Chionis alba
Catharacta maccormicki
Catharacta lonnbergi
Larus dominicanus
Sterna vittata

Non-breeding

frequent:

Eudyptes chrysolophus
Fulmarus glacialoides
Pagodroma nivea
Sterna paradisaea

Sporadic:

Aptenodytes patagonicus
Aptenodytes forsteri
Edyptes chrysocome
Spheniscus magellanicus*
Talassarche melanophris
Phoebetria fusca*
Phoebetria palpebrata*
Thalassoica Antarctica
Halobaena caerulea
Pachyptila desolata*
Bubulcus ibis
Cygnus melanocoryphus
Anas sibilatrix*
Anas georgica
Calidris fuscicollis
Steganopus tricolor*
Catharacta chilensis*


Pinnipeds  recorded at Admiralty Bay:

Mirounga leonina
Lobodon carcinophagus,
Leptonychotes weddelli, 
Hydrurga leptonyx,
Arctocephalus gazella.
Ommatophoca rossi *

* - only one visit.

APPENDIX D

Functioning of  the geoecosystem of Admiralty Bay
(Poland)

Interactions and relationships between the sea, land and ice are a very special feature of the geo-ecosystem on the shore of King George Island of the South Shetland archipelago in Maritime Antarctica. Climatic changes in the past, as well as changes that currently occur in this area, influence all these three environments with effects observed in different time scales. Changes on land are more easily recognised than those in the sea. The continuous process of deglaciation is accompanied by succession and colonisation of new areas by bacteria, microflora, lichens, mosses, vascular plants and microfauna. Land areas, with relatively small surfaces, constitute sites of concentration for bird colonies and pinniped resting grounds. As such, they are heavily fertilised and, once colonised, they provide the source of biogens and species claiming new areas freed from underneath the ice. In the sea, the warming climate leads to a decrease of the area covered by fast ice and ice pack and the following decrease in primary production of the sub-glacial flora, which in turn influences the biomass of krill that feeds on the bottom side of the floating ice. Krill is the main food source for animals associated with the land ecosystem, such as flying birds, penguins, fur seals and crabeater seals. Numbers and the biomass of penguins have decreased during the recent years, and so has the amount of organic matter transported to the land. In the shore zone, the smaller surface of pack ice, as well as the shorter time of its existence, eliminate crabeaters and leopard seals whose occurence is dependent on it. Fur seals, migrating from the north towards South Shetland Islands, also depend on krill resources. During the last 30 years of our studies in the Admiralty Bay area, important quantitative changes have occurred, indicating a tendency in the variability of the shore geo-ecosystem. An increase of the air temperature by 0.02o-0.04oC a year, as well as the clearly observed deglaciation in the area, illustrate and prove the case. Our research concerned environmental, i.e. climatic, meteorological, geological, cartographic, geomorphological, paleolimnological, as well as hydrological and  hydrochemical observations, both on land and in the sea, around South Shetland, as well as in  Admiralty Bay and on its shores. This provides a background which allows us to understand changes ocurring in the geo-ecosystem, in the million-year scale of the past, as well as in the decade scale of the present. Biological changes in this part of Maritime Antarctica follow changes of the climate but they are also a result of anthropogenic changes caused by the past and present exploitation of some important parties in the ecosystem, such as fur seals, whales, fish, krill and cephalopods. Changes are also caused by the increasing number of ships and people visiting the region which involves the risk of importing and spreading new species. Our studies concern changes in the numbers, as well as composition of species and populations, their distribution and biomass. All the main groups of sea and land organisms have been recognised, as well as the main trophic levels that they shape, which allowed us to estimate the flow of matter in this coastal-shelf ecosystem of Maritime Antarctica. Our particular attention has been given to DNA and RNA studies, as well as those concerning gene expression among selected systemathic groups, such as: bacteria, vascular plants, sea and land crustaceans, fish and elephant seals. These studies should explain physiological and morphological differences of these organisms, their phylogenetic origin, kinship relations within and outside the Admiralty Bay area, as well as in the whole Western Antarctica and out of it. From taxonomic and systemathic studies in the Admiralty Bay area, which gave us the information on what species, where and in what numbers occur there, through ecological research concerning functional relationships and interactions, we have now turned towards experimental studies. We have initiated research on tropho-chemoreception in invertebrates and fish in the environment characterised by the lowest water temperature. Chemical signals are the key to understand trophic relationships, metabolic changes, behavioural reactions  between predators and prey, as well as formation of benthos communities. 
Polish studies in the Admiralty Bay region use the facilities of the Henryk Arctowski station. During the last thirty years, they concerned logically interconnected research areas, coordinated first (from 1977) by the Department of Polar Research of the Institute of Ecology, Polish Academy of Sciences and then (since 1992) by the Department of Antarctic Biology PAS. 
The research undertaken by Poland constitutes a good starting point for contribution to the two main themes: 1 – The current state of the polar environment 2 - Change in the polar regions of the International Polar Year 2007-2008.


