REPORT OF JOINT INSPECTIONS UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND ARTICLE 14 OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL


















(Note.  This paper contains only the summary of the Inspection Programme.  The full Inspection Report will be distributed at ATCM XXVIII as an attachment to this Working Paper).



ANTARCTIC TREATY INSPECTIONS, 2005.

Introduction

Inspections were conducted jointly during February and March, 2005 by the United Kingdom, Australia and Peru in the Antarctic Peninsula region. 

The Inspections were undertaken by Observers designated by their respective Governments in accordance with the notification procedures of Article VII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. 

Observers so designated were:

For the United Kingdom:

    • Dr. M.G. Richardson (MR), Head of the Polar Regions Unit, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, London;

    • Mr. R.H. Downie (RD), Environmental Manager, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge.

For Australia:

    • Mr. T. R. Maggs (TM), Environmental Manager, Australian Antarctic Division, Kingston, Tasmania.

For Peru:

    • Mr. J.C. Rivera (JR), Environmental Officer, Instituto Antártico Peruano.


The logistic platform for the Inspection Programme was provided by the United Kingdom’s Ice Patrol Vessel HMS Endurance. Most Inspections were made using the ship’s two Lynx helicopters, with a few exceptions which were made by small boat. Helicopter support allowed for flexible and speedy logistics without which far fewer Inspections would have been possible in the time available.

The core Inspection Team (consisting of Richardson, Downie, Maggs and Rivera) was augmented, on a rotational basis, by Officers from HMS Endurance who had also been designated as Observers through diplomatic channels. 

The Inspections, undertaken between 10 February and 7 March, consisted of nine permanent (year-round) stations, five summer-only stations, three unoccupied stations, one station under construction, five Historic Sites and Monuments and one tourist vessel. In addition, five further unoccupied stations were overflown by helicopter, but not actually visited. This was due to the large numbers of penguins or Fur Seals present in and around the stations concerned - landing a helicopter in the vicinity would have caused unacceptable disturbance to wildlife and would have been in contravention of Annex II to the Environmental Protocol. 
In total, the stations or facilities of 13 Consultative Parties and one non- Consultative Party were inspected during this programme.

Brief visits were also made to the non-governmental ‘Eco-Nelson’ on Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands, and the Australian-flagged yacht Australis whilst at anchor in Port Lockroy. Because of their brief duration and informal nature these visits were not considered as Inspections.

To ensure impartiality, UK-designated Observers did not take part in the Inspections of operational UK stations or Historic Site and Monument No. 61 (‘Base A’, Port Lockroy), nor in the writing of the respective Inspection Reports. UK-designated Observers were however involved in the Inspections of unmanned Historic Sites and Monuments No. 62, ‘Base F’, (Wordie House) Winter Island, No. 63, ‘Base Y’ Horseshoe Island and No. 64 ‘Base E, Stonington Island).

All Inspections were undertaken in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol. 

In line with Article 14(4) of the Protocol, reports of all Inspections undertaken were forwarded to the Treaty Parties concerned for comment. The report of the Inspection of the tourist vessel was also sent to the respective tourist operator and IAATO as well as the flag-State.



Itinerary

HMS Endurance departed Mare Harbour, Falkland Islands on 8 February. Thereafter, the dates of Inspections were:



San Martin
Argentina
P

‘Base E’, Stonington Island
UK
HSM

Stonington- East Base
USA
HSM
4 March
‘Base Y’, Horseshoe Island
UK
HSM
5 and 7 March
Rothera Research Station
UK 
P

1Key:

P      	Permanent (year-round) station
SO  	Summer-only station
UO	Unoccupied station
UC	Station under construction
HSM 	Historic Site and Monument
V     	Vessel


Fig. 1 shows the location of all the stations and Historic Sites and Monuments inspected.


All Inspections were undertaken using the Inspection Checklists adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, viz:

Checklist “A” for permanent and summer-only stations (agreed in 1994, ATCM XVIII)
Checklist “B” for vessels within the Antarctic Treaty Area, and 
Checklist “C” for abandoned stations and associated installations. 

These checklists were adopted through Resolution 5 (1995) at ATCM XIX.

The checklists were used as an aide-memoire whilst undertaking Inspections rather than as exhaustive questionnaires. However, to ensure that the information collected on each station was recorded in a consistent fashion, a definitive checklist was completed immediately following each Inspection using the notes compiled by each Observer. These completed checklists have been retained for archival purposes.

Prior to undertaking any Inspections, the credentials of the designated Observers were shown to the Station Leader (or in the case of the vessel inspected to the Expedition Leader and Master), and copies of such designations were provided.

The Inspection Team was based onboard HMS Endurance throughout the duration of the programme, and disembarked at the UK’s Rothera Research Station on 4 March. From there the Team flew back direct to Punta Arenas, Chile on 8 March.



GENERAL REMARKS AND CONCLUSIONS

At the end of each station or facility report we have, as appropriate, set down recommendations specific to that site.  In addition to those recommendations, more general points, common to a number of, or many, stations are set out below as follows:

    • Scientific Research:  

Although some stations were undertaking world-class scientific research into a wide variety of disciplines (though many geared to climate change), a larger number of stations appeared to have relatively modest, or even rudimentary, science facilities.  This was particularly so when viewed against the substantial size of some stations’ infrastructure.  In many situations science programmes appeared to consist of no more than routine data observations involving technicians collecting e.g. meteorological, or tidal measurements.  In consequence, stations in close proximity to each other were often collecting similar data on the same parameters.

The Inspection Team believe, in the circumstances, that there would be virtue in SCAR undertaking an audit of science being carried out in Antarctica.  Such an assessment might examine issues in-situ such as science priorities, duplication of data collection, as well as identification of areas of scientific research which need to be strengthened.  

    • Scientific Co-operation: 

The Team found relatively little co-operation on science between stations, even including those sited in close proximity.  Even where they co-operated logistically or interacted socially there appeared to be a lack of scientific dialogue between adjacent stations.  This seemed particularly so on King George Island (Maxwell and Admiralty Bays).  Furthermore, given the significant cost of establishing and running a scientific station in Antarctica, it was not clear to the Team why greater consideration had not been given by some new entrants to the Antarctic Treaty System to share resources and thereby ensure that joint operations would produce a more cost-effective delivery of science and a significantly smaller human footprint.

    • Abandoned/Unoccupied Stations: 

During the course of this Inspection Programme, a significant proportion (25%) of stations (previously recorded as either permanent or summer-only) were unoccupied.  It was not apparent to the Inspection Team whether any of these stations had been occupied earlier in the 2004/05 summer season.  In most situations it appeared however as though the facilities had not been utilised, at least for the past two-five years, or longer in some cases.  Yet some of the facilities visited or overflown were clearly in a sound state of repair and capable of being utilised.  Others however had suffered storm damage. 

At a time when further stations are currently under construction or being proposed, some form of rationalisation of facilities in Antarctica ought to be considered.  Parties which own abandoned or unoccupied stations should determine whether they intend to re-occupy stations (as science facilities) in which case refurbishment, perhaps extensive, might be required. Alternatively those Parties should consider other options for these stations.  These might include their:

    • removal/remediation as required by Article 1 (5) of Annex III to the Environmental Protocol;

    • formal transfer  or lease to another Antarctic Treaty Party; or

    • conservation, maintenance and designation as an Historic Site and Monument, if appropriate.     

    • Fuel Storage and Transfer

Inadequate standards of fuel storage and transfer continue to be the main environmental concern at most stations inspected by the Team. This had also been the case in the UK/Germany 1999 Inspection, as well as in the Norwegian Inspection Report of 2001 and the Finnish Inspection Report of 2004 in other sectors of Antarctica. A large fuel spill on land is considered to be one of the greatest local environmental threats. 

Fuel transfer was noted to be undertaken by a number of means, including ship-to-shore fixed or floating pipeline, fuel barge, 205 litre drums, or delivery by helicopter in underslung tanks.  At some stations, fuel is transferred up to 5 times from the resupply vessel to its final destination in power generation. Whilst fuel transfer was not witnessed at any of the stations during the Inspection, only few of the stations inspected were able to produce documented transfer procedures

Eleven of the 14 occupied stations inspected had bulk fuel storage facilities. Of these, 7 (64 %) had no effective secondary containment (i.e. sufficient to contain the full capacity of the largest tank within a fuel farm). This included some tanks of up to 250,000 litres capacity. Some examples were also noted of attempted but ineffective or inadequate secondary containment (e.g. bunding around the tank valves only, or unsealed or poorly maintained bunds to the point where in the event of a spill they would serve no purpose).

At least three of the stations inspected had no formal Oil Spill Contingency Plan. Those same three operators provided no formal oil spill training or exercises for their staff.

Poor maintenance of tanks and transfer equipment was also evident at some stations. Tanks and tank foundations were at times noted to be heavily corroded and in some cases actually leaking fuel. Only one of the stations inspected had formally audited its fuel storage and transfer procedures and equipment, and containment and response capability, against COMNAP’s recommended checklists. 

Ground contaminated with fuel oil was noted at a few of the stations inspected – at one station in particular, the Team were concerned to note extensive areas of soil saturated with diesel.  
 
    • Environmental Impact Assessment procedures

Most stations visited were aware of the requirement for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for new buildings or projects. However, the majority were unable to provide examples of recently prepared EIAs. Whilst in most cases the responsibility for undertaking such assessments lies with the environmental sections, Governmental Departments or Ministries based back in the relevant country, nevertheless the Team was disappointed to note little evidence of the EIA process at the stations themselves. 

    • Protection of Flora and Fauna

The protection of flora and fauna was accorded a high priority at most stations. Poster displays with guidelines, generally based upon Recommendation XVIII – 1, were prevalent. At some stations, densely vegetated areas, or penguin colonies were roped off to prevent disturbance. 

Most stations were aware of the regulations governing the introduction of non-native species. However, at one station, untreated timber had been used in recent construction activities, and introduced house-plants and soil were noted. Only few examples of measures being taken to prevent the accidental introduction of non-native species were reported to the Inspection Team.

    • Area Protection and Management

Given the comments from the 1999 Inspection Report (UK/Germany) concerning the concentration of facilities in Maxwell Bay and their cumulative impact on that part of King George Island, the Team welcomed the news that initial consultations and baseline surveys are underway with the aim of proposing the Fildes Peninsula as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area.

However, the Team was disappointed to hear of the apparent lack of co-ordination amongst those Parties with stations located within Admiralty Bay (which is subject to a voluntarily adopted ASMA Management Plan). The Team understood that little progress had yet been made to formalise the Admiralty Bay ASMA, voluntarily adopted at ATCM XX (Utrecht, 1996)

    • Environmental Monitoring

Monitoring the impact of station activities varied greatly. Most commonly, the volume and type of waste produced was monitored and reported upon. Chemical and biological monitoring of sewage effluent and water quality (sometimes at considerable detail) was undertaken at a number of stations, particularly those operating sewage treatment plants. The impact of air operations on nesting birds was carried out at two stations, and studies into scavenging by avian populations was undertaken at one. Floristic survey and vegetation mapping was also undertaken.

Overall, it was apparent to the Team that there was no consistent or focused approach to monitoring in terms of agreed protocols, which parameters should be monitored, and to what level of detail.

The Team were aware of the considerable work currently being undertaken by SCAR, COMNAP and the CEP to assess monitoring needs and methodologies, and hoped that this would provide the necessary guidance to Parties.

    • Tourism

The degree of tourism activities at stations varied considerably.  A few stations actively encouraged visits from tourist vessels; most accepted, though then controlled, the number of such visits each season; whilst some stations actively discouraged or refused access to tour operators.  On the whole, the Team gained the impression that the relationship between tourist and state operators appeared satisfactory.  Only one Party expressed the view to the Inspection Team that tourism had created difficulties, and was incompatible with scientific research in Antarctica.

Irrespective of the degree to which Parties’ stations engage with tourist operators, the Team saw virtue in Parties setting out and making publicly available their respective policies on tourism for each of their Antarctic stations.  Such transparency would assist others, including IAATO, in conducting tourism activities in a manner compatible with the stated views of Treaty Parties.

    • Non-Governmental Facilities

The Inspection Team’s visit to “Eco-Nelson” on Nelson Island raises an important issue.  Whilst this modest facility undoubtedly has minimal environmental impact (indeed it had been established to demonstrate minimalist survival in harsh climatic extremes) nevertheless, this operation is the only non-Governmental permanent facility in Antarctica.  It raises the broader question as to whether the precedent set by such un-regulated activities are now compatible with the objectives of the Environmental Protocol.  The scope of Parties’ responsibilities and control over their nationals’ activities in the Antarctic is an issue that warrants further consideration.  Otherwise, there is the potential for such uncontrolled activities, including the construction of further land-based facilities, to proliferate.

    • Inspection Documentation

Information provided to the Inspection Team varied considerably, even between different stations operated by the same Party. In some situations, comprehensive documentation had been prepared. The most useful, in the view of the Team, was where six stations had provided completed versions of the Checklist adopted by the ATCM for permanent stations (Checklist A). Given the tight timeframes under which most Inspections were carried out due to logistic constraints, this proved to be invaluable in focusing the Inspection. The Team was of the view that the production of standardised reports for Antarctic stations in the format of Inspection checklists should be undertaken as a standard requirement. This issue should be addressed by the ATCM and COMNAP. 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS (these are not placed in any particular priority order)

    • That Parties, particularly those whose stations in Antarctica are in close proximity, should ensure that they liaise and co-operate on scientific research, as appropriate, to ensure that duplication of science is minimised, and scientific priorities are addressed in the most effective manner;

    • That SCAR, in furtherance of the above, should consider undertaking an in-situ audit of scientific research in Antarctica;   

    • That the construction of stations at previously unoccupied sites in Antarctica should be minimised.  The location of any such new sites should be selected with a view to optimising science, whilst minimising environmental impact, and in accordance with the principles of Articles 5 and 6 of the Environmental Protocol;

    • That Parties, particularly those that have relatively recently acquired status within the Antarctic Treaty System, should consider joint operations in Antarctica, thereby: (a) minimising the environmental impact of constructing new facilities, and (b) creating more effective joint science and logistic arrangements;

    • That Parties should prepare detailed reports on their stations and other facilities in Antarctica.  Such reports should be in the format of the Inspection Checklists adopted by the ATCM, reviewed and updated regularly, and placed on the website of both the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and COMNAP;

    • That Parties should prepare, and  make publicly available, Policy Statements on tourism in relation to their Antarctic stations;

    • That bulk fuel facilities currently lacking secondary containment should be replaced either with double-skinned tanks, or provided with adequate bunding; 

That those Parties that have yet to prepare Oil Spill Contingency Plans should do so, as required under Article 15 of the Environmental Protocol, and ATCM Resolution 1 (1997) and Resolution 6 (1998). Such plans should be prepared in association with the provision of adequate oil-spill response equipment, training and exercises. 

Furthermore, that COMNAP should consider undertaking further, up-to date assessment of fuel handling and storage facilities and procedures in Antarctica, and issue a set of clear recommendations to operators. 









