A Review of the Antarctic Protected Areas System
A Review of the Antarctic Protected Areas System
Executive Summary

New Zealand has conducted a review of the status of the Antarctic protected areas system, primarily to support the preparation of an evaluation for the CEP’s state of the Antarctic environment reporting system.  Key findings of the review are reported in this Working Paper, along with recommendations to the CEP.  Supporting tables are provided in a separate Information Paper.

Sixty two Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) protect approximately 2741 sq km of Antarctica: 1780 sq km of protected sea area and 960 sq km of protected land area.  The total area (land and sea) that has ASPA status represents 0.008% of the total Antarctic Treaty Area.

A review of the status of all ASPA Management Plans indicates that:

    • four Management Plans require updating in the accepted Annex V format;
    • thirteen plans appear to be overdue their five yearly reviews, and
    • thirteen plans are due for review during 2005.

It is ten years since the Moe Island plan (ASPA 109) was adopted as the model for the preparation of plans to meet Annex V requirements (Resolution 9 (1995)).  It is important that this plan is up-to-date and adequately represents the requirements of Annex V.  Alternatively a new “model plan” could be selected.

Article 3 of Annex V details nine categories for conservation that should be represented within the Antarctic protected areas system.  This assessment attempted to group Management Plans against each of these categories and provides a snapshot of the current distribution of sites.  In the absence of a strategic approach to the designation of sites, the appropriateness or relevance of the current distribution cannot be judged.

Birds are the most protected faunal type followed by invertebrates, seals and maritime communities more generally.  Individual ASPAs often protect more than one species and few sites are established primarily to protect birds.  More often than not, their mere presence determines their inclusion as values to be protected.  In the vast majority of cases the protection of penguins is achieved as a by-product of the protection of large concentrations of Antarctic birds generally, or other values.
 
Similarly, protection of plants is often achieved through protection of a whole stretch of vegetation in general rather than through primary designation for a particular species or type.  An exception to this is the designation of an ASPA to protect endocryptolithic communities in the Victoria Valley.

A review of the geographical distribution of Areas suggests:

    • sites are located exclusively on the fringes of Antarctica with no sites a significant distance inland;
    • there are two clear clusters of sites: one on and around the Antarctic Peninsula and the second in the Ross Sea / Victoria Land region;
    • there is a complete absence of protected areas within Marie Byrd Land in western Antarctica.

Recommendations for improving the Antarctic Protected Areas system:

Consideration should be given to actively seeking sites in under-represented geographical areas and for under-represented environmental values, in order to ensure a more systematic spread of sites.

The CEP should continue efforts to develop a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’.

When considering new or revised Management Plans, the proponent and the CEP should actively consider the extent to which plans complement the protected areas system as a whole.

The CEP should consider reviewing and revising the Guide to the preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2 (1998)) and the Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas Set Forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, (Resolution 1 (2000)). 

The CEP should consider the requirement for each Management Plant to include a clear statement of the primary reason for designation (with reference to Article 3(2) of Annex V).

An up to date set of Management Plans and maps (and supporting information) should be maintained on the Protected Areas Information Archive website.

The Moe Island plan should be updated and / or the CEP should reassess which Management Plan or Plans may best serve as a model plan.

Parties responsible for those plans not yet in Annex V format should revise them accordingly (Resolution 1 (1998) and Resolution 2 (2002) refer).

Parties responsible for those plans that have not been reviewed for 5 or more years should undertake reviews and any subsequent plan revisions.

The CEP should establish and maintain a register or similar of the status of Management Plans (perhaps through the Protected Areas Information Archive) in order to ensure that Parties are aware of Annex V review requirements.

The CEP should revisit the list of recommendations included as Annex 5 to the Final Report of CEP III (The Hague, September 2000) to identify and progress those issues still to be addressed. 
Introduction

In December 2004, New Zealand commissioned a review of the protected area Management Plans currently in use for the 62 protected areas in Antarctica.  The primary purpose for conducting the review was to provide background information to support an up-to-date evaluation of the status of the protected areas system for the CEP’s state of the Antarctic environment reporting (SAER) system.  This has been achieved and such an evaluation is now included on the SAER website.  However, it is suggested that the CEP may benefit from sight of the detail of the review.

The scope of this review was to:

    • Assess the status of the 62 Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plans;
    • Assess the basis for ASPA designation and how representative they are of the values requiring protection set out in Article 3 of Annex V;
    • Assess the geographical spread of ASPAs and ASMAs over the Antarctic continent;
    • Make recommendations in light of these assessments.

This Working Paper provides a summary of the review’s findings and makes recommendations with regard to the CEP’s management of the protected areas system.  Supporting tables are provided in a separate Information Paper.


Spatial Coverage of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas

Area covered

In 1997 the UK produced the “List of Protected Areas in Antarctica”1.  These data were used as a basis and updated as necessary.  The total coverage of ASPAs in Antarctica can be summarised as shown in Table 1. 


ASPAs
Land / Sea area within the Antarctic Treaty Area
Proportion of Antarctic Treaty Area
Land 
1780.4 km2
14,245,000 km2
0.012%
Sea 
960.4 km2
20,327,000 km2
0.005%
Total
2740.8 km2
34,572,000 km2
0.008%
Table 1:  Approximate total areas of ASPAs.

More sea than land is protected by ASPAs.  However, this is heavily influenced by two ASPAs.  Western Bransfield Strait (ASPA 152) and Eastern Dallmann Bay (ASPA 153) are 900 and 580 km2 respectively, which accounts for 83% of the protected coastal marine area.  This effectively concentrates the protected coastal marine areas around the Antarctic Penninsula.  

It is also clear that only a tiny proportion of the land and sea areas of Antarctica have been designated as ASPAs.

Geographical Distribution

Map 1 indicates the position of the 62 ASPAs and three ASMAs in Antarctica.  Two trends are immediately visible.  Firstly, the sites are located exclusively on the fringes of Antarctica, with no sites a significant distance inland.  Secondly, there are two clear clusters of sites, one around the Antarctic Peninsula and the second in the Ross Sea / Victoria Land region.

There are 30 sites on the Antarctic Peninsula and the surrounding islands (including the South Shetland and South Orkney Islands), 20 sites in the Ross Sea / Victoria Land region, and 15 elsewhere.  There is a complete absence of protected areas in Marie Byrd Land in western Antarctica.  The area with no ASPAs spans 90 degrees of longitude.

The unevenness of geographical representation is further exacerbated when consideration is given to the protection of marine areas.  Although a larger marine area is protected than terrestrial (see above), this is heavily influenced by two large ASPAs: ASPA 152 and ASPA 153.  This effectively concentrates 83% of the protected marine environment around the Peninsula.

The geographical distribution of sites described in this review clearly does not meet the requirement of Article 3(2) of Annex V that the protected area system in Antarctica should show some geographical representation.  This situation was noted by Lewis Smith (1994)2 and little has been done to remedy the situation since then.  Lewis Smith recommended that in order to improve the geographical spread of protected areas new ASPAs might be designated in the following regions:

    • Coats Land: Shackleton Mountains (geomorphology, wilderness, lakes and vegetation).
    • Dronning Maud Land: Shirmacher Oasis (wilderness, geomorphology, biology, lakes) and Unspecified nunataks and mountain ranges (wilderness, geomorphology, bird colonies).
    • MacRobertson Land: Prince Charles Mountains (wilderness, geology, geomorphology, lakes and vegetation).
    • Princess Elizabeth Land: Larseman Hills (wilderness, lakes, vegetation, birds) and Vestfold Hills (wilderness, glaciated terrain, glacial geology, geomorphology, lakes).
    • Oates Land, Victoria Land and TransAntarctic Mountains: numerous potential coastal and inland sites, notably in “dry valleys”, nunataks and mountain ranges with a good representation of geomorphological, biological and limnological features;
    • Marie Byrd Land.

All these regions have sites that are potentially worthy of protection.  Currently three new ASPAs and one new ASMA are proposed.  One of these (Dakshin Gangtori glacier snout and glacier) is in Dronning Maud Land and another (the Scullin and Murray monoliths) is in MacRobertson Land.  The other two sites are an ASMA for Deception Island and an ASPA in the Ross Sea which, whilst worthy of protection, do little to redress the geographical bias of protected areas.

The suggestion that sites should be located in Marie Byrd Land would seem to address the fundamental gap in the geographic distribution of sites.  As Lewis Smith (1994) states “Extensive tracts of polar plateau … could serve as valuable biologically and chemically uncontaminated sites, never visited by people or overflown by low-flying aircraft.”  These sites could act as a baseline environment with which to compare any other region of the world.

A further advantage of designating extensive sites in this area would be to move towards the IUCN (1992)3 goal of achieving protected area status for 10% of Antarctica.  In addition to those areas listed by Lewis Smith, a site or number of sites could be designated to protect the sub-glacial lakes.

 Recommendation:

    • Consideration should be given to actively seeking sites in under-represented geographical areas, in order to ensure a more systematic spread of sites.
    • 
A:  South Orkney Islands
ASPA 109
APSA 110
ASPA 111
ASPA 114

B:  Marguerite Bay and Adelaide Island
ASPA 107
APSA 115
ASPA 117
ASPA 129

C:  South Shetland Islands
ASMA 1
ASPA 112
ASPA 125
APSA 126
ASPA 128
ASPA 132
ASPA 133
ASPA 140
ASPA 144
ASPA 145
ASPA 149
ASPA 150
ASPA 151






D:  Antarctic Peninsula
ASPA 108
ASPA 113
ASPA 134
ASPA 139
ASPA 146
ASPA 148
ASPA 152
ASPA 153

E:  McMurdo Dry Valleys 
ASMA 2
ASPA 118
ASPA 123
ASPA 131
ASPA 138
APSA 154






F:  Northern Victoria Land 
ASPA 106
ASPA 159
ASPA 161

G:  Ross Island and vicinity
ASPA 105
ASPA 116
ASPA 121
ASPA 122
APSA 124
ASPA 130
ASPA 137
ASPA 155
ASPA 156
ASPA 157
ASPA 158


Map 1.  The geographical distribution of protected areas in Antarctica.
Reasons for Site Designation

Article 3(2) of Annex V states that:

“Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:

    (a) Areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities.
    (b) Representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems.
    (c) Areas with important or unusual assemblages of species including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals.
    (d) The type locality or only known habitat of any species.
    (e) Areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific research.
    (f) Examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features.
    (g) Areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
    (h) Sites or monuments of recognised historic value.
    (i) Such other areas as may be appropriate to protect the values set out in Article 3 Paragraph 1.”

Although the relative importance of these categories is unspecified, this language implies that, at a minimum ASPAs of each type should be identified.  The allocation of existing areas among these categories was therefore analysed and, in the case of (b) and (c), of the particular ecosystems and species protected.  In the absence of a strategic approach to the selection and designation of protected areas, little comment beyond the presence or absence of each type of ASPA can be made regarding the appropriateness of the distribution of existing ASPAs among the categories.

The Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas Set Forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (Resolution 1 (2000)) ask of a proposed  ASPA: “What contribution would the area make to an Antarctic Protected Area system with a full range of outstanding natural environmental, biological, geographic and geological values of the Antarctic region?”.  Despite this, evaluation of new ASPA proposals and review of existing ASPA Management Plans consistently fail to consider the status of the site within the broader context of the protected areas system.  It is beholden upon ASPA proponents and on the CEP to take a more holistic view to the designation (and indeed the de-designation) of ASPAs rather than assessing sites on their individual merits in isolation.

To meet these challenges, and has been noted on numerous occasions elsewhere, a more systematic framework for categorising sites, as called for by Article 3(2) of Annex V, will greatly assist inter-site comparison.  New Zealand’s separate Working Paper on an Environmental Domains analysis for Antarctica may assist in moving towards meeting this requirement.

A review of the Guide to the preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2 (1998)) and the Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas Set Forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (Resolution 1 (2000)) may also assist in meeting some of these challenges.

 Recommendations:

    • The CEP should continue efforts to develop a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’.

    • When considering new or revised Management Plans, the proponent and the CEP should actively consider the extent to which plans complement the protected areas system as a whole.

    • The CEP should consider reviewing and revising the Guide to the preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2 (1998)) and the Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas Set Forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, (Resolution 1 (2000)).

Primary reason for designation

Currently there is no requirement for Management Plans to identify which of the Article 3(2) categories is the primary reason for designation.  In order to make an assessment of how representative of these the protected area network currently is, the Management Plans were studied and the primary reason for designation identified to the best extent possible, given that in many cases it was not explicitly stated.  A clear statement of the primary reason for designation, with reference to the Article 3(2) categories, in each Management Plan would greatly assist management decisions for particular areas as well as overall comparisons to assess whether the types of areas required in Article 3(2) are being adequately protected.  

Graph 1 below shows the number of sites designated for each of the categories set out in Article 3 of Annex V.  The graph shows that important or unusual assemblages of species, is by far the most common, with half of all sites (31) designated primarily for this reason.  Categories B (representative examples of ecosystems) and E (interest to scientific research) are the second and third most prevalent reasons with 10 (16%) and 9 (15%) sites respectively.  All other categories have 5 or fewer sites (<10%) designated.  Notably, there are no sites designated primarily because they are the type locality or only known habitat of any species.  This has previously been commented on by Lewis-Smith (ibid).

This uneven distribution of ASPAs amongst the categories set out in Article 3(2) of Annex V is simply a product of history, in that a series of ad hoc designations have been made over time, rather than a systematic selection of sites within an overarching strategy or framework.  In the absence of such a framework there is no means for assessing whether this distribution is appropriate or not.  It should not be assumed that protected areas should be distributed equally among each category set out in Article 3(2).  No priority or weighting is given to these categories and no strategic assessment has yet been made regarding the extent to which each of these categories should be represented within the protected areas system as a whole.  

In the absence of an holistic approach to management of the protected areas system (along the lines of a strategic environmental geographic framework as provided for in Article 3(2) of Annex V), the distribution of sites can be no more than simply noted.

 Recommendation:

    • The CEP should consider the requirement for each Management Plan to include a clear statement of the primary reason for designation (with reference to Article 3(2) of Annex V).
Graph 1: The number of sites designated against each category set out in Article 3 of Annex V.

Additional reasons for designation

In the majority of cases Management Plans make clear that sites are designated for a variety of reasons and often a site will serve to protect several values.  An assessment taking into account these multiple values was also conducted.  Graph 2 presents this information visually.

When all the values protected by an ASPA are taken into consideration, the broad trends remain similar to the primary reason for designation but the disparities are reduced.  Important or unusual species assemblages remain the prevalent reason for designation (48 sites). Interest to on-going or planned scientific research (31 sites) and representative examples of major terrestrial and marine ecosystems (22 sites) remain the next two most prevalent reasons for designation, but in reversed order.

Outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features (13 sites) overtakes areas or monuments of recognised historic value (12 sites).  The type locality or only known habitat of any species is represented by 7 sites whose Management Plans include either the words “type locality” or “unique” in relation to any species.  Category G, areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value, is represented by 7 sites, only one of which specifically mentions the word “wilderness”.  Ten Management Plans indicate that the sites they refer to are partly protected to ensure they remain viable reference sites and therefore fall under category A - areas kept inviolate from human interference.

On this basis, the existing ASPAs would appear to slightly better address the requirements of Article 3 of Annex V, in that (at least) all categories are represented.
Graph 2: The number of ASPAs designated for each category of Article 3 of Annex V when all protected values are taken into consideration.

Protection of Faunal Types

An analysis of those sites protecting biota was made to examine the representativeness of species within the system. Graph 4 presents the number of ASPAs that protect different faunal types represented in Antarctica.  Typically each site included in this graph protects one or more faunal types.


Graph 4: Number of ASPAs protecting faunal types

Avifauna makes up 72% of the protected fauna, with 21 ASPAs protecting penguins and 38 sites protecting other species of avifauna.  Nine Management Plans mention the presence of terrestrial invertebrates, eight mention seals and four mention maritime communities more generally in their reasons for designation.  Two plans make mention of terrestrial bacterial assemblages.

Graph 5 below shows that 17 Adélie (Pygoscelis adeliae), 9 Gentoo (Pygoscelis papua), 8 Chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarctica), 5 Emperor (Aptenodytes forsteri) and 1 Macaroni (Eudyptes chrysolophus) penguin colonies are protected.

Graph 5: Number of protected penguin colonies by species

In a significant number of cases the protection of penguins is achieved as a by-product of the protection of large concentrations of Antarctic avifauna generally, or of other factors, with only four sites being primarily designated to protect penguin colonies.  Of these, two are designated to protect emperor penguin colonies (ASPAs 101 and 107), one is designated to protect Adélie penguins (ASPA 121) and one is designated to protect both the emperor and Adélie colonies (ASPA 124).

Graph 6 presents the number of other avifauna colonies protected in ASPAs.  As with penguins, ASPAs often include colonies of a variety of petrel and other avian species, rather than protection primarily being given to any single species. Skuas and petrels are the most commonly protected avifauna.

Graph 6: Number of ASPAs including avifauna colonies (excluding penguins), by species 

Protected flora, fungi and bacteria 

Protection of flora communities, fungi and bacteria was among the reasons for designation in 32 of the 62 ASPA Management Plans.  Graph 7 presents the number of sites protecting the various flora, fungi and bacteria of Antarctica. 


Graph 7: Number of ASPAs protecting floral types

As with the avifauna, ASPAs often encompass a variety of communities or vegetation types rather than being designated primarily for a particular species or type.  As a result, sites tend to afford protection to a variety of floral communities.  An exception to this is the designation of an ASPA to protect endocryptolithic communities in the Victoria Valley.

Bryophytes, lichen and algae are protected at the greatest number of sites.  This seems appropriate, as they are the most prevalent forms of vegetation in Antarctica.  Only two species of vascular plant are found in Antarctica and then only with a limited range, hence there are few ASPAs protecting them. 

Consideration should be given to actively seeking sites for under-represented environmental values, in order to ensure a more systematic spread of sites.


Status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plans 

It is first noted that no central, up to date repository of protected area Management Plans exists, which frustrates any holistic review of the Antarctic protected areas system.  The Antarctic Protected Areas Information Archive (on the CEP website) goes someway to addressing this gap but has not been updated since it was endorsed by the CEP in 2002.

Nevertheless, once obtained, the most recent available version of each of the 62 ASPA Management Plans was reviewed against the requirements set out in Annex V, and in particular the provisions of Articles 5 and 6 (regarding the format and five yearly review of Management Plans).  The findings indicate that four Plans are yet to be produced in Annex V format (i.e. containing the sections listed in Article 5(3) of Annex V) and thirteen Plans appear to be overdue their 5 year review as required by Article 6(3).

The Plans that require updating to Annex V format are:

    • ASPA 104, Sabrina Island;
    • ASPA 112, Coppermine Peninsular;
    • ASPA 119, Forlidas and Davis Valley Ponds; and
    • ASPA 127, Haswell Island.

It is considered important that these Management Plans are up-dated to Annex V format at the earliest opportunity.

Those Plans currently overdue a 5 yearly review are:

    • ASPA 101, Taylor Rookery;
    • ASPA 102, Rookery Islands;
    • ASPA 103, Ardery Island and Odbert Island;
    • ASPA 109, Moe Island;
    • ASPA 111, Southern Powell Island;
    • ASPA 129, Rothera Point;
    • ASPA 131, Canada Glacier;
    • ASPA 134, Cierva Point;
    • ASPA 138, Linnaeus Terrace;
    • ASPA 155, Cape Evans;
    • ASPA 157, Backdoor Bay, Cape Royds
    • ASPA 158, Hut Point; and
    • ASPA 159, Cape Adare.

Additionally, there are a number of Plans for which reviews should be initiated during 2005, these are:

    • ASPA 110, Lynch Island;
    • ASPA 115, Lagotellerie Island;
    • ASPA 116, New College Valley;
    • ASPA 125, Fildes Peninsular;
    • ASPA 128, Western Shore of Admiralty Bay;
    • ASPA 136, Clark Peninsular;
    • ASPA 140, Parts of Deception Island;
    • ASPA 141, Yukidori Valley;
    • ASPA 144, Chile Bay;
    • ASPA 145, Port Foster;
    • ASPA 146, South Bay;
    • ASPA 150, Ardley Island; and
    • ASPA 151, Lions Rump.

Whilst it is important that all these sites’ Management Plans are reviewed, possibly the most pressing is that of ASPA 109, Moe Island.

ATCM XIX recommended that the Moe Island Management Plan be regarded as the model for the preparation of new and revised Plans (Resolution 9 (1995)).  It is therefore important that this plan is updated to ensure that it adequately represents the requirements of Annex V.  Alternatively, given that more plans have been produced and best practices with respect to Management Plans have changed over the last ten years, a different plan (or plans) may now be more appropriate as a model. 

It is also noted that the CEP currently has no means for recording the timetable for the five-yearly reviews of Management Plans; a matter that might be addressed through the Protected Areas Information Archive.

 Recommendations:

    • An up to date set of Management Plans and maps (and supporting information) should be maintained on the Protected Areas Information Archive website.

    • The Moe Island plan should be updated and / or the CEP should reassess which Management Plan or Plans may best serve as a model plan.

    • Parties responsible for those plans not yet in Annex V format should revise them accordingly (Resolution 1 (1998) and Resolution 2 (2002) refer).

    • Parties responsible for those plans that have not been reviewed for 5 or more years should undertake reviews and any subsequent plan revisions.

    • The CEP should establish and maintain a register or similar of the status of Management Plans (perhaps through the Protected Areas Information Archive) in order to ensure that Parties are aware of Annex V review requirements.

Conclusions

The Antarctic Specially Protected Area currently lacks a strategic approach to the selection and designation of sites, and the required ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’.  As a result, the variety of Areas do not seem well distributed either geographically or in terms of the categories prescribed in Article 3(2) of Annex V.  These issues, and the recommendations made throughout this report, are by no means new.  Similar reviews of the Antarctic protected areas system have been conducted in the past, and similar recommendations made.  It is therefore strongly suggested that the CEP does not lose sight of the list of recommendations previously included as Annex 5 to the Final Report of CEP III (The Hague, September 2000).

 Recommendation:

    • The CEP should revisit the list of recommendations included as Annex 5 to the Final Report of CEP III (The Hague, September 2000) to identify and progress those issues still to be addressed.


