Biological Prospecting in Antarctica

Biological Prospecting in Antarctica


Introduction

The question of biological prospecting, or “bioprospecting” as it will be referred to throughout this paper, was first discussed at ATCM XXV with the introduction of Working Paper WP-043 by the UK.  At ATCM XXVI, the Committee on Environmental Protection established “Biological Prospecting” as an agenda item (7) and considered two information papers:  the joint UK/Norway Information Paper XXVI ATCM/IP075 on Bioprospecting, presented as background material to assist discussion; and a New Zealand Information Paper XXVI ATCM/IP047 which was a report of an academic workshop on Bioprospecting in Antarctica hosted by “Gateway Antarctica” at the University of Canterbury in 2003.  (Neither of these latter papers necessarily represented the views of the Governments concerned.)

The 2003 report of the Committee notes the following issues as having been raised1:

    • The value of the precautionary ecosystem approach to issues raised by bioprospecting in Antarctic marine areas and the fact that CCAMLR encompassed all living organisms in the Southern Ocean;
    • The view that the current environmental impact of bioprospecting in Antarctica was small and that EIA procedures in Annex I of the Protocol could be used to assess bioprospecting proposals;
    • The view that it was important to differentiate between fundamental scientific research and commercial bioprospecting activities, and that a definition of what is meant by bioprospecting might be useful in further considering the issue;
    • The view that bioprospecting could raise important issues of freedom of scientific information if confidentiality required by commercial developments limited opportunities for scientific publication.
    • The concern that in the marine environment there could also be potential for harvesting of slow growing species containing compounds of pharmaceutical or other commercial interest;
The Committee noted that bioprospecting raised “many complex legal and political issues” and agreed to refer the legal and political issues associated with bioprospecting to a future ATCM for further consideration.

Bioprospecting was, therefore, on the agenda for ATCM XXVII, under Agenda Item 17.  Discussion was limited to the introduction of Information Paper XXVII ATCM/IP-106 on industrial involvement in Antarctic bioprospecting.  Interested Delegations were “urged to introduce working papers at the next ATCM, so that consideration of this important subject can progress.”  Recognising the broad range of issues encompassed by the topic of bioprospecting, New Zealand and Sweden have nonetheless chosen to focus primarily on the question of exchange of scientific data.

Summary of Proposal

This paper proposes that ATCM XXVIII consider adopting a Resolution, which reiterates and reminds Contracting Parties of their obligations under Article III of the Antarctic Treaty, and urges Contracting Parties to bring this to the attention of their research institutes.  Furthermore, it proposes that any additional work undertaken by the ATCM focus on ascertaining what, if any, additional problems specific to bioprospecting exist and whether these require regulation within the Antarctic Treaty System context, or further action by Contracting Parties.  In undertaking any consideration of this, the ATCM should be aware of relevant developments in other international fora, taking into account the unique nature of the Antarctic Treaty System.

Definition of bioprospecting

Before commencing a discussion, it may be useful to consider what is meant by the term “bioprospecting”, as raised by the CEP during its consideration of the issue.  

The information paper IP-075-UK/Norway describes the key stages of bioprospecting as usually including:

1	Organism discovery through collection, screening and description
2	Product development involving isolation, purification, modification and clinical testing
3	Manufacturing
4	Marketing

This clearly indicates that bioprospecting is seen in the paper as extending beyond the discovery stage to the commercial application stage.

Other international writing echoes this approach.  In a paper published in the Melbourne Journal of International Law, “Bioprospecting in Areas outside National Jurisdiction:  Antarctica and the Southern Ocean”2 the authors describe bioprospecting as comprising four phases:

1	Sample Collection
2	Isolation, Characterisation and Culture
3	Screening for Pharmaceutical Activity
4	Development of Product, Patenting, Trials, Sales and Marketing

At the Twenty-seventh Meeting of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research in 2002, SCAR noted that “Bioprospecting occurs at two levels, viz. the study of genetic materials and determination of commercially important genetic codes and the harvesting of in situ organisms for extraction of biochemicals.”

It is suggested that it is not necessary for this meeting to agree on a definition of bioprospecting.  It is probably useful to acknowledge, however, that the term bioprospecting can, for some, extend beyond a narrow definition relating to the search and examination of biological resources that have features that might be of value for commercial development, to take in issues relating to the commercialisation of product resulting from the discovery phase.  Recognising that there is a “continuum” in this context, the discussion below focuses attention on the search and examination phase, and thus on the implications for Article III of the Antarctic Treaty.

Exchange of scientific information 

Article III(1) of the Antarctic Treaty provides that:

“In order to promote international cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica, as provided for in Article II of the present Treaty, the Contracting Parties agree that, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable:
    (a) Information regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica shall be exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations;
    (b) Scientific personnel shall be exchanged in Antarctica between expeditions and stations;
    (c) Scientific observations and results from Antarctic shall be exchanged and made freely available.”

A number of Resolutions have dealt with the exchange of scientific information, including most recently ATCM XXIV:  Resolution 6 (2001): Exchange of Information, which provided a new format for the exchange of information.  As far as Scientific Information was concerned, this was to be in terms of forward plans (details of strategic or multi-year science plans or contact point for printed version; list of planned participations in major, international, collaborative science programs/projects) and science activities in the previous year (list of research projects undertaken in previous year under science discipline (giving location and principal investigator). 

ATCM XXII:  Resolution 4 (1998) recommended that Consultative Parties establish National Antarctic Data Centres and link these to the Antarctic Data Directory System managed by the Joint Committee on Antarctica Data management of SCAR and COMNAP.  It also recommended that Consultative Parties encourage their scientists to provide information in a timely manner to their National Antarctic Data Centres; and that they give priority consideration as to how the requirement for freedom of access to scientific information, in accordance with Article III(1)(c) of the Treaty, is achieved within their national data management systems.

The patenting of bioactive substances, resulting from bioprospecting in Antarctica, is not inconsistent with Article III(1) of the Treaty.  One of the fundamental requirements is that scientific observations and results be exchanged and made freely available.  This requirement is qualified by the words “to the greatest extent feasible and practicable”.  

There will inevitably be a period of confidentiality involved in a patenting process, given the need for an invention to be “new”3 for a patent to be applicable.  The grant of a patent for an invention provides the owner with a right to exclude others from making, using or selling the patented invention during the term of the patent.  In return for the grant of a patent, the owner must make public a complete description of the invention.  Patent specifications are generally published and made available to any interested person 18 months after an application is filed.  The obligation to disclose the invention sufficiently and the following dissemination of information through publicly available patent-databases are central features of the patent system. As a consequence the patent system ensures the publication of results that might otherwise have been kept secret.  A patent does not prevent access by another to the same bioactive substances.   (In New Zealand, for example, patents will not be granted for micro-organisms that occur in nature when found in their natural state.  If, however, these naturally occurring micro-organisms have been isolated, it is possible to make patent claims in relation to them.) 

While delays may possibly occur in the release of information,4 the results of Antarctic bioprospecting research should generally be publicly available.  

Nonetheless, it would perhaps be useful for the ATCM to consider some further work on the effects of patenting as well as other forms of legal protection (in particular trade secrets) with regard to the free exchange of scientific information in this area.  Is there evidence, for example, that the exchange of scientific information is being particularly adversely affected?  If so, are there ways to improve this, without inhibiting scientific research? Available studies in this respect should be taken into account.5

In the meantime, it is proposed that the ATCM adopt a Resolution reaffirming the importance of Article III of the Antarctic Treaty with respect to bioprospecting activities and that the ATCM undertake further work to establish the nature and extent of any problem, both from a scientific point of view (for example by undertaking an analysis of whether the current exchange of scientific data reflects the level of bioprospecting activity in Antarctica) and from a legal and institutional point of view (through further examination as to whether there are any issues relating to bioprospecting and legal protection of scientific observations and results – as regards patent-related issues advice should be requested from WIPO6 as well as OECD7).

Environmental impact 

In the course of the CEP discussion of this issue in 2003, it was noted by several Members that the environmental impacts of bioprospecting were currently small, and would be covered by the environmental impact assessment requirements of the Madrid Protocol.

The Madrid Protocol requires any activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to (inter alia) scientific research programmes8 for which advance notice is required under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty to be subject to the procedures established for prior assessment of the impacts of those activities on the Antarctic environment or on dependent or associated ecosystems.9

It is unlikely that a bioprospecting activity at the sample collection stage will have any more than a minor or transitory impact, although this would depend on the particular circumstances.  It is suggested that the Madrid Protocol, where applicable, provides an adequate regulatory framework to deal with such issues.  New Zealand and Sweden are not aware of any concern that those provisions are not adequate or are not being complied with.  If that were so, it would be open to the ATCM to undertake further work on that aspect of bioprospecting.  

Further issues relating to bioprospecting in Antarctica

A number of papers, including the initial Working Paper presented by the UK, have raised the question of the relationship of the CBD with the Antarctic Treaty System, and questions of access and benefit sharing.

In terms of its jurisdictional scope, the Convention on Biological Diversity applies, in relation to each Contracting Party:

    • In the case of components of biological diversity, in areas within the limits of its national jurisdiction;
    • In the case of processes and activities, regardless of where their effects occur, carried out under its jurisdiction or control, within the area of its national jurisdiction or beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.10
Even setting aside the jurisdictional issues that the above provisions clearly give rise to, the fact remains that the nature of the Antarctic regime does not lend itself to a simple application of the CBD system.  

If Contracting Parties consider further work is warranted on this question, it is suggested that preliminary work should be done on (a) the nature and extent of any problem (b) existing models and their relevance to the particular situation.
Resolution X (2005)

Bioprospecting in Antarctica


The Representatives,


Noting that bioprospecting is occurring in the Antarctic;

Convinced of the benefits of scientific research in the field of bioprospecting for the progress of mankind;

Recalling Article III(1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty, which provides that scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available;

Recalling the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which provides for the regulation of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area to be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems;

Noting ongoing discussions in other international fora on aspects of bioprospecting;  

Reaffirm the importance of Article III(1) of the Antarctic Treaty with regard to bioprospecting, in that, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable:

    (a) Information regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica shall be exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations;
    (b) Scientific personnel shall be exchanged in Antarctica between expeditions and stations;
    (c) Scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available.

Urge Contracting Parties to draw to the attention of their national Antarctic programmes and other research institutes engaged in Antarctic bioprospecting activities the obligations of Article III(1) of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recommend that Contracting Parties identify bioprospecting activities in their annual Exchange of Information reports;

Recommend further that, on the basis of such information, the Contracting Parties, at subsequent Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, monitor the level of bioprospecting activity in Antarctica and consider whether any further action should be taken to manage such activities.


