‘Land-Based’ Tourism in Antarctica
‘Land-Based’ Tourism in Antarctica
New Zealand prompted discussion of land-based tourism in Antarctica at the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica (ATME) which was convened at Tromso from 23 to 25 March 2004 in response to Decision 5 of ATCM XXVI.  In particular in its paper ATME#7 New Zealand commented upon problems around jurisdiction which could be provoked by land-based tourism as well as the possible assertion of property and usufructuary rights by private interests and the risk of disruption to the Antarctic Treaty System that might ensue.
In the discussion at Tromso a number of other concerns about land-based tourism in Antarctica, in particular the development of permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure to promote or support tourism activities, were raised.  It was argued that the designation of Antarctica by the Environmental Protocol as a “natural reserve” and its Environmental Principles including the obligation to protect wilderness values allowed for the drawing of a distinction between tourist and scientific activities.  It was stated that priority should be accorded to science and that this should be reflected in States Parties’ legal processes. Some suggested that only non-scientific activities that had no more than a minor or transitory impact should be permitted in Antarctica.  One Party noted that all the permits it issued were restricted to a finite period and therefore the development of permanent facilities for tourism was not consistent with its law.
The discussion continued in the Working Group on Tourism at ATCM XXVII at Cape Town.  Concerns around the protection of wilderness values and consistency with Antarctica’s designation as a natural reserve as well as jurisdictional issues were reiterated.  The view was expressed that it was important to formulate general provisions before land-based tourism became a major problem.  The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) noted that it had changed its by-laws so that IAATO members subscribed to the principle that their activities would have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.  It was agreed that the issue should be further discussed at ATCM XXVIII at Stockholm and Parties were invited to prepare papers.
Land-based tourism in Antarctica is still in its infancy.  According to IAATO’s summary of seaborne, airborne and land-based tourism for 2003/04 some 27,500 passengers travelled to Antarctica in that period of whom somewhere over 400 were categorised as “land-based”.  
Overall, tourism in Antarctica has expanded rapidly in recent years however.  For example in 1999 just under 10,000 seaborne tourists were recorded; in 2004 the figure was over 24,000.  In addition tourism is diversifying and land-based tourism may well develop quickly.  In particular the increase in popularity of “fly-cruise” operations may stimulate proposals for the development of infrastructure for servicing aircraft and accommodating tourist passengers in the Antarctic Treaty area.
Tourism is now a major activity in the Antarctic Treaty area and lies for the most part outside the direct control of governments.  At the Tromso ATME there was agreement on the need to consider further the question of a regulatory framework for tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica.  In addition, while merit was seen in the existence of a strong industry association to ensure high standards among its members, it was stressed that establishing the regulatory basis for the industry was the primary responsibility of the States Parties.

New Zealand remains concerned about the potential for land-based tourism to challenge the modus vivendi achieved under the Antarctic Treaty by provoking issues regarding jurisdiction in particular.  Article VIII of the Treaty contains a requirement for Parties to consult over any dispute regarding jurisdiction with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable solution.  Fortunately this provision appears seldom to have been invoked principally because those in the Antarctic are for the most part scientific and support personnel under the control and discipline of base commanders or the leaders of official expeditions.  This situation could change quite rapidly with the creation of land-based tourism facilities.  In addition issues around property and usufructuary rights arising from land-based tourism could also severely test the ATS framework.  Nevertheless at this stage New Zealand perceives that the main concerns of the Parties relate to the environmental consequences of land based-tourism.
Proposals for the development of permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure to promote or support tourism, such as hotel accommodation or airline terminals, are likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.  Such proposals would therefore need to be the subject of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE).  Any decision on whether the activity should proceed would need to be based on the CEE as well as “other relevant considerations” (Annex 1, Article 4 of the Protocol refers).
New Zealand considers that the Protocol and its “Environmental Principles” (Article 3) establish a clear hierarchy of values against which proposed activities must be measured.  The Protocol has designated Antarctica as a “natural reserve, devoted to peace and science”.  The Environmental Principles establish that Antarctica’s “intrinsic value”, including its “wilderness and its aesthetic values and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential to understanding the global environment, shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area”.
By designating Antarctica as a “natural reserve” and by mandating the protection of its “wilderness values” it is apparent that the States Parties wished to preserve the continent as a wild, uninhabited area as far as possible.  The creation of permanent or semi-permanent structures to accommodate numbers of people whose travel to Antarctica is primarily for the purposes of pleasure or adventure as opposed to science is very likely to infringe upon these values.
By Resolution 1 (1999) adopted at ATCM XXIII at Lima a set of “Guidelines for EIA in Antarctica” was promulgated.  These guidelines include “recognition of the special status accorded to Antarctica by the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), including its status as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science” and also note that scientific activities have “intrinsic importance as a value to be protected in Antarctica” (paragraph 3.2 refers). 
It is clear from the discussions that have taken place so far at the ATME and ATCM XXVII that many Parties regard the development of permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure to promote or support tourism in Antarctica as inconsistent both with Antarctica’s status as a “natural reserve” and with the protection of its “wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research”.  New Zealand would suggest the adoption of a further instrument that would ensure Antarctica is in principle and in practice off limits to such development would be very timely.  


