WG Legal & Institutional Affairs - Annotated Agenda

5/16/2025 4:28 PM
WG Legal & Institutional Affairs - Annotated Agenda


Agenda Items
Proposed Measures, Decisions and Resolutions
Item 5 - Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: General matters
Intersessional Consultation


WP – 46 Intersessional Consultation Process
Japan, Australia

WP – 56 Proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure (2004)
Australia and others

	Attachment REVISED RULES OF PROCEDURE (2004)


IP – 103 Revised Scoping Paper on intersessional consultation process between the Secretariat and ATCM
Japan	

IP – 120 Corrigendum of Final Report of 27 ATCM (2004) Pages 170-175: Rules of Procedure
Japan
WP 46, presented by Japan and Australia, contains a short account of the developments on the issue of intersessional consultations since the Madrid meeting.  There has been a general consensus a procedure is needed for the Executive Secretary to consult with the Consultative Parties in those cases where the consent of the ATCM is needed and the issue can’t wait until the next ATCM.  An example of such a case would be a situation in which the Executive Secretary would feel that he needed to start a law suit, for which he needs the express permission of the ATCM under Article 5 of Measure 1 (2003).  In WP 46 it is proposed to add a new Rule 45 bis to the Rules of Procedure, and to amend Rule 46 accordingly. 
Decision (x) 2005: Amendments to the Rules of Procedure concerning intersessional consultations
WP 56, presented by Australia, Germany, Japan, the UK and the US, contains a revised version of the amendments in WP 46.  The main change is that, whereas in the version of WP 46 there is a requirement that replies from all Consultative Parties must have been received, in WP 56 the requirement is that “the Executive Secretary shall ensure that all Consultative Parties acknowledge the receipt” of his request. 

Participation of non-party states in the ATCM


WP – 54 PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS: PARTICIPATION OF THIRD COUNTRIES IN ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS
Chile

WP - 55 The Attendance of non-Party States at Consultative Meetings: A proposed change to the Rules of Procedures of the ATCM.
United Kingdom
WP 55 is a reissue of XXVI ATCM/WP 18, in which the United Kingdom proposed for the ATCM to adopt a procedure similar to that of CCAMLR, whereby the ATCM could invite non-party states to attend the ATCM as observers.  In WP 54 Chile proposes a new rule in the RoP which requires non-party states to submit a commitment document with a commitment to the principles and objectives of the Antarctic Treaty System and the intention to abide by the Treaty for 5 years. 
Decision (x) 2005: Amendments to the RoP concerning the participation of third countries
Consultative Status


WP – 57 Consultative Status
United Kingdom
The UK proposes an amendment to Decision 2 (1997) or a new Decision to make clear that one of the requirements for consultative status, namely that the Party concerned has ratified, accepted, approved or acceded to the Environmental Protocol, includes the requirement to have approved all annexes to the Protocol.

Review of recommendations

ATCM XXVIII discussed the review of measures concerning protected areas and “decided to defer adoption of the draft Decision concerning this matter to XXVIII ATCM as the terminology used required further reflection. The Parties would continue the review of Measures so that further consideration could be undertaken at ATCM as to which other Measures could be considered spent, superseded or otherwise obsolete.” (Paragraph 54 of the Final Report).

The status of the recommendations on protected areas has also been discussed in CEP VIII.  According to Paragraph 187 of the CEP Final Report the Committee decided to “establish a register of the status of protected area management plans and review dates on the CEP and ATS websites.”  The ATCM may consider having the Secretariat prepare materials relating to the status and review of protected area measures and possibly organize an intersessional workshop, since experience of the last few years has shown that it is difficult to find the time for this work during the regular ATCM meeting.

Document Guidelines


WP – 43 Guidelines for the Submission and Distribution of Documents to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and the Committee on Environmental Protection
ATS
In recent years, the ATCM has followed the document handling guidelines originally drafted for the CEP.  The guidelines, which assume that the Consultative Parties send documents to each other, are now out of date; they need to be updated to reflect current practice, which is for Parties to upload the documents to the Secretariat website.
Decision (x) 2005:  ATCM and CEP Document Guidelines
Enquiry Procedure Article 18


WP – 53 THE ENQUIRY PROCEDURE OF ARTICLE 18
Chile	 
Chile proposes to set up a Working Group to develop an inquiry procedure for the resolution of disputes concerning the interpretation of Article 3 of the Environment Protocol, as called for by the Madrid Final Act.   WP 53 includes a draft procedure.

Papers to take note of


IP – 111 APÉNDICE DEL PROTOCOLO ARBITRAJE. DESIGNACION DE ARBITROS POR PARTE DE CHILE
Chile
Item 6 - Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Review of the Secretariat's situation
Report 2004/5


WP 44: Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Report 1 September 2004 – 31 March 2005
ATS

	Attachment: Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Financial Report 2004/5

The Financial Report attached to WP 44 covers the seven months between 1 September 2004 and 31 March 2005).  As of now, the ATCM has not yet appointed the external auditor for the Secretariat.  Argentina will submit a proposal for the appointment of the external auditor, so that an audited report on the period September 2004 to March 2006 can be presented to the 29th ATCM.
Decision (x) 2005: Appointment of  the external auditor to the ATS
This period was the starting up period of the secretariat.  In the first few months the Executive Secretary was the only employee, and the secretariat started normal operations from February 2005.  Consequently, the financial report shows a large surplus.  In accordance with the Financial Regulations, the table of contributions shows the surplus per country.  Considering the special situation in the period of provisional application of Measure 1 (2003) and the fact that the Secretariat depends on assessed voluntary contributions the Executive Secretary proposes to keep the surplus in the General Fund to ensure financial stability for the Secretariat.

There is a discrepancy between the Headquarters Agreement and the ATS Staff Regulations with regard to the status of staff of Argentine nationality.  WP 44 contains a discussion of this problem, which carries some risks for the normal functioning of the Secretariat.  If the ATCM agrees, the Executive Secretary will prepare a proposal for the next ATCM to deal with this problem. 

Programme 2005/6 


WP – 45 Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. Draft Work Programme 2005/6
ATS
WP 45 includes the draft programme for the financial year 2005-2006, with the following annexes:
Decision (x) 2005: ATS programme for 2005/6
	Draft Budget for 2005/6, arranged according to appropriations and 	according to outputs
	Forecast Budget for 2006/7
	Contribution Scale 2006
	Salary Scale 2006



Aside from the task of preparing for the 29th ATCM in Edinburgh, many activities of the Secretariat will be related to the setting up of information systems called for by the ATCM, for the exchange of information under Art. VII(5) of the Treaty and related regulations, the compilation and publication on the internet of ATCM documents, and gathering of data on various subjects called for by the ATCM.  WP 45 accordingly proposes that the second information officer foreseen in the 2004/5 Programme will be called the IT Officer and that he or she will be recruited in the course of 2005 to strengthen the capacity of the Secretariat to carry out these tasks.  It is also proposed that instead of the appointment of a full-time translator, the Secretariat will continue to employ free-lance translators as needed to preserve some flexilibity, but that instead an editor will be appointed to work on the publication of the Final Report, the Newsletter, the Handbook and other editorial tasks.

Item 17 - Exchange of Information

WP – 29 Report of the Intersessional Contact Group reviewing the process for Exchange of Information
Australia

IP – 15	Establishment of an Antarctic Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities
Germany, Netherlands

IP – 70	9TH JOINT (SCAR-COMNAP) COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC DATA MANAGEMENT (JCADM-9. BUENOS AIRES, SEPTEMBER 12–16, 2005)
Argentina

IP – 78	DISEÑO E IMPLEMENTACIÓN DE LA PÁGINA WEB DEL INSTITUTO ANTÁRTICO ECUATORIANO (INAE)
Ecuador
ATCM 27 established in Resolution 5 (2004) an ICG to develop a decision on a new Exchange of Information System.  After consultation with Consultative Parties and other parts of the Antarctic Treaty System (COMNAP), a draft decision was developed.  The decision will give the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat a mandate to develop a new Information Exchange System for consideration by the 29th ATCM, in consultation with involved and interested parties.  The new system would involve no change in the legal requirements under the Treaty and the Environment Protocol for the exchange of information, but a change in the method of exchanging information: instead of sending their national reports to each other or publishing them on a website, the Consultative Parties will upload the required data into a central database to be maintained by the Secretariat.  This will not only provide the Parties with an easier and faster way to submit data, but will also provide a better overview of the data for Antarctica as a whole.
Decision (x) 2005: Establishment of an electronic Information Exchange System
Item 18 - Biological Prospecting in Antarctica


WP – 13 Biological Prospecting in Antarctica
New Zealand, Sweden	

IP – 8	Biological Prospecting in Antarctica
Spain

IP – 93	Recent Developments in Biological Prospecting Relevant to Antarctica
UNEP
New Zealand and Sweden have proposed a resolution calling upon the Consultative Parties to draw the attention of their national Antarctic Programmes and research institutes to the requirements in Article III(1) of the Antarctic Treaty concerning the exchange of information on scientific plans and personnel and the free availability of scientific observations and results.  The resolution also recommends that Parties identify bio-prospecting activities in their annual exchange of information.
Resolution (x) 2005: Bioprospecting in Antarctica	 
CEP Item 4(d) – Matters covered by Annex II of the Environment Protocol

IP - 123 “ANNEX II REVIEW”
“Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty”
ATS
The non-paper “Annex II Review” contains 
    • Para. 81 to 84 of the 27th ATCM Final Report, in which Annex II was referred to the 28th ATCM for resolution of the outstanding issues;
    • The text produced by CEP VII with the various alternatives marked
In order to provide a reference for delegates, the present text of Annex II is included in a separate paper.
The Legal and Institutional Working Group may wish to consider how to proceed with these texts.
Measure (x) 2005: Amendments to Annex II of the Environmental Protocol
CEP – Drafting of measures resulting from CEP consideration of new management plans and other matters

WP – 58 Environmental Impact Assessment: Circulation of Information
Resolution (x) 2005: Environmental Impact Assessment: Circulation of Information

WP – 59 Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programs in Antarctica
	Attachment COMNAP Practical Guidelines
Resolution (x) 2005:   Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programs in Antarctica

WP – 61 Fuel Storage and Handling
Resolution (x) 2005:  Fuel Storage and Handling

WP – 62 Updating of Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
Resolution (x) 2005:   Updating of Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica

	Attachment GUIDELINES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT IN ANTARCTICA


WP – 63 Antarctic Protected Area System: Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 4, Deception Island
Measure (x) 2005:   Antarctic Protected Area System: Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 4, Deception Island

	Attachment ASMA Deception Cover


	Attachment ASMA Deception Introduction


	Attachment ASMA Deception ASMA (rev.1)


	Attachment ASMA Deception ASPA 140


	Attachment ASMA Deception ASPA 145


	Attachment ASMA Deception Whalers Bay


	Attachment ASMA Deception Whalers Append


	Attachment ASMA Deception Facilities Code of Conduct


	Attachment ASMA Deception Visitors Code of Conduct


	Attachment ASMA Deception Volcanic Alert


WP – 64 Specially Protected Areas – Extension of Expiry Dates
Measure (x) 2005: Specially Protected Areas – Extension of Expiry Dates

WP – 65 Antarctic Protected Area System Historic Sites and Monuments: Marleen Hut, Mt. Dockery, Everett Range, Northern Victoria Land; Amundsen’s Tent
Measure (x) 2005:  Antarctic Protected Area System Historic Sites and Monuments: Marleen Hut, Mt. Dockery, Everett Range, Northern Victoria Land; Amundsen’s Tent

WP – 66 Measure XXX (2995) Antarctic Protected Area System: Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
Measure (x) 2005: Antarctic Protected Area System: Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas


