SITE GUIDELINES
FOR LAND-BASED TOURIST-VISITED SITES

SITE GUIDELINES FOR LAND-BASED TOURIST-VISITED SITES

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Australia and United States

Introduction and Background

    1. The issue of introducing “Site Guidelines” for those sites in Antarctica visited frequently by tourists has been the subject of ATCM discussion for the past two years.

    2. Whilst there has been general support for the principle of Site Guidelines as a means of managing tourism activities at certain locations, as yet, the ATCM has not reached unanimous agreement on either the content or method for addressing such Guidelines.

    3. There have been two main points of concern raised during and since previous discussions on Site Guidelines.  However, this paper proposes that these could be easily addressed through a slightly modified approach.  Those two concerns were:

    • the means by which Site Guidelines should be addressed; and
    • how small vessels (e.g. yachts) might be dealt with under the “hours ashore” provisions set out in each of the Site Guidelines, under the heading “Seasonal Limitations”.

    4. On the first matter, this paper now proposes a free-standing Resolution for adopting Site Guidelines.  This removes the complexities which arose from an earlier proposal to introduce Site Guidelines through a modification of Recommendation XVIII-1.  The key point here being that Recommendation XVIII-1 is already subject to Article IX procedures (and yet has not yet become effective, i.e. entered into force, even though it was adopted over a decade ago).  A draft of a new free-standing Resolution is appended to this paper (Annex A) for consideration by the ATCM.

    5. On the second issue, there was concern expressed subsequent to the ATCM XXVII that the proposal to limit access to sites might result in some sites being ‘blocked’ by very small vessels. (For example, a yacht landing eight passengers ashore for 6 hours would, under the earlier paper, have blocked the site to a tourist vessel).  Recognising the benefits of including a precautionary limit on the amount of time that sites with high wildlife sensitivity should be visited, as one method by which tourist visits to such sites can be effectively managed, we would propose addressing the issue of small vessels/yachts with a footnote. Such a footnote would provide a derogation in respect of small vessels/yachts, by indicating that the “hours ashore” provisions would relate only to passenger vessels; which would be defined as vessels carrying more than 12 passengers.  We do not believe that excluding small vessels/yachts from the “hours ashore” provisions will in practice, have any significant consequence.

Monitor, Review and further Development of Site Guidelines

    6. Four draft Site Guidelines for Penguin Island (Lat. 62º 06’S; Long. 57º 5’4’W), Aitcho Islands (Lat.62º 24’S; Long. 59º 47’W), Cuverville Island (Lat. 64º 41’S; Long. 62º 38’W) and Jougla Point, Wiencke Island (Lat. 64º 49’S; Long. 63º 30’W) are attached.

    7. These Guidelines have the form and content as proposed initially at ATCM XXVI, though with the inclusion of an explanatory footnote, as described above.

    8. A further seven Site Guidelines have already been drafted.  In all there are currently more than 100 sites in the Antarctic Peninsula alone that are visited, at varying frequencies, by tourist vessels.  In the medium term probably about 20 such sites warrant the preparation of Site Guidelines.

    9. The question remains as to how this work can best be effected to ensure that:

    • the Guidelines reach a wide audience of tour operators and tourists alike;
    • new Guidelines can be added to the scheme relatively easily; and
    • the texts of existing Guidelines already adopted can be amended readily in light of new information, or changing trends at these sites.

    10. It will be imperative that Site Guidelines do not become “fossilised”.  They must be flexible, responsive to change, easily modified by the ATCM and disseminated.  The non-mandatory form of the covering Resolution, and the informal nature of the Guideline texts themselves, will assist greatly in this regard.

    11. Nevertheless, to ensure a flexible approach to Site Guidelines the following procedures are recommended:

    i) attached to the Resolution would be an Appendix setting out a list of tourist-visited sites subject to Site Guidelines, as adopted by the ATCM;

    ii) the texts of the Site Guidelines (as adopted) would be made available in two forms:
    (a) to be placed on a discrete section of the ATCM website; and
    (b) to be published as a compendium – both in hard-copy (probably in loose-leaf format so that new Site Guidelines, and amendments to existing texts, can be added readily) and electronically (e.g. as a CD-ROM).

    iii) the CEP would be asked to review and monitor the effectiveness of Site Guidelines, including considering any proposed modifications, and advise the ATCM accordingly.  If such advice was endorsed by the ATCM then the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat would be mandated to make such changes to the published texts in  (a) and (b) above.  

    12. Such a mechanism should, we believe, enable the texts of Site Guidelines to reach a wide audience.  But it would also inject into the procedures the appropriate degree of informality commensurate with non-mandatory Guidelines.

    13. In addition, the UK would propose the formation of an intersessional contact group of the CEP to examine the drafts of new Site Guidelines, including the further seven that have already been prepared.  Such an ICG should prepare advice in advance of the next Consultative Meeting, with the view to recommending their adoption at ATCM XXIX.



April 2005
Annex A

Resolution on Site Guidelines for land-based sites visited by tourists

The Representatives,

Recognising	the continuing trend in the increase of tourism activities in Antarctica;

Noting	 that certain specific sites provide the principal focus for land-based tourist visits;

Noting further that such sites are, to varying degrees, visited frequently by tour operators thereby increasing the potential for visitor-related pressures at such sites;

Desiring to ensure that the management of tourists within such sites is tailored to their environmental values and sensitivities; and should be achieved through non-mandatory means;

Recognising the need for tour operators and tourists to have practical guidance on how they should conduct their activities within such sites;

Believing that such guidance will enhance the provisions set out in Recommendation XVIII –1 (Guidance for those organising and conducting Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic);

Believing further that the management of tourist sites must be able to respond readily to changing circumstances such as increased tourist pressure, or demonstrable environmental impact;

Recommend that:

    1. a list of sites subject to “Site Guidelines”, adopted by the ATCM, be attached to this Resolution as an Appendix;

    2. the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat be requested to place the texts of such “Site Guidelines”, as adopted by the ATCM, on the website of the Secretariat, as well as publishing, as appropriate, the Guidelines in a hard copy compendium and CD-ROM.  Furthermore, the Secretariat is requested to ensure wide dissemination of such Site Guidelines;

    3. administrative procedures be introduced to ensure that the texts of Site Guidelines can be modified readily to reflect readily changing environmental circumstances;

    4. any proposed amendment to existing Site Guidelines should be discussed by the CEP which should advise the ATCM accordingly.  If such advice is endorsed by the ATCM then the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat would be mandated to make the necessary changes to the texts of Site Guidelines on the website and, as appropriate, in any other forms in which the Guidelines have been published;

    5. Parties urge all those intending to visit such sites that they are fully conversant with, and adhere to, the advice in the relevant Site Guidelines as published by the Secretariat.
Appendix

List of current Site Guidelines:

    1. Penguin Island (Lat. 62º 06’S; Long. 57º 5’4’W);
    2. Aitcho Islands (Lat.62º 24’S; Long. 59º 47’W); 
    3. Cuverville Island (Lat. 64º 41’S; Long. 62º 38’W); and 
    4. Jougla Point, Wiencke Island (Lat. 64º 49’S; Long. 63º 30’W)

