Working Paper to initiate a strategic discussion on future environmental challenges in Antarctica and its dependent and associated ecosystems

Working Paper to initiate a strategic discussion on future environmental challenges in Antarctica and its dependent and associated ecosystems 

Purpose of the paper	
To initiate a strategic discussion on future environmental challenges in Antarctica and its dependent and associated ecosystems, embarking upon earlier results from the CEP, which could open up for a review of responsibilities and work tasks for the CEP. Especially important is evaluation and follow-up procedures for the CEP in accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Such a discussion could initiate a process to elaborate a strategy for a sustainable environmental management of Antarctica and its dependent and associated ecosystems, in accordance with the Protocol.

Background
During CEP VII in Cape Town 2004, Sweden made the observation that the work of the CEP has successfully evolved from its initial formative phase and the CEP now finds itself at a new stage with possibilities for further substantial developments. These possibilities might include finding ways of using the CEP for strategic considerations in a more systematic way to meet existing and future environmental challenges in Antarctica, and synthesizing our knowledge from environmental research in Antarctica and similar topics for best possible Antarctic environmental management (see Final Report CEP VII 2004, Item 3, Operation of the CEP, para 6 and 7). 

The activities, scientists, tourists and commercial industrial in the Antarctic Treaty area seem to have amplified in size, frequency and complexity. The International Polar Year 2007-2008 is expected to lead to a further growing interest for Antarctica with possible new activities on site. This new situation leads to an increased pressure on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. 

The recent establishment of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty has also created a new situation for the future CEP work.

Referring to the background above, Sweden presents this paper after having had discussions and taken advice from other Parties. 

Strategy
According to Article 2 of the Environmental Protocol the States parties commit themselves to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, and the Protocol designates Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science. 

Article 12 of the Environmental Protocol imposes an obligation on the CEP to provide advice to the States parties on a number of issues in connection with the implementation of the Protocol. This include preventive matters, the application and implementation of Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA:s), reporting on the state of the Antarctic environment and the need for scientific research related to the implementation of the Protocol. 

In order for the CEP to carry out its responsibility for such wide-range tasks, it seems useful that the CEP could take a more strategic and holistic view of the developments in Antarctica and dependent and associated ecosystems. We suggest that the CEP considers how such a process could be facilitated. One approach could be to develop both a short term and a long term Strategy for all its activities related to giving environmental advice. 

Developing such a Strategy could catalyse the process of getting a holistic view.  We believe that such an approach also could facilitate planning processes, highlighting the role of environmental issues in decision-making and facilitate research cooperation.

Conclusion
We suggest that an overarching discussion on strategic issues of the CEP work and future environmental challenges is started at CEP VIII in Stockholm, June 2005.

