Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area 127
Haswell Island
(Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery 
on Fast Ice)

Antarctic Protected Area System:

Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area 127
Haswell Island
(Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery 
on Fast Ice)

Introduction

Haswell Island was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 7 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) after a proposal by the USSR. 

Under Resolution 1 (1998), Russia was given responsibility for revising the Management Plan for SSSI 7, Haswell Island (redesignated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 127, Haswell Island, through Resolution V (1996)).

Field visits to the area during the 1999/2000 and 2003/2004 austral summer seasons allowed for the inventory and mapping of the avifauna, and for a more accurate definition of the boundaries of the Emperor penguin breeding colony on fast ice, adjacent to Haswell Island. results were taken into account when defining the ASPA boundaries. Recent studies confirm that the Area, a breeding site for almost all bird species in East Antarctica, is essential for fundamental research and monitoring of human impacts on the environment. studies also reaffirm the originally designated values and their consistency with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection.

The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), with a view to its approval or submission for further review to the Intersessional Contact Group established by the Parties involved.

ANNEX

Antarctic Specially Protected Area 127
Haswell Island 
(Haswell Island and Adjacent Emperor Penguin Rookery on Fast Ice)

Revised Management Plan


1. Description of Values to Be Protected

Haswell Island is a unique breeding site for almost all breeding bird species in East Antarctica including the: Antarctic petrel (Talassoica antarctica), Antarctic fulmar (Fulmarus glacioloides), Cape petrel (Daption capense), snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson’s storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus), south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki), and Adelie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae). The Area supports five species of pinnipeds, including the Ross seal (Ommatophoca rossii) which is a protected species.

East of the island, there is a large colony of Emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) on fast ice.

The originally designated protected area included the Haswell Islands, a large group of islands off Mirny Station, together with their littoral zone and fast ice (when present). VIII ATCM in Oslo (1975) approved its designation as SSSI 7 on the aforementioned grounds after a proposal by the USSR.

The site currently proposed for designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area, Haswell Island, includes Haswell Island (66º31’S, 93º00’E, about 1 km2) and the adjacent section of fast ice in the Davis Sea,  approximately 5 km2 (when present), that supports a colony of Emperor penguins. It is one of few Emperor penguin colonies in the vicinity of a permanent Antarctic station, and therefore it has advantages for the study of the species and its habitat.

Described by biologists during the first Soviet expeditions, the Area was studied in the 1970s and recent years, providing valuable materials for comparative analyses and monitoring of the 40-year long environmental impact of a large Antarctic station.

Map 1 shows the location of the Haswell Islands (except Vkhodnoy Island), Mirny Station, and logistic activity sites. 

2. Aims and Objectives

Research in the ASPA is conducted to provide a better understanding of how natural and anthropogenic environmental changes affect the spatial and temporal distribution of wildlife populations, and how these changes affect the interaction between key species of the Antarctic ecosystem.

Management at Haswell Island aims to:

    • Avoid direct impact of logistic activities on the Area;
    • Regulate access to the Area;
    • Avoid anthropogenic changes in the structure and in composition and abundance of flora and fauna;
    • Allow scientific research, provided it is for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere; 
    • Facilitate scientific research on the environment in the context of monitoring and assessment of human impact on populations.

3. Management Activities 

The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:

    • When the vessel is approaching the station and upon arrival at the station, the station staff and guests shall be informed of the existence and location of the Area and responsibility for unauthorized access to the Area.
    • Copies of the Management Plan and maps of the Area showing its location and bypass routes shall be available at all units engaged in logistic and scientific activities on the Haswell Islands.
    • A sign showing directions of the Area boundaries, with clear statements of entry restrictions (“No trespassing! Antarctic Specially Protected Area”), shall be placed at the crossing point of lines Gorev Island – Fulmar Island and Cape Mabus – eastern extremity of Haswell Island to help avoid inadvertent entry into the Area following the formation of fast ice which is safe for pedestrian and vehicle traffic. Information signs shall be installed at the top of Cape Mabus slope, and at station activity sites in the direct vicinity of the Area.
    • Markers and signs erected within the Area shall be secured, maintained in good condition, and have no impact on the environment.
    • Overflight of the Area shall be allowed only in case of emergency and shall be conducted as stipulated in Table 5.

The Management Plan shall be revised periodically to ensure that the values of the Antarctic Specially Protected Area are adequately protected. Any activity in the Area shall be preceded by the environmental impact assessment.

4. Period of Designation 

Designated for an indefinite period.

5. Description of the Area
5.1. Geographic coordinates and boundary markers 

The Area occupies a territory inside polygon ABCDEF (66º 31’10” S, 92º 59’20” E; 66º 31’10” S, 93º 03’ E; 66º 32’30” S, 93º 03’ E; 66º 32’30” S, 93º 01’E; 66º 31’45” S, 93º 01’E; 66º 31’45” S, 92º 59’20’’ E) (Map 2). The marked section of fast ice in the Davis Sea encompasses the most likely routes taken by Emperor penguins during the breeding season.

The Area boundaries on fast ice closer to the station can be broadly (visually) identified on site as directions DC (Vkhodnoy Island – Fulmar Island) and DE (Cape Mabus – eastern extremity of Haswell Island). A sign showing the directions (directions to? locations of? of the Area boundaries, with clear statements of entry restrictions (“No trespassing! Antarctic Specially Protected Area”), shall be placed in point D. Information signs showing distance to the Area boundary shall be installed at station activity sites in the direct vicinity of the Area (at the top of Cape Mabus slope, and on Buromsky, Zykov, Fulmar, and Tokarev Islands).

It is highly unlikely that the outlying marine boundaries of the Area will be crossed inadvertently, as there is presently no activity this far away from the station. These boundaries have no visual features and shall be identified by the map.

There are no paths or roads within the Area.

5.2. Natural features

The Area comprises Haswell Island (the largest island in the archipelago), its littoral zone, and the adjacent section of fast ice in the Davis Sea. Russia’s Mirny Observatory on Mirny Peninsula located in coastal nunataks south of the ASPA has been operational since 1956.

For the larger part of the year, the sea within the Area is covered with fast ice, whose width reaches 30-40 km by the end of winter. Fast ice breaks up between December 17 and March 9 (February 3, on average) and freezes between March 18 and May 5 (April 6, on average). The probability that the ice-free period off Mirny will last more than 1 month is 85%, more than 2 months 45%, and more than 3 months 25%. The Area is always full of icebergs frozen in the ice. In summer, when fast ice disappears, icebergs drift westward along the coast. Seawater temperature is always below zero. The tide has an irregular daily pattern.

Coastal waters support a rich benthic fauna. Fish fauna in the Area is dominated by various icefish species, while Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus mawsoni) and Antarctic silverfish (Pleuragramma antarcticum) are less abundant. An ample forage base and the availability of suitable nesting sites create a favorable environment for numerous seabirds. According to records, there are 12 bird species in the vicinity of Mirny (Table 1).

The coastal fauna is mainly represented by pinnipeds, among which Weddell seals (Leptonychotes  weddelli) are most abundant (). Other Antarctic seal species can be seen occasionally in very small numbers. Minke whales (Balaenoptera acutorostrata) and killer whales (Orcinus orca) have frequently been observed near Mirny.

Table 1: The avifauna of the Haswell Islands (ASPA 127).

1
Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri)
B, M
2
Adelie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae )
B, M
3
Chinstrap penguin (Pygoscelis antarctica)
V
4
Macaroni penguin (Eudyptes chrysolophus)
V
5
Antarctic fulmar (Fulmarus glacioloides)
B
6
Antarctic petrel (Talassoica antarctica)
B
7
Cape petrel (Daption capense)
B
8
Snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea)
B
9
Wilson’s storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus)
B
10
Pomarine skua (Stercorarius pomarinus)
V
11
Antarctic skua (Catharacta maccormicki)
B
12
Kelp gull (Larus dominicanus)
V
Notes: B – breeding species; M – molting sites in the vicinity of the station; V – visitant species.

At present, seabirds nest on six out of seventeen archipelago islands. Seven species breed directly on the islands, and one species – the Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) – on fast ice. A few visitant species have also been observed in the Area.

Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri)

The Emperor penguin colony of the Haswell Islands is located on fast ice in the Davis Sea 2 to 3 km north-east of the Mirny Observatory and usually within 1 km of Haswell Island. The colony was discovered and described by the Western Party of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition on November 25, 1912. However, a detailed study of the colony was initiated only after the establishment of the Mirny Observatory. Since its foundation in 1956, the Observatory has been conducting unsystematic monitoring of the size of the breeding population. The first round-the-year observation of the colony was initiated by E.S. Korotkevich in 1956 (Korotkevich, 1958), continued until 1962  (Makushok, 1959; Korotkevich, 1960; Prior, 1968), and was then resumed by V.M. Kamenev in the late 1960s-early 1970s (Kamenev, 1977). After a long break, observations of the avifauna continued at the observatory in 1999-2004.

Table 2 shows a schedule of various phenological events in the Emperor penguin colony of the Haswell Islands.

Table 2: Dates of phenological events in the Emperor penguin colony, Haswell Islands.

Penguins arrive at the colony site
Last 10 days in March
Peak of the mating period
Late April – first ten days in May
Commencement of egg laying
First 5 days in May
Commencement of hatching
July 5–15
Chicks start leaving brood pouches
Last 10 days in August
Chicks start getting together in creches
First 10 days in September
Chicks start molting
Late October – early November
Adult birds start molting
Last 10 days in November – first 5 days in December
The colony starts disintegrating
Last 10 days in November – mid-December
Birds abandon the colony site
Last 5 days in December – first 10 days in January

The most recent data on the colony status were obtained in 20032004 when the colony consisted of 3 subcolonies located within 500-1,700 m of each other and separated by icebergs (Map 3). Single adult birds and those with eggs and chicks migrated between the subcolonies.

The estimated local population in the 20032004 austral summer season was approximately 9,000 birds during the egg laying period, the highest figure obtained from censusing over the last decade (5,700-7,000 adult birds). According to estimates and censuses conducted in 1956–1966, the total population varied from 14,000 to 20,000 birds (Korotkevich, 1958, Makushok, 1959, Prior, 1964, Kamenev, 1977)

Available data on changes in population size indicate that the Haswell Island colony is characterized by a negative long-term trend: the population decreased by about 50% in 1950-2000 (from 14,000-20,000 to 7,000-9,000 birds). However, despite slight fluctuations, the size of the colony has stabilized over the last decade. Systematic monitoring studies should continue on the Haswell Islands to establish the causes of changes in the breeding population of Emperor penguins.

Table 3: Factors affecting the population of Emperor penguins on the Haswell Islands and relevant mitigation actions.


Actions to mitigate the impact of anthropogenic factors

Anthropogenic factors
Disturbance by visitors
Visits to the colony should be strictly regulated

Collection of eggs
The collection of live eggs is currently prohibited

Disturbance by flights
Flight route and height should be selected in accordance with this Management Plan
Natural factors
Climate change

Seasonal changes in ice conditions (an early break-up of fast ice increases chick mortality in the current season)

Data on changes in the size of other populations are less complete (Table 4). Long-term changes may show a negative trend, however, systematic monitoring studies are necessary to draw well-grounded conclusions.

Table 4: Changes in the size of bird populations on the Haswell Islands. Trend: 0  = uncertain, -1 = negative, ? = supposed.

Species
1960s-1970s 
19992001 
Trend
Adelie penguin
41,000 adult birds
15-15,850 nests
0 ?
Pomarine skua
9,500-10,000 adult birds
2,300 occupied nests with eggs
-1 ?
Antarctic petrel
?
150-200 occupied nests with eggs
?
Cape petrel
750 adult birds
150 occupied nests with eggs
-1 ?
Snow petrel
600-700 adult birds
60-75 occupied nests
-1
Wilson’s storm petrel
400-500 adult birds
No less than 30 occupied nests
-1
Antarctic skua
24 pairs
19 pairs
0

5.3. Definition of seasons; restricted and prohibited zones within the Area

Entry into any part of the Area is allowed only for holders of a special Permit. 

Activity in the Area shall be subject to special restrictions during the bird breeding season:
    • From mid-April to December in the vicinity of the Emperor penguin colony; and
    • From October to March in the vicinity of the nesting sites on Haswell Island.
Visitors other than Permit holders shall not approach the colonies or disturb birds during the breeding season.

The location of the breeding colonies is shown in Map 4. Emperor penguins, which are especially sensitive to disturbance, shall also be protected outside the designated breeding site as the breeding site may vary in location.

5.4. Structures within the Area 

A beacon – a metal pole whose base is secured by stones – is located on Haswell Island. There are no other structures on the island.

A heated shack containing an emergency food supply may be located on one of the neighboring islands (but not on Haswell Island).

6. Maps

Map 1: Location of the Haswell Islands, Mirny Station, and logistic activity sites. 

Map 2: Boundaries of Antarctic Specially Protected Area 127, Haswell Island.

Map 3: Emperor penguin distribution in the Haswell Island breeding colony during the 20032004 season (I, II, III – location and movement of the subcolonies).

Map 4: Location of breeding seabird colonies.

Map 5: Topographic map of Haswell Island.

7. Permit Conditions
7.1. Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited unless in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate national authority. Issue of a Permit to enter the Area must satisfy the following conditions:
    • A Permit is issued only for purposes specified in para. 2 of the Management Plan;
    • Permits shall be issued for a stated period;
    • The actions permitted will not jeopardize the ecosystems of the Area or interfere with existing scientific research;
    • Visits to the Area under a Permit shall be allowed to organized groups accompanied by a responsible person. Respective information shall be entered in the Visit Log Book specifying the date and purpose of the visit and the number of visitors; and
    • A visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit.

Permits shall be issued for scientific research, monitoring studies, or inspections that do not require collection of biological materials or fauna samples, or that require collecting in small quantities. A Permit for a visit to or stay in the Area shall specify the scope of tasks to be implemented, the implementation period, and the maximum number of staff allowed to visit the Area.

7.2. Access to and movement within the Area

Vehicles other than skidoos are prohibited within the Area.

When approaching or moving within the Area, care shall be taken to avoid any disturbance to birds and seals, especially during the breeding season. Any deterioration of the conditions of or approaches to the bird nesting sites, or seal haulouts shall be prohibited at all times.

Haswell Island. The western or south-western slopes are most suitable for access (Map 5). Movement shall only be on foot.

Fast ice section. During the formation of fast ice which provides pedestrian and vehicle safety, entry into the section shall be at any suitable place from the Mirny Observatory. The use of any vehicles in the Area shall be prohibited during the nest sitting season (May-July). When using skidoos, visitors shall not approach the Emperor penguin colony closer than 500 m (irrespective of its location).

Overflight of the Area is prohibited during the most sensitive period of the Emperor penguin breeding cycle, from April 15 to August 31.

During the remainder of the year, overflight of the Area shall be conducted according to the following restrictions (Table 5).

Table 5: Minimum overflight heights within the Area according to aircraft type. 


Aircraft type
Number of engines
Minimum height above ground


Feet
Meters
Helicopter
1
2,460
750
Helicopter
2
3,300
1,000
Fixed-wing
1 or 2
2,460
750
Fixed-wing
4
3,300
1,000


7.3. Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place

    • Research on avifauna and other environmental studies that cannot be conducted elsewhere; and
    • Management activities, including monitoring.

7.4. Installation, modification, or removal of structures

Structures or scientific equipment may be installed in the Area only for compelling scientific or management purposes approved by an appropriate authority pursuant to the effective regulations.

7.5. Location of field camps

Camping shall be allowed only for safety reasons, and every precaution shall be taken to avoid damage to the local ecosystem and disturbance to the local fauna.

7.6. Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 

No living organisms or chemicals other than chemicals required for scientific purposes specified in the Permit shall be introduced into the Area (chemicals introduced for scientific purposes shall be removed from the Area before the Permit expiry). 

Fuel is not to be stored in the Area unless it is required for essential needs relating to the permitted activity. Anything introduced shall be for a stated period only, handled so that the risk to the ecosystem is minimized, and removed at the conclusion of the stated period. No permanent storage facilities shall be established in the Area.

7.7. or harmful interference with native flora or fauna

or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except  Permit. In the case the activity is determined to have less than a minor or transitory impact, it shall be conducted in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, to be used as a minimum standard.

7.8. Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall only be for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit. 

However, human waste may be removed from the Area, and dead or pathological samples of fauna and flora may be removed for laboratory analysis.

7.9. Disposal of waste

All waste shall be removed from the Area.

7.10. Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan continue to be met

Permits to enter the Area may be granted to carry out scientific observation, monitoring, and site inspection activities, which may involve limited collection of fauna samples, eggs, and other biological materials for scientific purposes. To help maintain the environmental and scientific values of the Area, visitors shall take every precaution against the introduction of alien materials and organisms.

Any long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked on a map and on site.

Visits to the Area shall be limited to scientific and management purposes.

7.10. Requirements for reports 

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each Permit issued submits to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities, and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organizing the scientific use of the Area.

References

The Final Report of the Twenty Second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Tromse, Norway, May 25 – June 5, 1998). [Oslo, Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs], P. – 93 – 130.  (in Russian).

Averintsev, V.G. Seasonal variations of sublittoral polychaetes in the Davis Sea // Marine Fauna Studies.-L.,1982.-Vol.. 28(36).-P.4-70. (in Russian)

Averintsev, V.G. Ecology of sublittoral polychaetes in the Davis Sea // Animal Morphology, Systematics and Evolution.-L.,1978.-P.41-42. (in Russian)

Androsova, E.I.. Antarctic and Subantarctic bryozoans // Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter.-1973.-No. 87.-P.65-69. (in Russian)

Budylenko, G.A., and Pervushin, A.S. The migration of finwhales, sei whales and Minke whales in the Southern Hemisphere // Marine Mammals: Proceedings of VI All-Union Meeting.-Kiev, 1975.-Part.1.-P.57-59. (in Russian)

Bushueva, I.V. Some peculiarities of off-shore amphipod (Gammaridea)  distribution in the Davis Sea (East Antarctica) // Hydrobiology and Biogeography of Cold and Moderate World Ocean Waters in the Off-shore Zone: Report Abstracts.-L.,1974.-P.48-49. (in Russian)

Bushueva, I.V. Some peculiarities of Paramola walkeri ecology in the Davis Sea (East Antarctica) // Off-shore Biology: Abstracts of Reports Presented at the All-Union Conference. - Vladivostok,1975.-P.21-22. (in Russian)

Bushueva, I.V. A new Acanthonotozommella species in the Davis Sea (East Antarctica) // Zool. Zhurn.-1978.-Vol.57, issue 3.-P.450-453. (in Russian)

Bushueva, I.V. A new Pseudharpinia (Amphipoda) species in the Davis Sea (Antarctica) // Zool. Zhurn.-1982.-Vol.61, issue.8.-P.1262-1265.

Gavrilo, M.V., Chupin, I.I., Mizin, Yu.A., and Chernov A.S. 2002. Study of the Biological Diversity of Antarctic Seabirds and Mammals. – Report on Antarctic Studies and Research under the World Ocean Federal Targeted Program. SPb: AARI (unpublished). (in Russian)

Gruzov, E.N. Echinoderms in coastal biocenoses of the Davis Sea (Antarctica) // Systematics, Evolution, Biology, and Distribution of Modern and Extinct Echinoderms.-L.,1977.-P.21-23. (in Russian)

Doroshenko, N.V. The distribution of Minke whales (Balaenoptera acutorostrata Lac) in the Southern Hemisphere // V All-Union Meeting on Marine Mammal Research: Report Abstracts. - Makhachkala, 1972.-Part1.-P.181-185. (in Russian)

Egorova, E.N. Biogeographic composition and possible development of gastropods and bivalves in the Davis Sea, // Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter.-1972.-No. 83.-P.70-76. (in Russian)

Egorova, E.N. Zoogeographic composition of the mollusk fauna in the Davis Sea (East Antarctica) // Mollusks. Major Results of the Study: VI All-Union Mollusk Research Meeting.- L.,1979.-Vol.6.-P..78-79. (in Russian)

Egorova, E.N. Mollusks of the Davis Sea (East Antarctica).- L.:Nauka,  1982.-144 pp. - (Marine Fauna Research; No. 26(34). (in Russian)

Kamenev, V.M. Adaptive peculiarities of the reproduction cycle of some Antarctic birds. -  Body Adaptation to Far North Conditions: Abstracts of Reports Presented at the All-Union Meeting. Tallinn, 1984. P. 72-76. (in Russian)

Kamenev, V.M. Antarctic petrels of Haswell Island // Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter.-1979.-No. 99.-P.78-84. (in Russian)

Kamenev, V.M. Protected Antarctica. – Lecturer’s Aid. L.: Znanie RSFSR, 1986. P. 1-17. (in Russian)

Kamenev, V.M. The Antarctic fulmar (Fulmarus glacialoides) of the Haswell Islands // Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter. - 1978. No. 98. P. 76-82. (in Russian)

Kamenev, V.M. Ecology of Emperor penguins of the Haswell Islands. – The Adaptation of Penguins. M., 1977. P. 141-156. (in Russian)

Kamenev, V.M. Ecology of Cape and snow petrels. - Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter. 1988. No. 110. P. 117-129.  (in Russian)

Kamenev, V.M. Ecology of Wilson’s storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus Kuhl) on the Haswell Islands // Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter. 1977. No. 94. P. 49-57. (in Russian)

Kamenev, V.M. Ecology of Adelie penguins of the Haswell Islands // Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter. 1971. No. 82. P. 67-71. (in Russian)

Korotkevish, E.P. 1959 The bids of East Antarctica. – Arctic and Antarctic Issues. – No. 1. (in Russian)

Korotkevish, E.P. 1960 By radio from Antarctica. — Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter. - № 20-24. (in Russian)

Krylov, V.I., Medvedev, L.P. The distribution of the Ceteans in the Atlantic and South Oceans // Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter.-1971.-No. 82.-P.64-66. (in Russian)

Makushok, V.M. 1959 Biological takings and observations at the Mirny Observatory in 1958. — Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter. – No. 6. (in Russian)

Mizin, Yu.V. 2004 Report on the Ecological and Environmental Research Program Conducted by RAE 48 at the Mirny Observatory – SPb: AARI, unpublished. (in Russian)

Minichev, Yu.R. Opisthobranchia (Gastropoda, Opisthobranchia) of the Davis Sea // Marine Fauna Research.-L.,1972.-Vol.11(19).-P.358-382. (in Russian)

Popov, L.A., Studenetskaya, I.R. Ice-based Antarctic seals // The Use of the World Ocean Resources for Fishery Needs. An overview by the Central Research Institute of Fishery Information and Technical Studies. Series. 1.- M., 1971. Issue 5.-P.3-42. (in Russian)

Prior, M.E. 1964 Observations of Emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri Gray) in the Mirny area in 1962. Soviet Antarctic Expedition Newsletter. – No. 47. (in Russian)

Pushkin, A.F. Some ecological and zoogeographic peculiarities of the Pantopoda fauna in the Davis Sea // Hydrobiology and Biogeography of Cold and Moderate World Ocean Waters in the Off-shore Zone: Report Abstracts.- L.,1974.-P.43-45. (in Russian)

Stepaniants, R.D. Coastal hydrozoans of the Davis Sea (materials of the 11th Soviet Antarctic Expedition, 1965/66) // Marine Fauna Research.- L.,1972.-Vol.11(19).-P.56-79. (in Russian)

Chernov, A., Mizin, Yu. 2001 Avifauna observations at Mirny Station during RAE 44 (1999-2000) — The State of the Antarctic Environment as Shown by Real-time Data from Russia’s Antarctic Stations. — SPb: AARI. (in Russian)

Splettstoesser J.F., Maria Gavrilo, Carmen Field, Conrad Field, Peter Harrison, M. Messicl, P. Oxford, F. Todd 2000 Notes on Antarctic wildlife: Ross seals Ommatophoca rossii and Emperor penguins Aptenodytes forsteri. New Zealand Journal of Zoology, 27: 137-142.
Map 1: Location of the Haswell Islands, Mirny Station, and logistic activity sites. 










soil, rocks
glacier
lakes
station
cemetry
helicopter pad
vehicle debarkation site

Map 2: Boundaries of Antarctic Specially Protected Area 127, Haswell Island.


Map 3: Emperor penguin distribution in the Haswell Island breeding colony during the 20032004 season (I, II, III – location and movement of the subcolonies).

Map 4: Location of breeding seabird colonies.


Map 5: Topographic map of Haswell Island. 



