REVISION OF MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 150 (Ardley Island)
MANAGEMENT PLAN
Antarctic Specially Protected Area N° 150
ARDLEY ISLAND,  KING GEORGE ISLAND, 
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1. Description of Values to be Protected
Ardley Island (62°13' S; 58°56' W) was originally designated as Site of Special Interest (SSSI) Nº 33 through Recommendation XVI-2 (1991), pursuant to a proposal by Chile, due to its diverse community of birds and terrestrial plants. During the XXIV ATCM, through the Measure 3, the expiry date of protection was extended. The Area has been protected for intensive research, but besides scientific stations, it also includes a visitor zone.

The island was designated as a Protected Area because it supports a diverse assemblage of bird species that breed in it. Its beaches are also visited by seals, that use the Area to rest and moult. Ardley Island also possesses a developed and outstanding flora, with several species of lichens, mosses and vascular plants. Both the flora and fauna are extremely sensitive to human disturbance.

Due to its proximity to Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, Ardley Island is an attractive Area for tourist activities. During the last years, tourism increased from a few visitors to approximately a hundred visitors per season.

2. Aims and Objectives
The Management Plan of ASPA Nº 150 aims to:
    • Preserve the community of birds and the terrestrial ecosystem.
    • Avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance in the Area.
    • Allow scientific research on marine Antarctic birds, on the ecosystem and physical environment associated with the values for which the Area is protected, without any interferences.
    • Allow other scientific research in the Area provided it does not compromise the values for which the Area is protected. 
    • Minimize the possibilities of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area. 
    • Allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the Management Plan.

3. Management Activities
The following management activities will be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
    • Copies of this Management Plan, including maps of the Area, shall be made available at the following locations:
    1. Julio Escudero Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    2. Eduardo Frei Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    3. Bellingshausen Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    4. Great Wall Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    5. King Seyong Station, King George Island.
    6. Artigas Station, King George Island.
    7. Jubany Station, King George Island.
    • The staff to be posted at Ardley Island will be specifically trained on all matters concerning this Management Plan.
    • Markers, signs, buildings or any other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition.
    • The human activities will only take place on vegetation-free areas, taking a wide berth from the fauna, except when the scientific projects specifically mention otherwise and provided the correspondent harmful interference permits have been issued.
    • Visitors shall circulate just in the visitor zone and under the supervision of the authorized scientific staff.
    • Visits shall be made as necessary to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designed and to ensure management and the maintenance measures are adequate.

4. Period of Designation
Designated for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and Photographs
Three maps are enclosed to this Management Plan as Annexes:

Map 1. Ardley Island in its relation to the South Shetland Islands. Prepared by the Instituto Geográfico Militar, IGM, Chile.
Map 2. Ardley Island. The map shows the location of buildings and delineates the Visitor Zone. 
Map 3. Ardley Island map with the recommended foot paths for scientific and visitor activities. 

6. Description of the Area 
i. Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Ardley Island (62º13’ S; 58º54’ W) is located in the southwest coast of King George Island, about 500 m east of the coast of Fildes Peninsula, Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay). It is about 1 km southeast of the Bellingshausen Station (Russian Confederation) and of the Escudero and Frei Stations (Chile), and about 1 km east of the Great Wall Station (China).

The island is about 2.0 km long and 1.5 km at its widest, and rises to about 60 m altitude. Geomorphological and geological features show that the Area comprises mainly Tertiary andesitic-basaltic lavas and tuffs, and there are some raised beach terraces. It is snow and ice free in summer. Small freshwater ponds remain between November and February in the island. The Protected Area comprises the entire island and its associated littoral zone, including the isthmus between the island and Fildes Peninsula, in the west part of the island.
BREEDING BIRDS
The seabird community of Ardley Island is diverse and of exceptional biological interest. Its diversity encompasses several breeding species. Of particular importance are the breeding colonies of Gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua), whose average number of breeding pairs is about 4,700. This is the most important concentration point of this species within the South Shetland Islands and probably in the Antarctic. There are also about 500 pairs of breeding Adélie penguins (P. adeliae) and a very small number of Chinstrap penguins (P. antarctica). 

Other breeding species of particular importance are Southern Giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), Brown and South Polar skuas (Catharacta antarctica lonnbergi and C. maccormicki), Kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), Black-bellied storm petrels (Fregetta tropica), Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata) and Cape petrels (Daption capense). 

Detailed ornithological and botanical research has been undertaken on Ardley Island for many years mainly by Chilean and German scientists, with brief studies made also by scientists from Russia, Korea and China. Results of census and breeding studies on pygoscelid penguins have revealed large fluctuations between seasons, not only in numbers but also in the breeding success on the three species.

German studies indicate that the Giant petrel breeding population has declined in the last twenty years. There is a strong evidence that numerical fluctuations of these particular populations are a direct response to disturbances produced by large numbers of visitors, helicopter flights and station constructions. Disturbed pairs have moved their breeding sites to less influenced areas. In the case of the Skuas breeding population, it reflects anthropogenic and natural influences in the recorded fluctuations caused by variable food availability and weather conditions. The effects of these impacts will continue to be monitored as an integral part of the long-term ornithological research being undertaken at this site.
MARINE MAMMALS
Seals are usual visitors of Ardley Island. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) breed near the Area between October and November, in the sea ice in Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay). During December and March, some Elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), Weddell seals, Leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) and Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) visit the Area to rest, to moult or hunt. 

In summer time, from the beaches, is also possible to record some Humpback and Minke whales in the waters of Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay).
VEGETATION
The island possesses some of the best-developed and most extensive plant communities in the South Shetland Islands, notably the climax fell field ecosystem dominated by macro lichens as Himantormia lugubris and several species of the Gender Usnea. Such vegetation is extremely sensitive to human intervention and is very easily damaged. 

The presence of Antarctic grass Deschampsia antarctica reveals a significant increase in size and number of the recorded colonies. It is suggested that this population increases as a response to warmer and longer growing seasons, caused by regional warming.  


ii. Restricted and managed zones within the Area
There is a visitor zone in Ardley Island. Visitors shall be restricted to the delimited area and shall be guided for the authorized staff, according to the terms of Permit extended for each visit. Access to bird breeding areas should be restricted to scientific activities. 

iii. Structures within and near the Area
There is a semi-permanent summer-only research refuge, with buildings in two places of the Area, four Chilean structures (three containers of 2.4 x 6 m, that operates as laboratories, rest room and engine room; one building of 3.7 x 7.5 m, where the scientific staff live) in the tourist zone, and a small hut (3.7 x 6 m) in the east part of the island, close to the penguins colonies. There are also two Argentinean buildings in the visitor zone. A Chilean radio beacon facilitates navigation in the visitor zone, looking towards Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay), located beyond an Argentinean lighthouse. 

All the described structures remain in the Area year-round. 

iv. Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
There are four Protected Areas closer to Ardley Island, in Nelson and King George Islands. The nearest area is Fildes Peninsula, ASPA Nº 125, which lies about 2.0 km west and north-northwest. The ASPA Nº 128, West shore of Admiralty Bay, is located about 25.3 km west-northwest. Also in King George Island, the ASPA Nº 132, Potter Peninsula, is approximately 14.5 km. Finally, Harmony Point (ASPA Nº 133) is located around 18.6 km west-southwest from Ardley Island. 

7. Permit Conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate National Authority. Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
    • It is issued only for scientific purposes or for essential management purposes, consistent with plan objectives, such as inspection, maintenance or review activities which must be undertaken in accordance with the objectives of the Management Plan and cannot be served elsewhere.
    • The actions permitted may not jeopardize the scientific and ecological values of the Area.
    • Any management activity will be developed in support of the objectives of the Management Plan.
    • The actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan.
    •  During the stated period, the permit, or an authorized copy, shall be carried at all times by the scientific staff present within the Area.
    • Before any visit is made to the Area, visitors shall request a permit from the authorized scientific staff.
    • At the end of the period, a report shall be supplied to the appropriate National Authority mentioned in the permit, including any activities undertaken that were not explicitly mentioned in the authorized Permit.

i. Access to and movement within the Area 
Any access to the Area will be possible only with a permit delivered for the appropriate National Authority. Access to Ardley Island shall be by small boat or on foot. The movements within the Area shall be carried on foot.

Boat access

The northern coast of Ardley Island is the appropriate sector to land. It is coincident with the visitor zone. The western part of it should be the preferable place for landing and boats should reach the beach in the proximity of the buildings, in the central part of the island or in the eastern part. It is not allowed that boat crew or other people in boats move on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of the landing and sites contiguous to refuges, unless they carry with them an authorized Permit.

On foot

From Fildes Peninsula, it is possible to reach the island on foot, crossing the isthmus during low tide periods. Pedestrian activity should be restricted whenever possible to areas with minimal vegetation, and should avoid any seabird breeding sites, except as required for approved research studies. Tourists and non-scientific station and ship personnel should not move on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of their landing site unless specifically authorised by Permit in order to minimize disturbance of biota. The visitor activity may only be developed with the assistance of an appropriate and authorized guide.

Vehicle access

The use of any type of vehicle, including amphibious craft on land, is not allowed in the Protected Area. 

Overflights

Due to the widespread presence of seabird over the island, landing by aircraft is prohibited within the Area and any necessary overflight shall be conducted according to the Resolution 2 (2004), Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica: 

        ◦ Flights over penguin, albatross and other bird colonies are not to be over flown below 2000ft (~ 610 m) above ground level (AGL), except when operationally necessary for scientific purposes, and 

        ◦ Maintain a vertical separation distance of 2000 ft (~ 610 m) AGL and a horizontal separation of 1/4 nautical mile (~ 460 m) from the coastline, where possible.

Aircraft landing at and taking off from Teniente Marsh airfield should avoid overflying the island. 



ii. Activities that are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time or place
    • Scientific research that will not jeopardize the ecosystem or scientific values of the Area, or somehow diminish the value of the Area as a reference site.
    • Essential management activities, including monitoring.
    • Visitor activities duly restricted to the Visitor Zone carried on by groups limited to a maximum of 20 persons at any time. Such groups should only have access to the north coast of the island, as far as 300 m west of Braillard Point, and 300 m west of the Chilean refuge located in the central part of the north coast (Point Luis). Groups shall be accompanied by a guide, provided by the National station approving the visit, which shall be responsible for their conduct and which shall be fully conversant with the Site Management Plan, Annexes II and V to the Protocol for Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the Scar Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, and the current research programs within the Area.
    • The appropriate National Authority should be notified of any activities or measures undertaken that were not included in the authorized Permit.

iii. Installation, modification or removal of structures
No additional structures will be erected in the Area, except for essential scientific or management activities, and with a proper permit for a specified period. Any scientific equipment to be installed in the Area shall be approved in a Permit and clearly labeled, indicating country, name of the principal investigator or agency and year of installation. All such items shall be made of materials that pose minimal risk of harm to the fauna or of contamination to the Area.

Installation, maintenance, modification or removal of structures shall be undertaken in a manner that minimizes disturbance to flora and fauna. Removal of structures, equipment or makers for which the period specified in the Permit has expired, should also be considered in the Permit.

iv. Location of field camps
Camping should be avoided within the Area.

However, if such activity is considered necessary for essential purposes specified in the Permit, temporary camping may be allowed at the vicinity of the existing refuges.
No other locations shall be used for this purpose, in order to restrict human impacts and reduce their effects on the Area.

v. Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be into the Area
No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the corresponding Permit, shall be properly stored during the stated period, so that risks inherent to their introduction into the environment are minimized. If releases occur which are likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than that of leaving the material at the place.

Fuel, food and other material are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes related with the scientific or management activities for which the Permit has been granted and every precaution shall be taken against the risk of accidental introductions.
Any materials so introduced shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the stated period.

vi. Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by a Permit issued in accordance with the Annex II to the Madrid Protocol. Where the activity involves taking or harmful interference with the flora or fauna in the Area, the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes should be used as a minimum standard.

vii. Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall only be in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Removal of dead biological specimens for scientific purposes must not exceed levels that affect the other species in the Area and only with the purpose of developing pathological studies.

Anything of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit holder or otherwise authorized, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in the area. If this is the case, the appropriate National Authority should be notified.

viii. Disposal of waste
All the non-physiological waste shall be removed from the Area. Domestic liquid waste may be dumped into the sea, according to the Article 5 of the Annex III of the Madrid Protocol, or preferably may be temporally stored and removed from the Area at the end of the stated period.

The waste generated as a consequence of the activities developed in the Area should be temporally stored nearby the refuges, in a secure place against accidental loss. It should be properly labeled as Trash. At the end of the period, it should be removed from the Area.

ix. Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met
    • Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of limited samples of plant material and animals for with scientific purposes, for analyses or review, or for protective measures.
    • Any specific sites subject to long-term monitoring that are vulnerable to inadvertent disturbance should be appropriately marked.
    • To avoid interference with long-term research and monitoring activities or possible duplication of effort, persons planning new projects within the Area should consult with established national programs working at Ardley Island before initiating the work.
    • To help maintain the scientific values found at Ardley Island, visitors shall follow the indications regarding this Management Plan.

x. Requirements for reports
The principal holder for each permit issued shall submit to the appropriate National Authority a report describing the activities undertaken in the Area once the stated period has ended. Such report should include the information identified in the Visit Report Form,  recommended by SCAR and enclosed with the Permit. The report should be stored with the National Authority in order to enable it to provide summary descriptions of the activities conducted in the Annual Exchange of Information or to provide the necessary information on human activities within the Area to all the interested Parties in a proper management of the Area; and further maintain a record of usage which may serve the review processes of the management plan, improve the scientific use of the area and contribute to its best environmental protection.

ANNEXES: Maps



Map 1. Ardley Island in its relation to the South Shetland Islands. 
Prepared by the Instituto Geográfico Militar, IGM, Chile.


Map 2. Ardley Island. The map shows the location of buildings and delineates the Visitor Zone.


Map 3. Ardley Island map with the recommended foot paths for scientific and visitor activities.



