Guidelines for the Submission and Distribution of Documents to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and the Committee on Environmental Protection
Guidelines for the Submission and Distribution of Documents to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and the Committee on Environmental Protection

One of the main tasks assigned to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat consists of the preparation of  the agenda and gathering and collating the working and information papers for the ATCM and publishing them on the restricted area of the ATS website. Carrying out this task for the 28th ATCM made us aware of the lack of up to date and comprehensive guidance for the submission of documents to the ATCM.  
The most recent guidelines for the circulation and handling of information are in Decision 2 (2001), which concern documents for the CEP documents but which in practice have been applied also with regard to the ATCM documents. They mostly refer to the time schedules.  
Since there have been important changes in actual practice in the last few years, especially in regard to the submission and distribution of papers through the Internet, the Secretariat has prepared the accompanying revised Guidelines for the Submission and Distribution of the Documents of the ATCM and the CEP. 
Draft Decision XX (2005)
ATCM and CEP Document Guidelines 

The Representatives,

Recalling Decision 2 (2001) setting out the Guidelines for the Circulation and Handling of CEP Documents;
Aware of the changes in practice during the last four years, especially the tendency to distribute documents by making them available for download from a dedicated website instead of sending them to the Parties; 
Considering the need to adapt the guidelines to current practice, adopt the same guidelines for the ATCM and the CEP, and include guidelines on the formatting of documents;
Decide:
To adopt the attached Guidelines for the Submission and Distribution of Documents to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and the Committee on Environmental Protection.
Guidelines for the Submission and Distribution of Documents to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and the Committee on Environmental Protection 

1. Guidelines for the Submission and Distribution of Documents
    1. Documents submitted for consideration by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee for Environmental Protection should be sent to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat as email attachments and should be formatted as much as possible according to the accompanying formatting guidelines. The Secretariat shall post the papers on a web page with access restricted to the participants of the meeting immediately upon receiving them 
    2. All documents should include in the first page information regarding  the category of document (Working Paper or Information Paper), title, party or parties submitting the document 1, agenda item(s), and version (if applicable).  
    3. Working Papers prepared by Parties and Observers for the ATCM and the CEP and Information Papers which a Party requests to be translated, should be received by the Secretariat no later than 45 days before the meeting. The Secretariat should make these papers available in translation no later than 30 days before the meeting. It is suggested that Information Papers for which translation has been requested by a Party be limited to 30 pages. Information Papers for which translation has not been requested should be submitted to the Secretariat no later than 30 days before the meeting. 
    4. Working Papers received before the Meeting but after the 45 day deadline will be posted on the website in the language in which they are submitted and, if possible, in translation.  
    5. When a revised version of a Paper made after its initial submission is resubmitted to the Secretariat  for translation, the revised text should indicate clearly the amendments that have been incorporated.  
    6. When Working Papers and Information Papers are generated during the course of the meeting, Working Papers will be translated and circulated and Information Papers will be circulated at that meeting. 
    7. Parties may request translation of any Information Paper either pre-sessionally or during the meeting.

2. Formatting Guidelines
Cover Sheet Information
A cover sheet  is added to the document when it is received at the Secretariat. At the same time, a unique number is assigned to the document, and the information included in the first page is incorporated in the database of documents and displayed on the webpage. 
Format Requirements 
Font to be used: “Times New Roman - Size 11” 
Heading 1 in Arial 16 bold.
Heading 2 in Arial 12 bold.
Heading 3 in Times New Roman 12 Bold italic
Heading 4 in Times New Roman  12 Bold. 
Bold, Italic and Underline are accepted. 
Document must be in black text only 
2 cm page margins are required 
1 line spacing is preferred
12 pt. spacing between paragraphs 
Page number in the bottom right hand corner 
Figures, tables, images and maps
As a general principle, the sender of the document should take into consideration the need of translation of relevant information contained in non-text contents of the publication. For example, if the document consists of a scheme of installations with relevant information related to facilities, a companion table with legends would be useful to facilitate the translation of references.
Figures, Tables and Images should be included in the intended places of the document together with appropriate captions. In order to preserve the quality of relevant material, the authors can attach original jpeg/gif files for figures and images in a compressed format (.zip or .cab).
Annexes and attachments
As a general principle, annexes are included in the same file that the main body of the document. We suggest to include as annexes, additional information or proposals for recommendations, for example. Attachments are considered as different files, with similar or different format. When the text has a significance that justify the further consideration as an independent file, then it should be submitted as Attachment. This is the case of the Management Plans and their related Maps. 

