Assessment of environmental impacts of satellite facility at Troll 
Assessment of environmental impacts of satellite facility at Troll 

Introduction
A proposal to establish a satellite reception facility (ground station) at the Norwegian research station Troll has been submitted to Norwegian authorities. This proposal raises questions of principle regarding the question of cumulative environmental impacts and level of environmental assessment. 


Background
In 2004 a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was prepared and finalized for the upgrading of the Troll station to a permanent station1. The following statements were made with regard to future expansions of the station in the CEE:

Page 21: Likewise it is likely that the upgrading of the station will require a larger amount of antennas and satellite readers to accommodate new research and communication needs. An antenna park will also be located in a suitable location nearby the station. Some likely location for outlying facilities is Nonshøgda (Site 1), 500 horizontal and 100 vertical meters north of the current station area, or Site 2 some 1000 meters south of the station (…). These are areas currently used by station personnel for recreational walks. Separate environmental impact assessments will be conducted for the location and design of outlying facilities. A survey will be conducted for this purpose in November 2004, providing basis for the development of a land-use management plan. The assessment in the present document takes into account the concept of an enlarged station area.

Page 44: Currently no activity at the Troll station directly interferes with the flora or fauna in
the Jutulsessen area. Further impact assessments will be conducted before reaching
conclusions with regard to location of facilities (e.g. air monitoring facilities, antenna
park) outside the currently exposed station area.

The Norwegian Polar Institute conducted, as indicated in the Troll CEE, a survey in the Troll area in November 2004 in order to provide a basis for the development of a land-use management plan. Such a land use plan is consequently currently under development, considering the environmental values and sensitivities of the area in the context of potential future expansion of the station facilities. 


Proposal for new facilities associated with the Troll station
In the latter part of 2004 the Norwegian Space Centre (NSC), a government organisation reporting to the Ministry of Trade and Industry, and the commercial company Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT) initiated a proposal to establish a satellite reception facility (ground station) in conjunction with the Norwegian research station Troll, preferably to be in operation by the start of austral winter 2006.

The proponents underscore the growing importance of environmental satellites as a tool to monitor the global environment. Networking ground stations at high northern and southern latitudes considerably shortens the time from the data is registered to the information is available at the end users desk. KSAT already operates a similar ground station at Svalbard (SvalSat)2. A facility at Troll (TrollSat) would strengthen the ground station network. The proposed facility will also act as a test and reference station for the European Galileo3 project.

Based on an area survey conducted in November/December 2004 the proponents have concluded that Nonshøgda Nord, a plateau located approximately 1450 meters above sea level, approx. 1.3 km away from the Troll station, will be the most appropriate location for the TrollSat facility (noted as potential Site 3 for outlying facilities in the Troll CEE). 

TrollSat as it is planned will consist of a satellite receiving and tracking antenna, a parabolic antenna with a diameter of 7,3 meters, which will be mounted inside a radome with a diameter of approx. 11 meters. It will be placed so that that an additional antenna may be installed at a later stage. In addition to the antenna five 20-feet containers will be installed close to the antenna (three associated with the TrollSat facility and two associated with an air monitoring facility4). Provided that Galileo decides to set up a ground station at Troll, three rather small antennas (approx. 1,9 m diameter) will be located at Nonshøgda Sør (noted as potential Site 1 for outlying facilities in the Troll CEE). 


Nonshøgda Nord, approximately 1.3 km from Troll is the proposed location for the planned installations. Smaller antennas are planned located on Nonshøgda Sør.



The antenna and radome foundations will be similar to the already existing 6,4 meter (diameter) communication antenna at Troll (in picture).


Assessment of environmental impacts of the proposed facility
Nonshøgda Nord and Nonshøgda Sør are areas with particular values and it is proposed (in the draft land use plan as it currently stands) that activity in these areas should take place only in accordance with specified restrictions and on basis of an EIA5. The proponent has consequently recently submitted an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) to Norwegian authorities in accordance with §§ 9 and 10 of the Regulation pertaining to the protection of the environment in Antarctica (Norwegian regulations implementing the Environmental Protocol). The IEE has been submitted to the Meeting as a separate Information Paper. A conclusion as to level of impact is not clearly stated in the IEE, but the proponents have indicated that the activity is likely to have no more than minor or transitory impact and that an IEE therefore is a sufficient assessment level for the activity.

In the context of assessing environmental impacts of TrollSat, two issues of concern have been raised, namely i) cumulative impacts in the context of expanded station activities and ii) the issue of size of impact in relation to the level of impact (minor and transitory). 

Cumulative impacts in the context of expanded station activities
The issue of cumulative impact of expanded station operations has been raised earlier in the consideration of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations, noting that the activities often are broken down into individual activities (that each one may have insignificant impacts) that make up the whole (which may altogether have more significant impacts). In the context of the Troll CEE, for example, comments were made in regard to the fact that the environmental impacts of the Troll Airfield and the upgrading of the Troll station was considered in two separate steps. It is an issue that is inherent in Antarctic operations, as decisions as to the future developments at a station rarely are made at the initiation of a station establishment, but rather is steered by research needs and funding and the availability of existing infrastructure.

In principle the proposed activity (TrollSat) should have been considered in the context of the upgrading of the Troll station to a permanent station in order to consider the full range of impacts of activities in the area. However, although TrollSat was not covered by the Troll CEE in full, it was covered by general statements about future expansion needs for which it is specified that further impact assessment will be conducted before reaching conclusion with regard to location. In addition, issues such as a potential increase in fuel consumption due to the addition of outlying facilities was discussed in the Troll CEE6. 

Due to the stepwise expansion of the station activities (and facilities) cumulative impacts from the full spectre of activities in an area must always be considered when assessing the impacts of planned new activities. The TrollSat proponents have considered the impacts of the planned activity in the context of the overall activity in the area (ie. with regard to energy production/combustion products), and have (indirectly) concluded that the additional (cumulative) pressure caused by the planned activity is not significant.   

Minor and transitory – IEE or CEE
Discussions within the Treaty system (eg. TEWG, CEP, ATCM, etc.) have over the last decade shown that there is no clear-cut answer as to what constitutes less than a minor/transitory impact, no more than a minor/transitory impact or more than a minor/transitory impact, and so far it has been concluded that the level of environmental impact assessment must be considered on a case-by-case basis7. However, it is recognized that precedence has been set within the CEP system that a CEE level assessment is prepared for any new and major installations/activities (cf. e.g. ANDRILL and EPICA drilling projects, South Pole traverse, replacement stations, new stations, etc.). 

Norwegian authorities have only recently initiated the process of considering the submitted TrollSat IEE, but note that the proposed activity may be perceived as extensive, seeing that the proposed facility will be installed in the margins of the area of normal station operations covered by the Troll CEE (although noted as potential site for outlying facilities). The planned facilities can also be considered intrusive with regard to visual impact. In this context Norwegian authorities have considered whether the planned activity merits a CEE-level assessment. However, as far as the details of the project are known and have been considered, it is the Norwegian authorities’ preliminary opinion/judgement that this planned activity will not have significant impacts on the surrounding environment. Thus, unless it is concluded during the consideration of the submitted TrollSat IEE that impacts are such that a CEE is required (that there is a likeliness of more than minor or transitory impacts), Norwegian authorities are prepared to accept the IEE for the proposed activity.

In order to ensure transparency, the IEE documentation and information regarding the TrollSat proposal is nonetheless put in front of the CEP for consideration. The Norwegian delegation will be happy to consider any comments the Meeting may have with regard to the proposed activity, seeing that this particular proposal may constitute a border case CEE – although due to area covered by the project rather than anticipated impacts. 

