Listing of the Amundsen Tent on the List of Historic Sites and Monuments 
Listing of the Amundsen Tent on the List of Historic Sites and Monuments 




Summary
Norway proposes, in accordance with Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, to add the tent left behind by Roald Amundsen (and his team) at the South Pole in December 1911 to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting,” even though its exact position and depth is not known due to possible imprecision in original positioning and snow accumulation. Amundsen's tent is both a material object and an intangible cultural heritage of value both for Norway and the Antarctic society at large. The image of the small tent left standing alone in the vast expanse of ice on the polar plateau epitomizes the last great geographical conquest on earth and gives immediate associations to the stories of the Amundsen and Scott expeditions. 

Most historic sites and monuments listed on the HSM-list presently are associated with known existence and location. However, although the precise current location of the Amundsen tent is unknown, it was erected at 90ºS in 1911, and there seems to be no clear legal argument preventing the listing of it on this basis. 


Brief overview of history associated with the Amundsen tent 
On 14th December 1911 the South Pole was reached for the first time in history. Five Norwegian men: Olav Bjaaland, Helmer Hanssen, Sverre Hassel, Oscar Wisting and the leader Roald Amundsen, travelled the c. 3000 km to the Pole and back with dogsleds in 99 days and were able to report back to the world from a geographic goal that had tantalized for generations. Behind them at the Pole they left a simple tent, documented through the famous photograph of four of the group standing solemnly before it, as well as in the desperate photograph of Robert Falcon Scott’s men gathered beside it as the second group to arrive.

The tent was small and only taken along in case the group had to divide into two. It had been sewn of thin, grey-brown coloured, windproof material by sail maker Martin Rønne during the journey south in the “Fram”. The men extended the single mid-pole over the tent with an extra pole to a total height of about 4 m to make a flagpole for two flags: a small Norwegian one and pennant on which FRAM was painted. Guy ropes held the tent in place on all sides. Inside the tent Amundsen placed a small bag containing a letter to King Haakon of Norway proclaiming the attainment of the South Pole, and a note to Scott, who was expected to arrive shortly at the Pole. These letters were collected by Scott. Also left was some extra equipment: a sextant with glass horizon, a hypsometer case, 3 reindeer-skin foot bags, some footwear and gloves. A plaque with the 5 men’s names was fastened to the tent pole.

The tent stood almost unchanged when Scott’s group arrived a month later. Various flights over the South Pole from 1929, and the Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition that reached the Pole overland in January 1958, made no mention of seeing the tent or any remains of it. It is presumed that the tent was gradually covered by snow and disappeared under the surface of the ice sheet around the Pole.

Consideration of value of the Amundsen tent 
The story of Amundsen’s and Scott’s expeditions as the first to reach the South Pole has been retold countless times through their own accounts, through books, films and paintings. The photographs each group took beside the tent were the ultimate proof that both reached the spot. The image of the small tent left standing alone in the vast expanse of ice on the polar plateau thus epitomizes this last great geographical conquest on earth and gives immediate associations to expedition history that may be said to have international significance. Amundsen’s expedition also played an important part in defining the new nation of Norway after its revival as a sovereign nation in 1905. The tent as a material object is thus heritage of national value for Norwegians. Of equal importance is the intangible heritage value that lies in the image and the symbolism of the tent with its small flags waving in the wind at the Pole. 

Threats to the Amundsen tent
From time to time the idea arises of attempting to locate the tent under the ice and to excavate it. The purpose may be for exhibition, research, both or other reasons. Particularly as the 100th anniversary of the attainment of the South Pole approaches (2011), the possibility exists of an increase in interest and attention with regard to whatever may be the remains of the tent today. 
Excavation, or indeed any disturbance of the ice layers around the tent area at all, would not only destroy the intangible, but highly present feeling of the tent as an unchanged symbolic object frozen in time, but would in recompense present the Antarctic society and the general public with a disappointing fact of the tent’s current, sorry condition. Excavation in or near to the site of the tent would also run the risk of further damaging the remains over and above whatever the ice has already done to it.  

Provisions for protection of historic remains without known location 
Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty provides provisions for protection of historic sites and monuments in Antarctica. It is specified that any Party may propose a site or monument of recognised historic value which has not been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area, or which is not located within such an Area, for listing as a Historic Site or Monument. It is furthermore noted that such listed Historic Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed. Most historic sites and monuments listed on the HSM-list presently are associated with known existence and location. Although the precise current location of the Amundsen tent is unknown, it was erected at 90ºS in 1911, and there seems to be no legal argument preventing the listing of it on this basis.

It is noted that the Treaty Parties, recognizing also the need to enable protection of historic remains whose existence or present location is not known, adopted Resolution 5 (2001) containing Guidelines for handling of pre-1958 historic remains whose existence 
or present location is not known. However, a recent proposal involving the Amundsen tent has made it clear that these Guidelines in themselves do not afford sufficient protection for known historic remains with unknown location if it is deemed essential that the particular historic monument be left untouched to maintain its historic value. For example, it has been considered that the risks to the historic values of the Amundsen tent associated with an excavation (even without removal) are significant (see above). The Guidelines adopted by Resolution 5 (2001) do not give a legal basis to prevent such excavation.   

Proposal 
On the basis of the above, ie. the high historic and symbolic value of the Amundsen tent and the current insufficient protection mechanisms for this monument, Norway proposes, in accordance Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, to add the Amundsen tent to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting” annexed to Measure 3 (2003). It is considered that all necessary precautions with regard to maintaining the historic (including intangible) value of the tent are taken by including it on the HSM-list, thereby giving the Antarctic Treaty Parties clear guidance with regard to management of the monument and providing sufficient protection of this monument of international significance.

It is recognized that since the precise location of the tent is unknown there is a chance that a future project at the South Pole conducting significant research that is completely unrelated to the tent could stumble upon the tent inadvertently and cause damage to t unintentionally. Such unintentional damage should not be considered a breach upon the provisions for this particular historic site, although efforts should be taken to limit such damage should they occur.

It is proposed that the monument is added to the HSM-list with the following annotations:

[No. 79]: The tent erected at 90ºS by the Norwegian group of explorers lead by Roald Amundsen on their arrival at the South Pole on 14 December 1911. The tent is currently buried underneath snow and ice in the vicinity of the South Pole.

Location: In the vicinity of 90ºS 
Original proposing Party: Norway
Party undertaking management: Norway
 




Norwegian Polar Institute archives (Photo: Olav Bjaaland) 

Draft Measure [XXX] (2005)
Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments: The Amundsen Tent, South Pole

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX and VI-14 and Measure 3 (2003);

Noting the requirements of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to maintain a list of current Historic Sites and Monuments and that such sites shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed:

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty That the following site be added to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting” annexed to Measure 3 (2003): 

[No. 79]: The tent erected at 90ºS by the Norwegian group of explorers lead by Roald Amundsen on their arrival at the South Pole on 14 December 1911. The tent is currently buried underneath snow and ice in the vicinity of the South Pole.

Location: In the vicinity of 90ºS 
Original proposing Party: Norway
Party undertaking management: Norway


