Revised Chairman’s Draft of Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty – “Liability for Environmental Emergencies” 
                       
Revised Chairman’s Draft of Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty – “Liability for Environmental Emergencies”

LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES

	The States Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
	Recognising the importance of preventing, minimising and containing damage to the Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems;
	Further recognising the desirability of establishing a comprehensive legal regime, inter alia to deter States and operators from causing such damage;
	Recalling Article 16 of the Protocol under which the Parties undertook to elaborate, in one or more Annexes to the Protocol, rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol;
	Further recalling the priority accorded to scientific research and to preserving the value of the Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research in the Protocol;
	Noting the desire of the Parties to take action to promote environmental protection in the Antarctic Treaty area by mandating certain steps concerning prevention of damage, contingency planning and liability, with a view to further steps being taken in the future by the Parties in accordance with Article 16,
	Have agreed as follows:

Article 1
Scope

	This Annex shall apply to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty Area which relate to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notice is required under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities, and to measures and plans for preventing and responding to such emergencies.  

Optional additional sentence:   It shall also apply to environmental emergencies, which arise from activities within the Antarctic Treaty Area to which the provisions of Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty do not apply, to the extent that those environmental emergencies and their consequences are not regulated by other applicable treaties. 

Article 2
Definitions

For the purposes of this Annex:

(…)

(a)	“Decision” means a decision adopted pursuant to Decision 1(1995) of the XIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

(…)

(b)	“Environmental Emergency” means any accidental event that results in, or imminently threatens to result in, any significant and harmful impact on the Antarctic environment after the entry into force of this Annex;

(c)	“Operator” means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non -governmental, which organises (…) activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.   Except as otherwise indicated in this Annex, the operator of a Party is an operator which organises activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, in that Party’s territory, and 
    (i) those activities are authorised by that Party for the Antarctic Treaty Area, or
    (ii) in the case of a Party which does not formally authorise activities for the Antarctic Treaty Area, those activities go through a comparable regulatory process by that Party, 
and the terms “its operator” and “their operators” shall have a meaning accordingly.

 (d)	“Reasonable”, as applied to preventative measures and response action, means measures or actions which are appropriate, practicable, proportionate and based on the availability of objective criteria and information including:
    • risks to the Antarctic environment, and the rate of its natural recovery
    • risks to human life and safety
    • technological and economic feasibility.

(e)	“Response action” means reasonable measures to prevent, minimise or contain the impact of an environmental emergency, which may include clean-up in appropriate circumstances, and including determining the extent of that emergency and its impact;


Article 2 bis
Savings Provision

The provisions of the present Annex are without prejudice to any rights and obligations of the Parties under other international instruments or rules of customary international law.

Article 3
Preventative Measures

1.	Parties shall require their operators to undertake reasonable preventative measures that are designed to reduce the likelihood of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.

2.	Preventative measures may include:

a.	specialised structures or equipment incorporated into the design and construction of facilities and means of transportation;
b.	specialised procedures incorporated into the operation or maintenance of facilities and means of transportation; and
c.	specialised training of personnel.

Article 4
Contingency Plans

1.	Parties shall require their operators to 

a.	establish contingency plans for responses to incidents with potential adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems; and
b. 	cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such contingency plans.

2.	Contingency plans shall include, as appropriate, the following components:

a.	procedures for conducting an assessment of the nature of the incident;
b.	notification procedures;
c.	identification and mobilisation of resources;
d.	response plans;
e.	training;
f.	record keeping;
g.	demobilisation.

3.	Parties shall establish and implement procedures for immediate notification of, and cooperative response to, environmental emergencies, and shall promote the use of notification procedures and cooperative response procedures by operators which cause environmental emergencies.

Article 5
Response Action

1.	Parties shall require their operators to take prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies arising from the activities of their operators.*

2.	In the event that an operator does not take prompt and effective response action (…), the Party of that operator and other Parties shall endeavour to take such action, but are not obliged to do so, including through their agents and operators specifically authorised by them to take such action.

3.	Other Parties taking response action shall consult the Party of the operator beforehand, unless threat to the environment is imminent and it would be unreasonable in all the circumstances not to take immediate action.

4.	Parties taking response action shall consult and coordinate their action with all other affected Parties to the extent feasible, and shall take into account relevant expert guidance which has been provided by permanent observer delegations to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, and other organisations.

*Note: Paragraph (1) is under consideration by a Contact Group, which will communicate intersessionally.

Article 6
Liability

1.	An operator shall be liable to pay the costs of response action taken by other Parties pursuant to Article 5(2).

2.	When prompt and effective response action should have been taken but was not, the operator shall be liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken, into the (…) fund established in Article 12.

3.	(deleted)

4.	Liability shall be strict.

5.	When an environmental emergency arises from the activities of two or more operators they shall be jointly and severally liable, provided that an operator which establishes that only part of the environmental emergency results from its activities shall be liable in respect of that part only.

6.	Notwithstanding that a Party is liable under this article for its failure to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships or aircraft owned or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service, those vessels and aircraft of the Parties shall be immune in accordance with the provisions of Article 11(1) to (3) of Annex IV to the Protocol.

Article 7
Actions for Compensation

1.	A Party may bring an action against a non-State operator for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) (…) only in the courts of the Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence.   Such actions for compensation shall be brought within three years of the commencement of the response action or within three years of the date on which the Party bringing the action knew or ought reasonably to have known the identity of the operator, whichever is later.   In no event shall an action against a non-State operator be commenced later than fifteen years after the commencement of the response action.

2.	Each Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain actions under paragraph 1 (…).

3.     	Each Party shall ensure that there is a mechanism in place under its domestic law for the enforcement of Article 6(2) with respect to any non-State operator that is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in that Party.   Each Party shall inform all other Parties of this mechanism in accordance with Article 13 of the Protocol.

4.	The liability of a Party as a State operator under Article 6(1) shall be resolved only in accordance with the provisions of Articles 18, 19 [and 20] of the Protocol and as applicable the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.

5.	The liability of a Party as a State operator under Article 6(2) shall be resolved only in accordance with any enquiry procedure which may be established by the Parties, the provisions of Articles 18, 19 [and 20] of the Protocol and as applicable the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.
 

Article 8
Exemptions from Liability

1.	An operator shall not be liable pursuant to Article 6 if the environmental emergency was caused by:

a.    	An act necessary to protect human life or safety; or

b.	An event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character, which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either generally or in the particular case, provided all reasonable measures were taken to prevent harmful impacts.

2.	A Party or operator shall not be liable for an environmental emergency resulting from response action taken by it pursuant to Article 5(2) to the extent that such response action was reasonable in all the circumstances.

Article 9
Limits on Compensation

1.	The amount of compensation for which each operator shall be liable under this Annex, in respect of each environmental emergency, shall be as follows:

a	[For an environmental emergency arising from an event involving a vessel which is covered by a Certificate of Entry pursuant to IMO Guidelines

    (i) in the case of a vessel actually carrying oil in bulk as cargo, the limit shall be determined by applying the provisions of Article V of the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 1969, including any amendment that is in force internationally
    (ii) in the case of any other vessel, the limit shall be determined in accordance with the International Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims 1976, including any amendment that is in force internationally
    (iii) in no case shall the limit be less than that under (b) below]*

b.	For an environmental emergency arising from an event involving any vessel which is not covered under (a) above, the limit shall be [$10 million]**;

c.	For an environmental emergency arising from an event which does not involve a vessel, the limit shall be [$3 million]**. 

2.	The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties shall review the limits in (b) and (c) every three years, or sooner at the request of any Party.   Any amendments to these limits, which shall be determined after consultation amongst the Parties and on the basis of advice including scientific and technical advice, shall be made under the procedure set out in Article 13(1).

*Note:   Subparagraph (a) is under consideration by a Contact Group, which will communicate intersessionally.

**Note:  These figures are included as a basis for discussion in light of COMNAP’s advice at ATCM XXVI.    Final figures may be stipulated in SDR.

Article 10
State Liability

A Party shall not be liable for the failure of an operator (other than its State operators) to take response action to the extent that that Party fulfilled its obligations under this Annex in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Protocol.

Article 11
Insurance and other financial security

1.	Each Party shall require its operators to maintain adequate insurance or other financial security, such as the guarantee of a bank or similar financial institution, to cover liability up to the limits specified in Article 9(b) and (c).

2.	Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may maintain self-insurance* in respect of its State operators including those carrying out activities in the furtherance of scientific research.

* i.e. may bear its own risk

Article 12
Role of Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

1.	The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty shall maintain and administer a fund, in accordance with Decisions including terms of reference (…) to be adopted by the Parties (…), to provide inter alia for the reimbursement of the reasonable costs incurred by a Party in taking response action in accordance with Article 5(2), if:

a.	The identity of the operator cannot be established, or the operator is not subject to the provisions of this Annex; (…)

b.	The costs exceed the applicable limit of liability in accordance with article 9;

c.	A non-State operator is unable to meet its liability up to the applicable limit, because of the failure of its insurance or other financial security; or

d.	The operator is exempted from liability under Article 8.

2.	Any Party may make proposals to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting for reimbursement to be paid from the fund, which shall be approved by means of a Decision.   The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may seek the advice of the Committee of Environmental Protection on such proposals as appropriate.

3.	The fund may also have any other function for the protection of the Antarctic Environment which may be conferred on it by any other Annex.

4.	Any State or person may make voluntary contributions to the fund.

Article 13
Amendment or Modification

1.	This Annex may be amended or modified by a Measure adopted in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.   In the case of a Measure pursuant to Article 9(2), and in any other case unless the Measure in question specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes and extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the Measure.

2.	Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.


