Proposal to submit a proposal to IMO to ban the presence of Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) on board ships south of 60o South
 
Proposal to submit a proposal to IMO to ban the presence of Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) on board ships south of 60o South



Proposal
This paper proposes to the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty System to submit a proposal to IMO to ban HFO on board ships in Antarctic Marine Waters (i.e. south of 60o south). The area coincide with the area declared as a Special Area under Annexes I and V of the MARPOL 73/78 Convention.

Introduction
    1. Whilst HFO was mainly used on large ocean going bulk carriers and tankers, because of fuel economics, more and more other ships, including cruise ships and even bigger fishing vessels are now using heavy fuel oil for propulsion. This oil is of a quality that makes it necessary to heat the oil substantially before it is introduced into the engine of the ship. 

    2. When such heavy oils are released to the environment its natural degradation is very slow due to the heaviness of the product as such. When released in near coastal areas it usually ends up at the beach. If the beach is left  un-cleaned such oils can stay in the environment for a very long time giving the fact that it clings very efficiently to hard surfaces if released under the right circumstances. 

    3. There have been several well published oil spills involving HFO in recent years, including the HFO tanker Nahkodka in Japanese waters, the HFO tanker Prestige off the coast of France and Spain and the tanker Erika off the coast of France. Norway has had several incidents including heavy fuel oil in Arctic areas providing experience with heavy fuel under polar circumstances. The largest one in later years (1980) was the sinking of the bulk carrier Deifivos and included  release of  1000 tonnes of HFO outside the county of Nordland (at the Polar Circle). The oil was removed by the oil contingency services but to a relatively high cost, and consequences could be measured in the environment for many years. Along the coast of Norway one has chosen to remove the oil from the beaches following accidents involving oil spill, and it may be assured that this is not an easy task.

Problem at hand
    4. COMNAP has conducted an analysis of present oil uses in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and the conclusion of this analysis show that none of the ships in the COMNAP-IAATO fleet carries Heavy Grade Oil in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The COMNAP analysis has obviously not covered fishing vessels or fishing supply vessels. Assuming that the fishing activities in the Antarctic Area is similar to other High Seas fishing areas, these might also carry and use heavy fuel. At least the bigger fishing vessels use HFO to a varying degree.

Proposal
    5. In light of the potential problems caused by HFO it is proposed that the ATCM XXVIII meeting propose to IMO to ban the use and carriage as oil fuel of  HFO on board vessels in the Antarctic Sea Area coinciding with the Antarctic Annex I special area. In asking the IMO to address the issue it is assured that any provision regarding use of heavy fuel in Antarctic waters will be broadly discussed and that such provisions will cover also ships operated from states that are not Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.





 


