

Antarctic Protected Areas System:
Lillie Marleen Hut, Mt. Dockery, Everett Range, northern Victoria Land, Antarctica
Proposal for Inclusion in the Antarctic Treaty List of Historic Sites and Monuments
Antarctic Protected Areas System:
Lillie Marleen Hut, Mt. Dockery, Everett Range, northern Victoria Land, Antarctica
Proposal for Inclusion in the Antarctic Treaty List of Historic Sites and Monuments 



Introduction
Germany signed the Antarctic Treaty on 5 February 1979 with the intention of carrying out substantial scientific work on the 6th continent. The first German expedition to the Antarctic continent after World War II began in the same year the treaty was signed. The expedition was organised and implemented by the Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR), Hannover, i.e. the Geological Survey of Germany. This was the first German geoscientific expedition to the Antarctic continent after several decades. The German Antarctic Northern Victoria Land Expedition (GANOVEX  I - 1979/1980) was mainly ship-based, but included a small onshore base which was essential for efficient field work. Thus, the Lillie Marleen Hut (Lillie) was erected and was subsequently used during following six GANOVEX expeditions.

Position and description of the hut
“Lillie” was erected in a kettle depression at the foot of Mt. Dockery in the Everett Range, around 75 km south of the Pennell Coast at 71°12' S;  164°31' E (Fig. 1). Not reachable by caterpillar-tracked vehicles, it can only be approached by helicopter.
The hut acquired its name from the Lillie Glacier – one of the largest glaciers in northern Victoria Land flowing north into the Pacific – and the song “Lili Marleen”.  
The hut is a bivouac container made of prefabricated fibreglass units insulated with polyurethane foam. It sits on a steel subframe to prevent snow accumulating against the hut (Fig. 2). The whole structure is anchored into the rock by steel cables to enable it to withstand even the severest storms. With an area of 22 m², it provides sleeping space for 6 people. The front is used as a kitchenette. The opposite side accommodates the radio operator and radio equipment. The entrance is protected by a porch.

Reasons for Designation
The hut was used at times during all of the 8 GANOVEX expeditions as a base, a radio station and as a depot from which the expedition activities were coordinated, and from where radio contact was maintained with the camps in the field and the American McMurdo Station, New Zealand’s Scott Base, the Italian Terra Nova Base (now: Mario Zucchelli Base) and the BGR Gondwana Summer Station. Lillie was therefore the gateway to the exploration of northern Victoria Land during the GANOVEX expeditions. 
Lillie is also closely associated with one particular dramatic event: it was the station through which the rescue attempt to prevent the sinking of the expedition ship “Gotland II” during GANOVEX II was relayed. The radio station at Lillie was used to maintain radio contact between the ship and McMurdo Base from where the rescue bid was being coordinated. Unfortunately, the bid to save the ship failed: trapped and surrounded by pack ice in a polynya off Yule Bay on 18 December 1981, the ship rapidly began to take in water. Pumps flown in from McMurdo came too late to help. The vessel was abandoned and sank on the same day. All of the expedition members and the ship’s crew were evacuated to Lillie by the 5 expedition helicopters and subsequently flown from McMurdo to Christchurch, New Zealand, thanks to the generous support of the USARP. A memorial stone at the Lillie Marleen Hut commemorates the sinking of the ship and the resulting abandonment of the expedition (Fig. 3). The lapidary inscription reads: GANOVEX II (81/82) ended due to the sinking of MS Gotland II. 
Given its historical importance, we apply for the Lillie Marleen Hut and the Gotland memorial stone to be included in the Antarctic Treaty List of Historic Sites and Monuments. 





