PROPOSAL FOR CLASSIFYING HISTORICAL SITE N° 46
PORT MARTIN (Adelie Coast)
(66°49’ S / 141°23’ E)
AS A SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA   

MANAGEMENT PLAN
PROPOSAL FOR CLASSIFYING HISTORICAL SITE N° 46
PORT MARTIN (Adelie Coast)
(66°49’ S / 141°23’ E)
AS A SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA   
MANAGEMENT PLAN

1- Description of values to be protected
Port Martin was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-16 (Brussels, 1985), as Historical Site No. 46, after a proposal by France.
 Brief historical overview
The construction of a base on Adelie Coast was scheduled as a major task during the TA21 expedition. Such expedition left Brest (France) in November, 1948, and reached the ice pack on February 11, 1949. Unfavorable ice conditions prevented it from landing.
A new expedition, TA3, made it on January 18, 1950, and the final location to erect the new base was selected on January 20. It took the name of Port Martin (P-M) in memory of the late J. A. Martin, a member of the expedition who died on board the ship. A team of 11 men, led by André-Franck Liotard erected the main building – a pre-crafted wooden structure, with trusses – and built a number of annexes. These were essentially for the purposes of scientific research (magnetism, geodesy, ionosphere sounding, atmospheric optics, biology, etc.) and meteorology. Radio transmission antennae and wind-machine towers were built in the clearances as well as a shelter to be used in case of emergency.
The 17 members of the TA4 replacement team, led by Michel Barré, landed on January 6, 1951. They enlarged the main building while continuing to carry out their scientific activities.
Led by René García, replacement team TA5 reached P-M on January 14, 1952, whereas a smaller team, led by Mario Marret (4 men in all) built a secondary base2 on Damiers Island (Cape Geology Archipelago).
In the night of January 23 to 24, 1952, a blaze swept away the main building of the P-M base. As the supply ship was still in the area, it managed to evacuate the men. Three of them, on top of the original 4, landed in Cape Geology. They joined Mario Marret and his team. During the winter, the 7 men of this so reassembled team traveled to P-M to recover various materials – of which the 2 ice weasels – stranded there.
Since then, only some sporadic visits of a few hours at the most have been paid to the remains of this base which is supposed to have been left unscathed.
 The buildings taken together.
All of the P-M annex constructions, among which the human shelter, the meteorolical shelter, the food and coal warehouses, subsist today. As snow has covered with time the remains of the main station, it is difficult to tell what exactly has endured the fire. An archaeological mission will have to travel to make an inventory of the remains, both for the buildings and mobile elements contained therein. But the annex buildings in themselves, as witnesses of the spatial organization of an Antarctic base at the end of the Heroic Age, justify our request.
Indeed, P-M is the perfect example of the way an Antarctic base was organized immediately after the war. As such, the site has its historic and cultural importance. In spite of the brevity of its actual operational period, some discoveries in the study of the earth sciences, meteorology and the ionosphere are linked to the base.
It is precisely the shortness of its operation which has left it as a “snapshot” of history. No modification – but for some superficial plunder – has ever changed the original setting.
Besides, the site offers to the archeology-to-come a particularly appropriate field for setting up state-of-the-art methods and techniques adapted to such extreme conditions of archeological research. The site is partially covered by snow which should conceptually be regarded as a very peculiar sediment. Stemming from the P-M site, archaeologists should be able to foster new concepts and an adapted methodology which could be put to use for future archeological studies elsewhere in Antarctica.
Port Martin should therefore be considered not only as a base of the final period of the Heroic Age, but also as an original archeological site, the appreciation and operation of which will call for specific and consummate technologies, a new and golden opportunity for international cooperation which blends so well with the spirit of the Treaty.

2- Aims and objectives
The aim of the present management plan is to make sure the area and its features are protected so as to preserve its proven values as well as its potential value. The main objectives are spelled out as follows:
- avoid degradation of the values of the area as well as the substantial dangers looming ahead of them, by
 upholding the integrity of the site, especially by strongly restricting access to the site until specialists have suggested appropriate scientific research methods to restore it and to open it to a larger gathering.
 establishing a baseline conservation plan of the surface artifacts located therein (towers of the antennae and wind-machines, shelters, etc.)

3- Management Activities
a) an in-situ restoration and maintenance program of the superstructures, especially the human shelter;
b) a study program marked by a continuous monitoring of the status of the condition of the objects and structures as well as the factors having an impact on them;
 by means of the meteorological data recorded for decades by an automatic in situ American station
 installing sensors which automatically transmit data relevant to different levels of nival stratigraphy
c) a conservation program for the objects found both in situ and outside the site, including an inventory of the surface objects by
 preparing charts and recording the position of historical objects around the lodge,
 keeping records of other relevant historical data,
 preparing a GIS
d) Directors of National Antarctic Programs operating in the area or those who may be interested by the area can undertake mutual consultations to make sure the above mentioned provisions are complied with.

4- Period of Designation
Designated for an indefinite period.

5- Documents, maps and photographs
Annex A: Port Martin – Map of the (original) surroundings of the base. Scale: 1/300, prepared by Paul Perroud, in  Vallette Y. et J. Dubois, Terre-Adélie 1950-1952, Expéditions Polaires Françaises, Résultats techniques N° G.III, 53, Paris 1955.
Annex B: Map of the French Polar Expedition – Antarctic expeditions 1948 – 1953: « Terre-Adélie – Port-Martin », 1/20 000  
Annex C: Map drawn between 1950 and 1952 by the French Polar Expeditions  – 1/5000

6- Description of the Area
a) Boundary markers and natural features 
they are defined by the external footprints of the constructions as they were surveyed on the map (Annex A):
 to the North: by a line drawn between the tower of the Trombonne antenna (ionosound), the NNW corner of the wind-machine tower, the NNW corner of the workshop and the ESE corner of the workshop;
 to the West: by a line drawn between the WSW corner of the workshop, the W corner of the food warehouse, the S corner of the wind-machine tower;
 to the South: by a line drawn between the S corner of the wind-machine tower, the SSW corner of the meteorological tower, the location of the rain gauge (20.60 mark);
 to the East: by a line drawn between the location of the rain gauge (20.60 mark), the E corner of the meteorological shelter and the tower of the Trombonne antenna of the ionosound.
Besides, the area includes a 200 m strip, copying the coast as shown on the IGN map with a resolution of 1:20,000 (Annex B) going from Sphinx Hill to Llano Point (Annex C) on the map with a resolution of 1:5,000 [Drawn by the French Polar Expeditions in 1950/1952]. Presence on the coast of various landing points and, under water, of a known shipwreck.
b) Restricted area inside the Area
The area within the limits mentioned above, including the marine strip, will be declared as a restricted access area. All structures and artifacts located inside this area are purported to have a historical origin. The restriction period is limited at the end of the inventory and expertise tasks to be carried out on the realty and the movables of the area and the archaeological site.
c) Location of structures in the Area
All the structures inside the area are purported to have a historical origin
d) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
There is no protected area in the close proximity of the area thus proposed to be classified as a historical monument.

7- Conditions under which permits may be granted
The competent authority to grant a permit will be appointed by decree by the Council of State.

Permits may be granted to carry out various scientific research, site monitoring or inspection activities. For each single entry and length of stay permits will authorize the scope of the tasks to be undertaken, their time span, and the maximum number of people commissioned to enter the area.

a) Access to and movement within the area
The points and limits corresponding to the approach areas are to be established on the basis of the best advice provided by seamen and consultative conservation organizations (agents of the Heritage). 
Helicopter landings are to take place outside the area, on spots to be selected on the grounds of their closest vicinity to the area. in such a way:
 that the spatial distribution of the surface artifacts does not change, 
 that the existing structures are not continuously bombed by the uncontrollable flight of surface objects or ice particles.
Land vehicles are forbidden inside the area, with the exception of light vehicles equipped with low-pressure tires or soft muskegs.

Access to the area is restricted to the Heritage agents holding a permit and to the 2 or 3 people who must accompany them for safety, technical or logistical reasons.

 Access to and movement within the area shall, in any case, be extremely cautious, and shall entail no degradation of the structures therein or removal of the movable objects (artifacts), on the surface or buried deep under the snow.

b) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place
Visits for purposes of establishing heritage and archaeological values, restoration, preservation and/or protection, including installation and maintenance of automatic survey or teletransmission, equipment are among the activities that may be carried out inside the area.
Visitors holding a permit will make sure that their visit cannot cause any disturbance to the programs under way.
c) Installation, modification or removal of structures
Any surface object, let alone any buried one, is purported to belong to the historical heritage. 
No structures are to be erected or scientific equipment installed in the area except for compelling scientific reasons or management activities as authorized by the competent authorities in the framework of the urbanistic and public domaniality regulations in force. 
d) Location of field camps
Authorized visitors are to define a camping site as a function of local conditions and requirements of their program. Marks and traces of their camping modules shall be indicated on a small scale map (for example, 1:5,000 or 1:2000) prepared for each season. Such maps are to be submitted after each season to the appropriate authorities who issued the Permit.

e) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area

 according to the provisions set forth in Annex II of the Madrid Protocol, no living animals or plant materials, poultry products, including dried eggs, shall be introduced into the Area; 
 no chemicals shall be brought into the Area, except chemicals which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose as specified in the permit. Any chemical introduced shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted
 fuel, food and other materials are not to be stored in the area, unless required for compelling purposes connected with the activity for which the permit has been granted. Such materials are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent storage is not permitted

f) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Collection or removal of material objects not brought into the Area by a permit holder is prohibited.
However, materials may be collected or removed from the area only for the purposes of restoration, conservation or heritage protection, or for scientific reasons in accordance with the objectives of the management plan and only with a separate Permit issued specifically for that purpose by appropriate national authorities.

g) Disposal of waste
All non-human waste produced in the area shall be removed from the Area. 

h) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan can continue to be met

Visits to the Area shall be restricted to scientific and management objectives only
i) Requirements for reports of visits to the Area
Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit original or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be taken into consideration both when reviewing the management plan and when organizing the scientific manipulation of the Area

___________________


