PROTECTION OF ANTARCTICA’S INTRINSIC VALUES: POLICY ON NON-GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES
PROTECTION OF ANTARCTICA’S INTRINSIC VALUES: POLICY ON NON-GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES


Introduction
At ATCM XXVII it was agreed that further discussion was required on the issue of land-based tourism, specifically to address concerns raised in relation to the establishment of permanent infrastructure.  These concerns included the environmental impact of such developments, the protection of wilderness values and consistency with Antarctica’s designation as a “natural reserve devoted to peace and science”, and potential undesirable jurisdictional and legal consequences.

It is in the shared interest of Parties and the tourism industry that non-government activities remain consistent with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty system, and that their conduct is environmentally sustainable and socially responsible.  While there has been discussion amongst Parties about permanent tourism infrastructure, there is no codified approach to controlling it.  

It has been argued that permanent tourism infrastructure in Antarctica could threaten the wilderness and aesthetic values that Treaty Parties have a responsibility to protect under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Madrid Protocol).  It could also undermine the operation of the Antarctic Treaty system, which does not have juridical mechanisms to manage legal issues that could arise from complex international commercial arrangements.

Operation of tourism activities within the Antarctic Treaty System
Tourism is a well-established activity that is consistent with Article 1 of the Antarctic Treaty, where it makes use of Antarctica for ‘peaceful purposes’.  Tourism activities are also consistent with the objectives of the Madrid Protocol, as long as they are undertaken in accordance with the environmental principles elaborated in Article 3. 

These principles require that activities be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment; to protect the Antarctic environment and the intrinsic value of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values; and to accord priority to scientific research.

The development of permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure in support of tourism activities would inevitably impact on the wilderness and aesthetic values of Antarctica which, as signatories to the Madrid Protocol, we have a responsibility to protect.     

At its annual meeting in 2004 the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) took the initiative to ensure that the planned activities of its members continued in accordance with the principles of the Madrid Protocol.  IAATO adopted a by-law that requires:
Members of IAATO subscribe to the principle that their planned activities will have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.
By enshrining this principle in its by-laws, IAATO has demonstrated considerable foresight.  To date, no permanent or large-scale infrastructure has been put in place, and it seems clear that current operators do not need such infrastructure for their long-term viability.  However, tourism activity has recently gone through a period of rapid growth (from approximately 6 500 tourists landed from 11 vessels in 1992-93, to close to 20 000 aboard 29 vessels in 2003-04), and it is likely that this growth will exert pressure for new services to tourists in areas of high visitation, such as the Antarctic Peninsula.  Additionally, IAATO and the Treaty Parties cannot rely on new entrants to the industry making environmental considerations a priority.  

A suggested policy approach to land-based infrastructure
This Working Paper proposes a policy approach that would acknowledge and build on the commitment of tourism operators to maintain a sustainable and socially responsible industry.  This approach involves a clear acknowledgement by Treaty Parties that the development of permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure in support of tourism or other non-government activities is not in accordance with the principles of the Madrid Protocol.   

A draft Measure to this effect is attached for consideration by the Treaty Parties.  


DRAFT MEASURE XXX

PROTECTION OF ANTARCTICA’S INTRINSIC VALUES: POLICY ON DEVELOPMENT OF NON-GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE



The Representatives,

Recalling the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol);

Noting the designation of Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science; and the priority accorded to science in the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol;

Noting also the Parties’ commitment to the protection of the Antarctic environment and the intrinsic values of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values;

Desiring to ensure that tourist and other non-governmental activities are undertaken in a manner consistent with these principles; and 

Having determined that the development of permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure for the conduct or support of tourism and non-governmental activities is inconsistent with these principles; 

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty;

Parties shall not authorise the development of any new permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure for the conduct or support of tourism or other non-government activities in Antarctica.  

Further, if tourism or other non-government activities are conducted in a way which is inconsistent with principles of the Protocol, then those activities shall be modified, suspended or cancelled.




