The Attendance of non-Party States at Consultative Meetings: A proposed change to the Rules of Procedures of the ATCM.
Preamble

Earlier during this ATCM the issue of non-Party States´ involvement in Consultative Meetings was raised in Plenary. In addition, the UK was requested by another Party to re-table its Working Paper (XXVI ATCM/WP18) submitted to ATCM XXVI in Madrid.

Accordingly, WP 18 from 2003 is attached (now numbered WP 55) for further consideration by the ATCPs. The UK would however suggest that any re-examination of the issue of non-Party States should at this stage be confined to the point of principle only.

Subsequent to ATCM XXVI the Rules of Procedure have been amended. In the view of the UK it would therefore not be appropriate to scrutinize the detailed Rule changes proposed in our earlier Working Paper, which were related to the Rules of Procedure then currently in force.

The Attendance of non-Party States at Consultative Meetings: A proposed change to the Rules of Procedures of the ATCM.

The attendance of Malaysia “to observe” ATCM XXV in Warsaw was a novel, unique situation.  But the precedent raises a more fundamental issue – that of the procedures for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to invite non-Party States to Consultative Meetings.  The issue will re-emerge at ATCM XXVI with both Malaysia, and Iceland (in respect of Agenda Item 9) scheduled to attend.

Attendees at ATCMs are confined to four categories:

    • Consultative Parties;
    • non-Consultative Parties;
    • Observers, of which under Rule 2 there are only three recognised (SCAR, CCAMLR and COMNAP);

    • Invited Experts, which include inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations.

There is no formal mechanism either under the Antarctic Treaty, or under the current Rules of  Procedures of the ATCM (last amended by Decision 1 (1997)) which allows for the attendance of a non-Party State at a Consultative Meeting. In effect the attendance by Malaysia at ATCM XXV was determined by an ad-hoc, intersessional agreement amongst Consultative Parties. In this respect the situation in the ATCM contrasts with practice seen elsewhere in the Antarctic Treaty System.

CCAMLR’s Rules of Procedure provide explicitly for a non-Party State to be invited to a meeting of its Commission (providing there is consensus to do so).  
	
Rule 30 (c) states that the “Commission may…….”

“invite as appropriate, any other state to attend, in accordance with Rules 32, 33 and 34 below, as Observers in the meetings of the Commission unless a Member of the Commission objects”.

(Note: other state in this context means any state other than a signatory or acceding state referred to in Rule 30 (a) and (b)). 

This arrangement has worked well, and to the benefit of CCAMLR.  It has demonstrated transparency, and a willingness to co-operate with non-Party States.  This has indeed been advantageous to the CCAMLR Commission in its on-going fight against illegal, unregulated and unrecorded (IUU) fishing for Toothfish. Over the past three to four years the practice of inviting non-Party States has become more commonplace.  A number of the States involved have normally not been associated with the Antarctic Treaty system (e.g. Seychelles, Mauritius and Namibia).  Nevertheless, these States have indicated at the Commission Meetings of CCAMLR a strong desire to work collaboratively. Furthermore, certain of those non-Party States have demonstrated their commitment to tackling IUU fishing, to the extent that they have voluntarily and constructively implemented CCAMLR’s Catch Documentation Scheme in respect of Toothfish. One example of CCAMLR’s ability to engage actively with other States has seen Namibia in the space of three years, firstly accede to the CCAMLR Convention and then become a Member of its Commission.

The UK is of the view that a similar procedural mechanism ought now to be considered for the ATCM.  It would enable Treaty Parties to engage more directly with other States which have an interest in Antarctica.  It might for example also enable the engagement to extend to those States whose flag-vessels (e.g. as tourist vessels) frequent the waters south of 60°S (this is the principal presence by non-Treaty Parties within the Antarctic Treaty Area).

The UK believes that positive engagement with non-Party States could be beneficial.  We propose a procedural means of doing so through revision of the Rules of Procedure by a Decision of the ATCM.
 
A draft Decision, along with the proposed changes to the Rules, is attached as Annex I, along with an explanatory commentary (Annex II).


DRAFT DECISION (2003) 


Revised Rules of Procedure (2003)




The Representatives,

Desiring to amend the Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings;


Decide:

That the “Revised Rules of Procedure (2003)” attached to this Decision shall replace the existing Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings with immediate effect.





























