Measures to address the unintentional introduction and spread of non-native biota and disease to the Antarctic Treaty Area

Measures to address the unintentional introduction and spread of non-native biota and disease to the Antarctic Treaty Area
Background

The Madrid Protocol (Article 4) requires that Parties do not introduce animals or plants to the Antarctic Treaty Area, other than for specified purposes for which a permit has been issued.  The intent is that unintentional introductions of non-native species will be minimised. 

The revised draft text of Annex II (Final Report, XXVII ATCM) suggests an obligation on Parties to take precautions to “prevent the accidental introduction of micro-organisms (e.g. viruses, bacteria, yeasts, fungi) not present naturally in the Antarctic Treaty area.” and to take all reasonable steps to control the consequences of introductions of non-indigenous species in order to avoid their adverse impacts (Article 4, Part 5).

Disease issues have been raised at several ATCMs, including:

    • ATCM XXII (CEP I) IP-53 ( IUCN), on introductions as an increasing problem;
    • SATCM XII (CEP III) WP-20 (SCAR/COMNAP), in response to a workshop on diseases of Antarctic wildlife;
    • ATCM XXIV (CEP IV) WP-10 (Australia/ICG) on a review of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease causing agents in Antarctica, and a risk assessment of those activities which may introduce or spread disease causing agents in Antarctica;
    • ATCM XXIV (CEP IV) WP-11 (Australia/ICG) on practical measures that might be implemented by Parties to diminish the risk to Antarctic wildlife of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease causing agents; and
    • ATCM XXVII (CEP VII) IP-071 (Australia) outlining Australian Antarctic Program procedures to minimise introductions

Further discussion

Elsewhere in the world border inspections and controls to prevent the introduction of alien species are being continually tightened and more stringently enforced.  Despite anecdotal and documented reports of introductions of aliens to Antarctica, there has been no formal assessment by the CEP of the pathways, risks, likely consequences, and possible responses to such events.

There are many well-documented cases of introductions to the sub-antarctic islands (eg Kerguelen, Marion, Macquarie), many of which have proven ineradicable.  The effects of climate change and consequent availability and alteration of Antarctic habitat is evident on the Antarctic peninsula and elsewhere on the continent. 

The increasing openness of the Antarctic continent to the activities of national programs and non-government activities alike would suggest that the pathways of introduction are many and widely spread.  Outside the relatively small proportion of Antarctica constituted by the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, few, if any habitats are isolated from real or potential human presence.   This applies as much to inshore marine as to terrestrial habitats.

Summary
Further discussion of quarantine matters is timely and recommended because:

    • the scope and scale of national program and non-government activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area is increasing;
    • lessons learned in the sub-Antarctic and elsewhere highlight the need to be proactive in preventing unplanned introductions, and to manage quarantine threats in a precautionary manner;
    • ‘biological contamination’ has an increasing potential to compromise the scientific values of the region;
    • there is a growing research interest in the potential modification of species distributions and susceptibility associated with global warming.

Recommendation to CEP

That the CEP endorses the formation of an intersessional contact group to assess the current and likely threats to the Antarctic environment of the introduction and spread of alien organisms and disease.

Such work could include, amongst other things:

    1. Developing a ‘working goal’ for a quarantine strategy, e.g.
Prevent the accidental introduction and spread through human activity of any alien organism or substance that may have an unwanted impact on Antarctic species or ecosystems.
    2. Assessing the importance of pathways for introductions;
    3. Identifying risk assessment/analysis tools and methodologies;
    4. Developing specific risk-relevant pre-departure procedures;
    5. Identifying specific and practical quarantine management measures to prevent or control the spread of organisms between sites in Antarctica;
    6. Identifying priority research and monitoring requirements.

