Proposed Improvements to Measures Designed to Prevent Environmental Damage in Antarctica

Proposed Improvements to Measures Designed to Prevent 
Environmental Damage in Antarctica

Preventing damage to the Antarctic environment is a priority for the Antarctic Treaty Parties.

Pursuant to Article 3 of the Madrid Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, including its wilderness, aesthetic values, and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential for understanding the global environment, shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. Activities in the Antarctic Treaty area “shall be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment”.  In addition, pursuant to Article 8 of the Protocol, the Parties shall establish special procedures for the prior assessment of impacts on the Antarctic environment and its dependent or associated ecosystems related to planned activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. 

However, even when a strict national authorization system exists, one cannot exclude the possibility that operators whose activity was not approved by the national authorities, or operators without a permit to conduct activities in the region, may enter the continent. Such “illegal” operators may take actions without notifying the national authorities of their planned activity in Antarctica. Therefore, it is possible that States will not have information about the forthcoming activity. In some cases, information that an activity has taken place becomes available only when its adverse consequences and damage to the Antarctic environment are discovered.

It is also possible that activities may be conducted in Antarctica despite a vigorous counteraction by the State, which has sound reasons to believe that the planned activity will not be consistent with international legal requirements. Strictly speaking, States can only monitor “law-abiding” operators which observe the permit issue procedure established for Antarctic activities. However, when operators deliberately circumvent the requirements established by national legislation, controlling operators by way of permit issue is inadequate. Operators, using the right of free exit from their own State, may go to Antarctica without any notice to the national authorities. These operators pose the greatest potential threat to the Antarctic environment, because they may travel without adequate, well-functioning equipment and necessary gear.  An “illegal” operator may not have trained staff, mandatory insurance, or other types of requisite financial security.

It should be noted that the gateway States do not know whether an expedition to Antarctica has been authorized. Lack of information prevents States from taking enforcement actions, pursuant to their national legislation, against “illegal” operators.

We believe that the establishment of an information system on planned Antarctic activities authorized by States could be very helpful in preventing the entrance of “illegal” operators into the Antarctic region.

In our view, the system shall operate as follows:

The Consultative Parties shall undertake to inform the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat about all planned Antarctic expeditions and activities whose operators obtained a respective permit as required by their national authorization systems, or those expeditions and activities conducted in compliance with comparable regulatory procedures established by the Parties. Having received this information from the ATCPs, the Secretariat shall put the data on its website. The Secretariat shall maintain and update the database. The Secretariat’s authority and responsibility to collect data from States concerning Antarctic activities approved by these States, and the establishment of a continuously updated database, is fully consistent with Measure 1 (2003) Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Draft Decision ___ (2005)


Database on Activities Planned in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The Representatives,

Noting that pursuant to Article 3 of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment; 

Noting further that pursuant to Article 8 of the Protocol the Parties shall establish special procedures for prior assessment of impacts on the Antarctic environment and its dependent or associated ecosystems related to planned activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. 

Recognizing the need to create conditions whereby any Antarctic activity shall be conducted only in compliance with international legal requirements for the protection of the Antarctic environment;

Acknowledging the need for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to exchange information on all Antarctic activities;

Recalling Article 2 of Measure 1 (2003) Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;


Decide:

To establish a database on all activities planned in the Antarctic Treaty Area: 
а)	Which are authorized by the Consultative Parties as activities permissible in the Antarctic Treaty area, or
б) 	Which are being conducted in compliance with comparable regulatory procedures established by the Parties.

That the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat develop and maintain the database.

That the database establishment procedures be consistent with the Annex to this Decision.  


    
	 

Annex to Decision ___ (2005)
  
Procedures to Establish a Database on Activities Planned 
in the Antarctic Treaty Area

1. The Consultative Parties shall inform the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat about all activities planned in the Antarctic Treaty area and authorized by the Consultative Parties as permissible activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, or in the absence of a formal permit issued by a Party, activities which are being conducted in compliance with comparable regulatory procedures established by that Party, no later than 15 days prior to commencement of the planned activities.

2. The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat shall inform the Consultative Parties about all activities referred to in paragraph 1 above by posting the received data on the Secretariat’s website, no later than 10 days prior to commencement of the planned activities.
