DECEPTION ISLAND 
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREA (ASMA) 
MANAGEMENT PACKAGE
DECEPTION ISLAND 
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREA (ASMA) MANAGEMENT PACKAGE


Joint Working Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom, and United States


1. Introduction

Deception Island was first raised for discussion as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) at ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994), in order to protect the island’s “scientific, nature conservation, wildlife as well as its historic values”. Recent Information Papers (XII SATCM/IP8, XXIV ATCM/IP63, XXV ATCM/IP28 and XXVI ATCM/IP48) submitted to the CEP, summarise the extensive consultation, site investigations and progress made by those Parties with major interests in Deception Island (Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, UK and USA) to achieve that objective. The advice of ASOC and IAATO is also gratefully acknowledged.

2. Deception Island Management Package

The above Parties recommended an island-wide approach to the management of activities at Deception Island and the Management Package was presented to XXVII ATCM (Cape Town, 2004) in Working Paper 13. It proposed that Deception Island be designated as an ASMA, comprising a matrix of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs), and further zones in which activities will be subject to a code of conduct. 

The overall aim of the Management Package is to conserve and protect the unique environment of Deception Island, whilst managing the variety of competing demands placed upon it, including science, tourism, and the conservation of its natural and historic values. It also aims to safeguard those working on, or visiting, the island. 

The island-wide Management Package comprises the following key documents:

    • Deception Island ASMA Management Plan;
    • Management Plan for ASPA 140, Sites of Unique Botanical Importance, Deception Island;
    • Management Plan for ASPA 145, Port Foster, Deception Island;
    • Conservation Strategy for HSM No. 71, Whalers Bay, Deception Island;
    • Facilities Zone Code of Conduct;
    • Code of Conduct for Visitors to Deception Island;
    • Volcanic Alert Scheme and Escape Strategy.
 
3. Intersessional review 

CEP VII established an Intersessional Contact Group to review the Management Package for Deception Island against the Terms of Reference established by the CEP in paragraph 8 of the ‘Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft ASPA and ASMA Management Plans’ (contained in Annex 4 of the Report of CEP VII).
 
The ICG was convened by the UK through the newly established CEP Annex V Management Plan Forum, access to which is open to all CEP Members and Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, as well as CCAMLR, COMNAP, SCAR, ASOC and IAATO. 

Only a few comments were received (from Japan, USA, and CCAMLR). This perhaps reflects the very considerable level of international consultation and collaboration that had already taken place since 1999 on the preparation of the Management Package, and the widespread agreement that had already been achieved.

Table 1 shows a summary of the major comments received (minor editorial comments are not included). 

Table 1

Section
Party/
Observer
Comment
Amendment

Appendix 1 (ASPA 140) 
& Appendix 2 (ASPA 145)

Japan   
Clarification needed in Section 7 (Permit Conditions) on who in the Deception Island Management Group reports should be submitted to. 
Text amended to read ‘submit a report to the Chair of the Deception Island Management Group’ (Section 7).

Appendix 2 (ASPA 145)
CCAMLR
Due to the shallow nature of the site and the location within the caldera, the plan would not affect CCAMLR-related activities. CCAMLR therefore recommended that the plan should be approved. 

However, CCAMLR noted scope to improve the plan. Further scientific information is required to determine whether the site continues to require protection. The description of physical and biological features should be expanded upon,  and the rationale for the location and size of the two sites explained. Also, information on recent research conducted in the area should be included.

The period of designation for ASPA 145 has been revised to 2 years, during which time further thorough review of this site will be undertaken (Section 4). 

USA
The USA drew attention to the most current research undertaken in Port Foster. This includes very relevant information on the values of this area, and should be used to determine the requirement for the long –term protection of the site. 

Further detail was requested on why these 2 particular sites were chosen for protection.

As above, the period of designation for ASPA 145 has been revised to 2 years, during which time further thorough review of this site will be undertaken (Section 4). 

Appendix 3
(Conservation Strategy for Whalers Bay)
USA
Section 4.2 - Would the broader Deception Island Management Group discuss the installation of interpretative material at the site? 
Text amended to read ‘No new buildings or other structures (apart from interpretative material agreed by Chile, Norway and the UK in consultation with the wider Deception Island Management Group) are to be erected at the site' (Section 4.2).

Appendix 4
(Code of Conduct for Facilities Zone)
USA
Section 2.1 - Include a recommendation to re-use existing sites for construction activities, where practicable. 
Recommendation included (Section 2.1). 


Section 4 - Include a recommendation for secondary containment for fuel storage 
Recommendation included (Section 4). 

4. Conclusion

The ICG is satisfied that the Management Package for Deception Island has been suitably reviewed and revised, that it meets its stated aims, and that it is consistent with the aims of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol. 

The final Management Package for Deception Island is therefore attached to this Working Paper and is submitted for further consideration by the CEP and adoption by the ATCM. 
 

April 2005

