Scott Base and Mcmurdo Station: 
Report of an inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
SCOTT BASE AND McMURDO STATION:
REPORT OF AN INSPECTION UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND ARTICLE 14 OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

Introduction
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty provides that each Consultative Party has the right to designate observers to undertake inspections in Antarctica.  Observers have complete freedom of access at any time to any or all areas of Antarctica.  Parties are obliged to have all areas of Antarctic, including stations, installations and equipment open at all time to inspection by designated observers.  This also applies to all ships and aircraft at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel in Antarctica.  The provision for inspection is a key element of the Treaty and is designed to promote the objective of the Treaty and ensure observance of its provisions.

Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) also provides for the conduct of inspections, consistent with Article VII of the Treaty, to promote protection of the Antarctic environment and ensure compliance with the Protocol.  The Protocol requires that reports of inspections are sent to the Parties whose facilities are subject to inspection and that, after those Parties have been given the opportunity to comment, the report and any comments on it are to be circulated to the Committee on Environmental Protection, considered at the next Treaty meeting and then made publicly available.

During the 2004-05 austral summer Australia undertook an inspection of New Zealand’s Scott Base and the United States’ McMurdo Station.  This was the fifth inspection mission undertaken by Australia since the entry into force of the Treaty in 1961, and the first by Australia since the entry into force of the Protocol in 1998.  

Conduct of the inspections
The Australian observer team conducted inspections in the Ross Sea region over a five day period from 21 to 25 January 2005.  The observer team comprised:
Mr Christos Moraitis, Senior Legal Adviser, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
	Dr Conall O’Connell, Deputy Secretary, Department of the Environment and Heritage
	Mr Andrew Jackson, Manager, Antarctic and International Policy, Australian Antarctic Division

All inspections were conducted in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol.  In accordance with Article VII the names of the Australian observer team were notified by diplomatic note to all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.  This was done in advance of the observer team’s departure for Antarctica.  

The activities of the observer team in Antarctica were subject to an authorisation in accordance with sections 12E and 12F of Australia’s Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980 which implements the obligations of the Protocol in domestic law.

The Australian observer team looked at the following:
	Scott Base (New Zealand) 	21 and 22 January 2005
	McMurdo Station (United States)	23, 24, 25 January 2005
	Logistic facilities on the Ross Ice Shelf (United States)	23 and 25 January 2005
	RV Nathanial B Palmer (United States)	24 January 2005
	Protected areas on Ross Island	23 January 2005
	Tourist activities on Ross Island	25 January 2005

The Australian observer team entered the Antarctic Treaty area on 21 January 2005 and departed on 25 January.  The observers were taken to Antarctica as guests of the New Zealand Antarctic Program.  Transport between Christchurch and Antarctica was on a Lockheed C141 (Starlifter) operated by the US Air Force in support of the United States Antarctic Program.  The observers were accommodated at Scott Base.  Logistic support for movement around Ross Island was generously provided by both the New Zealand and United States programs.  

In undertaking the inspections the observer team was guided by the inspection checklists adopted under Resolution 5 (1995) of the 19th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  The observers also looked at activities not subject to the checklist.  The observers carried with them information exchanged and made publicly available by the New Zealand and United States governments in accordance with Article VII.5 of the Antarctic Treaty.

The inspections were greatly assisted by the quantity and quality of information provided by the operators of the stations inspected.  This information, provided in the format of the inspection checklists, greatly facilitated the task of gathering volumes of critical data in a short time.
Summary of observations
Australia last inspected Scott Base and McMurdo Station in 1964.  It is believed that Scott Base was last inspected in 1989, and McMurdo Station in 1988.  Accordingly, these were the first inspections of these stations for some 15 years, and the first since the entry into force of the Protocol in 1998.

The Australian observer team is pleased to report that it was welcomed cordially at each station visited.  The level of support provided by both the New Zealand and United States Antarctic programs in facilitating the activities of the Australian observer team was an excellent example, on the ice, of the cooperation promoted by the Antarctic Treaty.  The observers were provided with full access to any of the facilities and equipment they sought to inspect.  The observers are pleased to report that there is full compliance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty at both stations inspected.  No military manoeuvres were observed and any military personnel and equipment in Antarctica was unarmed and directed solely to the support of civilian scientific activities.

Both stations are directed at facilitating the conduct of sophisticated scientific research programs on Ross Island and elsewhere in Antarctica, and both stations demonstrate their Governments’ commitment to cooperation under the Antarctic Treaty by actively supporting the operations in Antarctica of other Parties.

Furthermore, there is a very high level of compliance with the provisions of the Protocol and active steps are being taken to address the minor compliance issues observed.  The inspection revealed “state of the art” performance with respect to several aspects of the operation of these stations, demonstrating that there are areas of excellence at both stations where other operators in Antarctica can draw on the substantial achievements made — these relate in particular to the segregation and handling of solid wastes and hazardous wastes, the treatment of liquid wastes, cleaning up the sites of previous activities, and mechanisms to increase energy efficiency.

The full report of the inspection provides details on the stations and other places observed.  The information is presented in the sequence of the obligations presented in the Treaty (article by article) and in the Protocol (by article, followed by the annexes).  Some additional observations are also reported.  The appendixes contain information provided by the New Zealand and United States Antarctic Programs against the standard checklist for inspections.


