TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ANTARCTIC TREATY
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote     : ANT 42 - REV.1
Date     : November 26, 1968
Original : In English

REVISED INTERIM GUIDE LINES FOR
VOLUNTARY REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC PELAGIC SEALING

(Submitted by Norway, United-States and United-Kingdom)

Recalling Recommendation IV-21 (Interim Guide Lines for the Volun-
tary Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing) and wishing to revise
them in the light of recent additional scientific advice;

Recalling  the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora, adopted under the Antarctic Treaty;

Recognising that the seal stocks south of 60 South latitude are
a resource of potential value which at some future date may require
a binding international agreement for its effective regulation;

Recognising that this resource should not be depleted by over-
exploitation, and hence that any harvesting should be regulated
at or below the level of the optimum sustainable yield;

Recognising that in order to improve scientific knowledge and so
place exploitation on a rational basis, every effort should be made
both to encourage biological research on these seal populations
and to gain information from the statistics of future sealing
operations;

Desiring to promote and achieve the objectives of protection,
scientific study and rational use of Antarctic seals;

Having regard to the conservation principles developed by the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) of the Inter-
national Council of Scientific Unions, and in particular the
report of SCAR to National Antarctic Committees in 1968 on
pelagic sealing;

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that in
accordance with Recommendation III-11 each Government should
voluntarily take account of the following Revised Interim Guide Lines
for the Voluntary Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing
appended to the Report of the Fifth Consultative meeting.

.../. . .
- 2 -

REVISED INTERIM GUIDE LINES FOR THE VOLUNTARY REGULATION
OF ANTARCTIC PELAGIC SEALING

(to be appended to the Report of the Fifth Consultative Meeting)

1.      The total number of seals of each species taken in the area south
of 60° South Latitude should not exceed the number for that
species set so as to bring the population to, or maintain it at
the level giving the optimum sustainable yield.

2.      The number will be set in the light of the best available scien-
tific evidence, and will be revised at regular intervals. The
best present advice regarding numbers is given in Annex A.

3.      A seal should not be killed or taken when it is in the water.

4.      The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal (Mirounga
leonina), and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus should not
be killed or taken except in an emergency or in accordance
with a permit.

5.      Within the period specified in Annex C no Weddell Seal
(Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old, or older, should be
killed or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance with
a permit.

6.      For the purposes of these Guide Lines, the area south of 60°
South Latitude should be divided into the Sealing Zones set
out in Annex B. No seals should be killed or taken except in
the zones, and at the times specified in Annex B.

7.      No seals should be killed or taken within the closed season
designated in Annex C, other than in an emergency or in accor-
dance with a permit.

8.      Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that forms
a seal breeding area or is the site of long-term scientific
research on seals may be declared a Seal Reserve by the
Governments. Such Seal Reserves are listed in Annex D. Within
any Seal Reserve seals may not be killed or taken except in
an emergency or in accordance with a permit.

 
./..
- 4 -

ANNEX A   -   PERMISSIBLE CATCH

With present information it is not possible to give figures for the optimum sustainable yield, or for the levels of popula-
tion which would provide such yields. Such figures can only be 
estimated with any useful precisions from the analysis of the 
populations after they have been exposed to exploitation for a 
period.

It is suggested that if catches do not exceed the following 
safety levels until the results of such analysis are available 
then the populations will not be reduced below the level giving 
the optimum yield.

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon carcinophagus)     200,000 individuals
                                            in any one year

Leopard Seals (Hydrurga Leptonyx)           15,000 individuals
                                            in any one year

Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)      10,000 individuals
                                            in any one year

ANNEX B   -   SEALING ZONES

1.  The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with those used 
by the whaling industry are designated:

    Zone 1  Between 60° and 120° West Longitude

    Zone 2  Between 0° and 60° West Longitude together with 
            that part of the Weddell Sea lying westwards of 
            60° West Longitude.

    Zone 3  Between 0° and 70° East Longitude

    Zone 4  Between 70° and 130° East Longitude

    Zone 5  Between 130° East Longitude and 170° West Longitude

    Zone 6  Between 120° and 170° West Longitude.

2.  During the season 1969-1970, being the first season to 
which these Guide Lines apply, no sealing should be permitted in 
Zone 1. In the second season of application, Zone 2 should be 
closed to sealing, and thereafter each zone should be closed for 
a season in sequence.

.../..

ANT 42-REV 1
- 5 -

ANNEX  C  -  CLOSED SEASONS

1.  The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is a
    Closed Season.

2.  No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old or
    older should be killed or taken between 1 September and
    15 December inclusive.

ANNEX  D  -  SEAL RESERVES

The following areas are declared Seal Reserves:

1.  The area between 60°20' and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05'
    and 46°25' West Longitude, including the South Orkney
    Islands.

2.  The area of the south western Ross Sea south of 76° South
    Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude, including Ross
    Islands.

3.  The area of Edisto Inlet south and west of a line drawn
    between Cape Hallett (72°19'S.: 170°18'E) and Helm Point
    (72°11'S.: 170°00'E).

ANNEX  E  -  EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.  Each Government should provide to other Governments
    statistical information on all seals taken within the
    area to which these Guide Lines relate.

2.  This information should include the number of adult
    individuals and pups of each species killed or taken during
    each operating day, specifying in which of the Zones set out
    in Annex B they have been killed or taken.

ANT  42-REV  1
