TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE         QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        пятое консультативное совещание
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote : ANT. 27
Data : November 18th, 68
Original : English

Report on United States Requirements Relating to
Tourist Activities in Antarctica and Information on
Tourist Activities Organized in or Proceeding
from the United States During 1966-1968

The United States does not control access to Antarctica
by either United States citizens or foreign nationals. However,
the United States does reserve the right to judge whether or not
tourists can be admitted to any of its Antarctic Stations, and
under what conditions..

The United States expects tourists expeditions to be self-
sufficient. In the event of an emergency befalling a tourist
expedition in Antarctica, the United States would respond to a
request for humanitarian assistance as it does in any part of the
world. Reimbursement would be required in case goods and services
were furnished beyond a humanitarian assistance and rescue
situation.

ANT. 27
- 2 -

Except in emergency, United States Government resources
will not be used for the support of tourist enterprises.

Tourist activities must be conducted in compliance with
the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, recommendations approved
under the Treaty, and the conditions applicable at stations to be
visited.

Under the Antarctic Treaty, the United States informs the
other Contracting Parties, in advance, of "all expeditions to and
within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all
expeditions organized in or proceeding from its territory." In the
case of tourist expeditions, special notice is also given to any
government whose stations the expedition intends to visit.

The United States Government provides to other governments
at their request, information regarding the conditions upon which
it will grant permission for tourist groups to visit Antarctic
stations which it maintains.

To implement the above, and to insure, insofar as possible
that tour expeditions sponsored by United States citizens and
organizations or organized in or proceeding from the United States
are conducted with safety and success :

    a. The United States considers the feasibility, safety,
and self sufficiency of United States tourist expeditions
as plans are made known. The United States advises the tour
sponsors on these matters and on the operational limitations
within Antarctica. These limitations may be expected to
restrict severely the United States capability to furnish
goods, services, and even commonly expected courtesies to
tourists at United States Stations.

ANT. 27
- 3 -

b. Except under emergency or rescue conditions,
admission of tourist groups to visit United States
Antarctica Stations can only be granted when it is clear
to the United States that the tour concerned takes adequate
account of the above factors.

c. The United States prepares the necessary statements
of conditions applicable at United States Stations to be
visited by tourist expeditions.

UNCLASSIFIED

The following conditions are set forth for tourist
expeditions visiting any United States Stations :

  1. It is expected that the tourist group will, utilizing
existing communication facilities, notify the station prior to
its planned arrival at the station area. The U.S. Officer-in-
Charge will at that time provide the expedition with information
regarding local conditions in the area, particularly those of
operational interest such as local weather and areas for anchoring
or mooring.

  2. Upon arrival of the tourist group in the station area
the U.S. Officer-in-Charge and the Station Scientific Leader, or
their representatives, will consult with the tour group leader to
establish a program for the visit. They will further brief the
tour group leader on local safety requirements, historic sites,
special scientific study areas, and such other local restrictions
to be observed during the visit. It is desirable that the tourists
be providad with a briefing on the scientific program and the
operation of the station.

ANT. 27
- 4 -

3. Visits of station personnel to tour group ships or camps will be arranged between the U.S. Officer-in-Charge or Station Scientific Leader, as appropriate, and the tour group leader.

4. Normal courtesies will be provided the tourists as these are available at the station, but beyond this, services will not be provided. Since the tour group is self-sufficient, quarters and transportation for tourists will not be provided at the station, except in emergency.

5. The Station Scientific Leader and the U.S. Officer-in-Charge will take such measures as are within their power to assure the personal safety of tourists in their station area and to prevent interference with the Antarctic scientific program, provided however, that the United States Government shall not be held responsible for any loss or damage of life or property which may befall any tourist in Antarctica owing to accident or mishap outside the control of the United States Government or its personnel, or owing to failure to observe Treaty provisions, Agreed Measures, regulations and policy statements issued thereunder, or warnings or restrictions given by local authority.

6. Visits of tourists to  the station or station area shall be at their personal risk and governed by the same limitation of United States Government liability as set forth in paragraph 5 above .

7. Tourists and tour group leaders will alike be required to abide by those provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, Agreed Measures, and regulations and policy statements issued thereunder which pertain to non-governmental visits to Antarctica, as well as any special safeguards, warnings and restrictions of a local

ANT. 27
- 5 -

nature which have been brought to their attention by the U.S.
Officer-in-Charge or his representative with respect to particular
station areas.

8. In the event that any tour group does not fulfill its
obligations as set forth above with respect to any station or
station area, the Naval Officer-in-Charge or Station Scientific 
Leader, as appropriate, will advise the tour group that its visit
cannot be accommodated at the station.

Tourist activity organized in or proceeding from the United
States to Antarctica has thus far been limited to tours by Lindblad
Travel, Inc., with offices in New-York (Lindblad Travel Building
133 East 55 Street).

The Lindblad firm had its first tour January 13-February 13,
1966 with a tourist group of 50 persons departing from Buenos Aires
Argentina aboard the Argentine vessel LAPATAIA and returning
to Ushuaia, Argentina. It visited the following places in the Antarc-
tic Peninsula :

      Admiral Brown Station (Argentine)
      Lt. Groussac Station (Argentine)
      Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
          Deception Station (Argentine)
          Base F (United Kingdom)
          Pedro Aguirre Cerda (Chile)
      Lt. Camara Station (Argentine)
      Lasseure Station (Argentine)
      Hope Bay, Trinity Peninsula

In 1967 Lindblad Travel, Inc., carried out two tours,
(January 15-28 and January 29-February 12) originating from and 
returning to Ushuaia, Argentina, aboard the LAPATAIA to visit the

ANT. 27
- 6 -

following places on the Antarctic Peninsula (there were 46 on 
the first tour and 48 on the second tour) :

Lt. Camera Station (Argentine)
    Potter Cove, King  George Island, South Shetland Island
    Hope Bay, Trinity Peninsula
    Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
        Deception Station (Argentine)
        Base F (United Kingdom)
        Pedro Aguirre Cerda (Chile)
    Argentine Islands West Coast
    Admiral Brown Station (Argentine)
    Palmer Station (United States)
    Melchior Station ( Argentine)

Lindblad had three tours to Antarctica    in 1968. The first 
two tours departed from and returned to New Zealand aboard the 
MAGGA DAN (Danish vessel). The first tour of January 8-February 4 
of 21 tourists visited McMurdo and Scott Stations. The second 
tour of February 6-March 4 for 18 tourists visited Hallett, 
McMurdo and Scott Stations. The third tour for 60 tourists, 
February 4-27, originated in Punta Arenas, Chile and returned to 
Puerto Montt, Chile. It visited the following places on the An-
tartic Peninsula aboard the Chilean vessel NAVARINO :

    Potter Cove, King George Island, South Shetland Island
    Half Moon Bay, Livingstone Island, South Shetland Islands
    Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
    Paradise Harbor, West Coast
    Palmer Station (United States)

ANT. 27
