TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE         QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote     :  ANT 30.
Date     : 19 November 1968

World Meteorological Organization
No. 25.229T/AA/TP, ANNEX

STATEMENT TO THE FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING OF THE ANTARCTIC
TREATY STATES ON PRESENT AND PLANNED METEOROLOGICAL ACTIVITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC FORMING PART OF THE WORLD WEATHER WATCH

Introduction

1.      In the early years of the present decade the United Nations
General Assembly adopted two Resolutions (1721 (XVI) and1802 (XVII)
on International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
These resolutions stemmed from developments in the use of satellites
and other technological advances and called upon WMO to further
progress in the atmospheric sciences.  This invitation in turn led
to plans for the World Weather Watch (WWW).  The purpose of the
World Weather Watch is to take full advantage of the new opportu-
nities presented by the developments mentioned above and thereby
to improve meteorological services throughout the world.  Such
improvements will have a profound impact on agriculture, commerce
and industry and will permit more accurate and timely warnings of
severe storms and other weather hazards for the protection of life
and property.  It will further the safety and efficiency of intern-
ational air and sea transportation and provide essential support
to nations in the management of water resources and food production.

2.      Since the adoption of the General Assembly resolutions, a
great deal has been done to design and plan the implementation of
the new world-wide system.  The need for a truly global system has,
of course, long been recognized and the Antarctic must clearly play
an important role in such a system.  In 1967 the Fifth World Meteo-
rological Congress adopted a plan and implementation programme
covering all parts of the world including the Antarctic.  The main
features of this plan are the Global Observing System (GOS), the
./.
- 2 -

Global Data-Processing System (GDPS), the Global Telecommunication System (GTS), Research and Training.  In this statement each of these features is examined both generally and in so far as the Antarctic is concerned.  Information on the action being taken is also given.

Global Observing System

3.      The present Global Observing System is principally deficient over most ocean areas, in the tropics and in remote land areas. To remedy these deficiencies, extension of conventional observing networks and deployment of meteorological satellites and other new observing tools will be used to ensure a more homogeneous distribution of meteorological observations on a global basis. During the fifth financial period (1968-1971) the following maximum average spacing between stations should be aimed at as a first step:

(a)     1000 km for upper-air stations over continental regions and ocean regions having suitably distributed islands ;

(b)     1500 km for upper-air observations over open ocean areas ;

(c)     1000 km for surface observations over the oceans ;

(d)     500 km for surface stations on land.

Upper-air observations should be made twice daily at 00 and 12 GMT.

4.      At each session of a WMO Regional Association, a recommended network of surface and upper-air stations is approved.  For the Antarctic this task is carried out by the Executive Committee Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology and the present requirements in this respect were set up by the group at its first session in 1966 and adopted by the Executive Committee in its Resolution 5 (EC-XVIII).  Thus the Antarctic network of observing stations has the same status as those in other parts of the world. There have of course been changes in the Antarctic network since early 1966 and they will be taken into account when the group holds its second session in 1969.  Full implementation of these regional basic networks is eminently desirable and is urged upon Members.

5.      The most critical deficiency is in the upper-air networks and Congress decided that if, for practical reasons, full implementation could not be carried out by 1971, every effort should be made to achieve a minimum implementation programme of upper-air observations in order to approach the criteria laid down above.  For the Antarctic three stations are included in the list, i.e. 88952 Argentine Is., 88968 Islas Oreadas, 94986 Mawson.  At each of these stations there is a need to increase the observational programme.  The order in which the additional programmes are implemented will be governed by many local factors.  The main requirement is that each Member concerned should take the initiative in arranging implementation of the minimum upper-air plan.

ANT 30
./.
- 3 -

6.      The present state of implementation of the network of 
observing stations in the Antarctic is shown below :


-------------------------------------------------------------
                    Surface                            Radio-   Radio-
-------------------------------------------------------------
                        00  03  06  09  12  15  18  21  00  12  00  12  
-------------------------------------------------------------
Observations            
requested     ...   30  30  30  30  30  30  30  30  17  17  17  17  
Observations            
implemented  ...   27  13  26  18  27  18  27  18  12  10  11  11  
Deficiencies  ...    3  17   4  12   3  12   3  12   5   7   6   6  
-------------------------------------------------------------
% Implementation     90  43  87  60  90  60  90  60  71  59  65  65  
-------------------------------------------------------------

Action      
(1)     When the Executive Committee Working Group on Antarctic 
Meteorology holds its second session in early 1969 it will 
be required to review thoroughly the network in the Antarctic. 
In reviewing the network the group will give attention to the 
WWW spacing criteria as well as to changes which have taken 
place in the Antarctic since 1966 ;

(2)     Members of WMO which are signatories of the Antarctic Treaty 
are being urged to give high priority to the full implementation 
of those observations in the Antarctic urgently required for 
WWW purposes.

Global Data-Processing System

7.      During the fifth financial period (1968-1971) the Global Data-
Processing System will prepare and make available to all Members of 
WMO global products through a system of World, Regional and National 
Meteorological Centres.  The functions of the various centres will 
not affect any international commitments of Members for support to 
shipping and aviation, nor determine the manner in which Members 
execute these responsibilities.  These centres will be equipped to 
including high-speed computers.

ANT 30
- 4 -

8.       The functions of the three different classes of meteo-
rological centres will be :

(a)    World Meteorological Centres (WMCs), located at Melbourne,
Moscow and Washington, are regarded as service centres for
analyses and prognoses of the large-scale atmospheric
processes for use by all Members as aids to forecasting
and to assist in other long-range planning.

(b)    Regional Meteorological Centres (RMCs), which will be
established where the need exists and with the consent
of the Members to be served. An RMC should perform the
functions required by the Members it serves and should
meet certain established criteria.

(c)    National Meteorological Centres (NMCs), which will be the
responsibility of the Member concerned. Each Member will
decide, in the light of its own capabilities and needs,
the extent to which it will wish to receive and use the
products of WMCs and RMCs.

9.       For the Antarctic, the eighteenth session of the WMO
Executive Committee supported the views of the first session of
its Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology that it would be
desirable to establish centres similar to RMCs at Molodzhnaja,
McMurdo, B.A. Aguirre Cerda and possibly other locations.  The
main functions of these centres would be restricted to :

(a)    The issue of analyses and prognoses of surface and upper-air
conditions for use of associated meteorological centres,
as required ;

(b)    Support of research in the atmospheric sciences.

10.    More recently the twentieth session of the Executive
Committee further developed its earlier ideas on this subject.  It
considered that there is a well-established need for centres in
the Antarctic to provide meteorological service to Members carrying
out scientific programmes in the Antarctic, as well as for shipping
and aviation activities. In view of the restricted functions of
these centres as quoted above, however, the Committee decided that
the term Regional Meteorological Centre as used in the WWW Plan
would not be appropriate and that the centres should be called
Antarctic Meteorological Centres (AMCs).  The Committee recognized
that these centres will have telecommunication functions for the
dissemination of their processed data and also that there is a
need to determine more precisely the specific functions of such
centres in order that Members called upon to operate them may
decide whether they are able to assume the necessary responsibilities
Noting that the list of centres (given in paragraph 9 above) has
not yet been finalized, the Committee instructed its Working Group
on Antarctic Meteorology to give urgent attention to this matter.

ANT 30
- 5 -

Action

(1) Both the questions of functions of AMCs and the finalization
of a list of these centres are now under study by the Working
Group on Antarctic Meteorology. Both matters will be further
considered at the second session of the group in early 1969.

(2) The WMO Members which are signatories of the Antarctic Treaty
providing AMC facilities will be urged to accept as soon as
possible the full responsibility for the functions decided
upon.

Global Telecommunication System

11. The purpose of the improved Global Telecommunication System
during the period 1968-1971 will be to collect and distribute raw
observational data to National, Regional and World Meteorological
Centres (including Antarctic Meteorological Centres) and subsequen-
tly to distribute the resulting processed information to other
WMCs, RMCs and NMCs (including Antarctic Meteorological Centres).
During this period Members should seek to install jointly a relia-
ble global circuit which will interconnect all Regions and have
sufficient capacity to exchange the meteorological data and pro-
ducts required by Members.

12. The Global Telecommunication System should be organized on a
three-level basis, namely :

(a) The Main Trunk Circuit to interconnect the WMCs and appro-
priate RTHs (Regional Telecommunication Hubs), RMCs and NMCs.
All the RTHs and RMCs should have equal access to the Main
Trunk Circuit;

(b) The Regional telecommunication networks which should be
capable of collecting, exchanging and distributing observa-
tional data within the Region to meet the needs of Members.
They should also be able to exchange and distribute proces-
sed information to meet the needs of Members of the Region
and to interchange such information with other Regions ;

(c) The national telecommunication networks which Members should
ensure are adequate to meet international as well as national
needs.

13. As regards the meteorological telecommunication arrangements
in the Antarctic, following the recommendations of the first
session of the working group, the Executive Committee set up a plan
for the collection and routing of surface and upper-air synoptic
reports. At the same time it considered that these arrangements
should be kept under constant review and that the collection arran-
gements should be speeded up to meet the overall requirements of
the WWW. The following time criteria were set out :

(a) For collection of surface synoptic reports at designated
meteorological centres from Antarctic stations for all synop-
tic hours : 30 minutes after the standard observing hours.
- 6 -

(b)  For the collection of upper-air data at designated meteorological centres from Antarctic stations : 30 minutes after the observing station presents the coded report to the telecommunication system ;

(c)  For the collection of Antarctic data at the World Meteorological Centre, Melbourne, not more than :

        (i)     60 minutes after the standard time of observation for 
surface reports for all synoptic hours ;

        (ii)    60 minutes after the observing station presents the 
coded meteorological report to the telecommunication system for all upper-air data.

14.  The twentieth session of the Executive Committee felt that a number of changes have taken place in the Antarctic Treaty Telecommunication system since the Antarctic Treaty Telecommunications Meeting in 1963 and consequently that the system no longer meets all requirements and needs to be revised. In particular, it drew attention to the advances made since that time in the planning and implementation of the Global Telecommunication System and the desirability of bringing the telecommunication system in the Antarctic to a similar standard It also recongnized that the system must meet the requirements of other scientific disciplines and operational activities in the Antarctic as well as meteorology, although meteorological traffic is much larger than the traffic of any other scientific discipline on Antarctic telecommunication channels. In addition the Committee stressed WMO's readiness to give full support to the Antarctic Treaty States in designing, in consultation with other users, a consolidated plan for an Antarctic telecommunication System which would be compatible with and linked to the Global Telenumber of occasions that data from Antarctic stations are of great importance for global and regional weather analysis and prediction, including services to aviation and for marine activities.

15.  Another question considered by Executive Committee was the recommendation adopted by WMO Regional Associations I(Africa), III (South America) and V (South-West Pacific) that the relevant sectors of the Antarctic be included in their zones of responsibili-ty for the collections of ships' weather reports. In view of recent developments in the Antarctic the Committee felt that further examination of this question is desirable and requested the working group to study it and report to the twenty-first session.
- 7 -

Action_

(1)    Revised information on requirements of individual Members 
for Antarctic data are now being assembled.

(2)    Selected WMO Members will shortly carry out a check on the 
reception of Antarctic meteorological data at various stations.

(3)    WMO ready to assist in design of consolidated plan for an 
Antarctic telecommunication system compatible with and linked 
to GTS.

(4)    The WMO Executive Committee Working Group on Antarctic Meteo-
rology is studying the question of responsibility for the 
collection of ships' weather reports in areas south of 60°S. 
Will be further considered at second session of group in 
early 1969.

((5)  Members of WMO which are signatories of the Antarctic Treaty, 
should be asked to co-operate fully in the establishment and 
operation of a Telecommunication System Meeting the needs of 
meteorologists, operational and other users (in close colla-
boration with SCAR).

The research programme

16.    Major improvements in the accuracy and range of operational 
forecasting and serious investigations of the feasibility of large-
scale weather modification and control can only come from a greatly 
increased understanding of the behaviour of the globe's atmosphere. 
A vigorous programme of research on the general circulation of the 
atmosphere must therefore be established as an essential ingredient 
of the WWW. While the operational programme of the WWW will provide 
observational data for the testing of physico-mathematical models 
of the atmosphere, the results of such computations will serve 
to guide the further development and the most economic design of 
the operational systems.

17.    Since their introduction in recent years, mathematical models 
of the general circulation of the atmosphere have grown in complexity 
and now incorporate many of the basic physical and dynamical 
processes.  Nevertheless they are still only very inadequate 
descriptions of the real atmosphere.  In particular, the processes 
of convection, condensation, heating and cooling, mass and energy 
exchange between the atmosphere and the underlying land and ocean 
surfaces have yet to be incorporated satisfactorily.  Many of these 
processes, although operative on scales smaller than the global 
circulation, nevertheless interact strongly with it, and their 
proper study will require detailed observational programmes perhaps 
over a number of limited areas.
- 8 -

18. The stress placed upon research as part of the WWW indicates clearly its importance as part of the programme of meteorological activities in the Antarctic. Scientific research is, of course, primarily the responsibility of Members and the role of WMO is primarily one of encouraging and assisting in the co-ordination of research.

19. Mention must, however, be made of the International Antarctic Meteorological Research Centre located in Melbourne, Australia. The centre is an international venture under the sponsorship of SCAR and is endorsed by WMO. Its aim is to extend man's knowledge of the atmospheric structure and processes over Antarctic regions by providing an opportunity for scientists of different nations to bridge the gaps of distance and language by working in close collaboration. The facilities have been provided by the Australian Government and WMO is able to provide fellowships to assist scientists wishing to work at the centre.

Action

(1) Continue to encourage and co-ordinate research activities in Antarctic meteorology and especially into those processes interacting with the global circulation.

(2) Continue support for scientists desiring to undertake a period of work at the International Antarctic Meteorological Research Centre.

Conclusion

20. In this statement an attempt has been made to explain briefly the global meteorological activities now being undertaken as part of the World Weather Watch Plan and Implementation Programme and the vital part which the Antarctic has to play in these activities. It will of course be obvious that the many details of each part of the WWW Plan and Implementation Programme is attached to this statement. In addition a status report on progress in implementing WWW is now being printed and copies will be distributed to all WMO Members in the near future.

21. It is hoped that the Fifth Consultative Meeting of Antarctic Treaty States will support the action being taken by WMO in the field of Antarctic meteorology and associated telecommunications and call upon each signatory to collaborate fully in these efforts to improve the present system within the general framework of the World Weather Watch. In particular it is suggested that the meeting may wish to endorse the arrangement whereby co-operation in meteorology and related telecommunication matters is established through the Permanent Representative with WMO of each signatory State.
