TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE        QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING             ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote : ANT 37
Date : 20 November 1968
Original : in English

CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH THE BRITISH ANTARCTIC
SURVEY ACCEPTS TOURIST VISITORS TO THEIR STATIONS

1968-69

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)

The British Antarctic Survey is prepared to accept visitors as long as their presence does not interfere with the scientific operations to which the Survey's stations are devoted. For this reason the Survey requests that tour organisers and tourists comply with the conditions (1) to (7) listed below :

(1) The British Antarctic Survey lays particular importance on the condition that Station Commanders should be informed by the Captain of the cruise vessel (or by the tour organiser) by radio at least two days before their intended arrival at that station and should inform the Station Commander of the number of tourists who wish to visit the station. The Call Signs are : Deception Island ZHF 22, and Argentine Islands ZHF 44.. First call to both stations should be at 0100 G.M.T. on 4067 Kc/s; the subsequent schedules to be arranged during this contact.. The Survey has noted that prior contact with their station at Argentine Islands was not made by last season's cruise.

(2) The tour organiser and the tourists should follow the instructions of the Station Commanders in respect of access to quarters and interference with the scientific work, the use of station equipment and materials and, in the interests of safety, the movement of visitors in the neighbourhood of the stations.

./..
- 2 -

(3) The tour organisers should agree to restrict the number of 
tourists who visit the station at any one time in consultation 
with the Station Commander. It will probably not be practica-
ble to show round more than about twelve people at a time.

(4) The tour organisers, in the spirit of paragraph 3 of Recommen-
dation IV-27 of the Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting, should undertake to comply with these conditions and 
with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, particularly in 
connection with the "Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora".

(5) The tour organisers should ensure that tourists do not enter 
the Specially Protected Areas listed in Recommendations IV-1 
to IV-15 of the Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

(6) Ships visiting the Argentine Islands station should not enter 
Meek Channel, where they would pass close to the magnetic ob-
servatory on the north shore of Galindez Island and cause 
disturbance to the instruments. The approach should be made 
from the west, or the ship should lie in Penola Strait while 
parties are sent ashore by motor boat through Meek Channel.

(7) In the event that tourists visit any British stations which 
are closed down, tour organisers should ensure that the buil-
dings are not entered. Unoccupied British stations are main-
tained as refuges in case of emergency.

ANT 37
