TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA

ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote : ANT 28
Date : 18th November 1968
Original : English

DISCUSSION PAPER
SUBMITTED BY THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

November 18,1968

Terms of Reference for
Meeting of Telecommunications Experts

1. A meeting of Telecommunications experts should be held between
April 1 and September 1, 1969 :

2. The date set for the meeting should not conflict with the
conduct of field expeditions ;

3. The Meeting will be held in furtherance of the principles and
objectives of the Antarctic Treaty ;

4. Provision should be made for exchange of telecommunications
data and proposals between governments prior to the Meeting.

5. Experts from Consultative Treaty Governments attending the
Meeting will serve as Representatives of their Governments.
While it is expected that all Consultative Parties will send
experts, the Meeting may proceed without experts from all the
Consultative Parties being present, but proposals emanating
from the Meeting shall be circulated to all the Consultative
Parties for their consideration.

6. With the agreement of all the Consultative delegations
participating in the Meeting, experts from non-consultative
countries may be invited to attend as Observers.  They may
submit documents and make statements with the permission of
the Chairman, but they may not vote.
- 2 -

7. A representative from WMO, a representative from ITU and a 
representative from SCAR may attend as Observers.  They may 
submit documents and make statements with the permission of 
the Chairman, but they may not vote.

8. The final agenda for the Meeting will be determined by 
Consultative Governments (wishing to attend the Meeting) 
through diplomatic channels after they have had an opportunity 
to discuss priorities with their experts.

9. The final agreed agenda should be circulated by the Host 
Government through diplomatic channels one month prior to the 
opening of the Meeting.

10. The results of the Meeting will take the form of unanimously 
agreed proposals on telecommunications, unanimously agreed by 
the delegations of the Consultative Governments participating 
in the Meeting. These will be circulated by the Host Govern-
ment to all Consultative Treaty countries for consideration 
and any action which any government may wish to take. These 
proposals will constitute the Report of the Meeting. Other 
conference documents may be appended for information as 
Annexes to the report with the consent of all delegations 
present.  The proposals would not become effective under 
Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, however, Consultative 
Governments may submit any proposal to a subsequent Consult-
ative Meeting for consideration as an agenda item.

11. Recurring telecommunication problems and necessary modifica-
tions to proposals emanating from this Experts Meeting should 
as far as possible be resolved by informal arrangements 
between expedition headquarters.

ANT 28
