TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE                    QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                   ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
                                                   PARIS

                                                   Cote : ANT.34
                                                   Date : 20th november
                                                   Origincl : anglais

CONDITIONS OF ACCESS FOR TOURIST EXPEDITIONS
TO SOUTH AFRICAN STATIONS IN ANTARCTICA

(a)  Approval in principle to visit South African bases must be
sought through the State Secretary for Transport. Such per-
mission will only be granted if assurance is given that
persons visiting Antarctica will comply with the provisions
of the Antarctic Treaty, the Recomendstions of Consultative
Meetings effective at the time and in particular with the
agreed Measures for the conservation of fauna and flora.
Assurance must also be given that the proposed tourist expe-
dition is entirely self-supporting and that adequate safety
precautions will be taken.

(b)  Tourists permitted to the antarctic continent will be
requested to obtain prior medical clearance by approved
medical officers.

(c)  The station commander must receive a minimum of 24 hours
notice of a proposed visit to a base. He will then
advise the tour leader whether such a visit at the time
requested is feasible and will determine the regions that
may be visited. The instructions of the station commander
should be obeyed.

(d)  Tourists may in no way interfere with the various scientific
programmes which may be in operation.

(e)  Since accommodation facilities are limited at the S.A. base,
tourist groups must make arrangemants in such a way that
they will not have to pass the night at the base except in
case of emergency. No transport facilities, food or
- 2 -

shelter can be made available to tourist groups since they 
should be completely self-sufficient.

(f)    Nothing may be renoved from South African bases and their 
vicinity without the prior permission of the State Secretary 
for Transport.

(g)    The S.A. Government cannot accept responsibility for any 
accident of loss and tourists will be required to indemnity 
the S.A. Government against any such eventuality.

(h)    In case of emergency, base members will be prepared to 
render assistance as for as possible. If negligence can be 
proved on the part of the tourist group, the organisers may 
be held responsible for the cost of the rescue operations.

(i)    In the event of non-compliance with any of the conditions 
outlined above by individual tourists or the group as a 
whole, the station commander will be at liberty to cancel 
all remaining arrangements previously made with the tour 
leader, and take such further action as he may deem appro-
priate.

These conditions may be amended or added to as may become 
necessary.
