TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA

ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Côte : ANT 17
Date : 18 Nov. 1968
Original : in English

TOURIST VISITS - MACQUARIE ISLAND
( presented by Australia)

While Macquarie Island does not lie within the area covered by the Antarctic Treaty, members may be interested to know that the Australian authorities concerned have recently approved two tourist visits there early in 1968 subject to the following conditions. Point (vii) to (xv) relate to the status of Macquarie Island as a wildlife sanctuary.

     (i) Visitors shall not land at any point on Macquarie Island nor at any time without the express permission of the Officer-in-Charge, which may be sought by radio from ship to shore, so that interruption to the work at the station may be kept to a minimum, so that local knowledge of conditions may be used to advantage, and so that if an emergency arises assistance can be arranged without delay.

    (ii) Except in emergency, visitors shall not expect the limited resources available on the island to be used to provide them with food or shelter.

   (iii) Visitors shall take all possible precautions to avoid getting into difficulties due to the rough conditions because the means available for providing them with assistance are meagre.

    (iv) Visitors shall obey all reasonable directions from the Officer-in-Charge at all times.

..../..
- 2 -

(v)     Visitors shall not approach the magnetic buildings without 
        discarding all ferrous materials as requested by the geo-
        physicist.

(vi)    Visitors shall not enter the seismic voult.

(vii)   Visitors shall obey the Officer-in-Charge in discharging 
        his duties as Curator of the Sanctuary

(viii)  Visitors shall not kill, wound, capture, or molest any native 
        mammal or native bird or attempt any such act.

(ix)    Visitors shall not harmfully interfere with the normal living 
        conditions of any native mammal or bird.

(x)     Visitors shall not carry fire arms or explosives, nor light 
        fires.

(xi)    Visitors shall not drive vehicles within 200 metres of concen-
        trations of. birds or seals.(vehicles would be taken to include 
        amphibious vehicles, such as DUKWs).

(xii)   Visitors shall keep away from areas which are under special 
        study.

(xiii)  Visitors approaching bird colonies shall move slowly and 
        quietly, taking care particularly no to frighten parent birds 
        away from their eggs and chicks.

(xiv)   Visitors shall not introduce any non indigenous species, 
        parasites or diseases into Macquarie Island.

(xv)    Visitors shall not take specimens of native birds or their 
        eggs or mammals or flora away from Macquarie Island.
