TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE         QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING             ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote : ANT 44
Date : 26th November 1968
Original : English

DRAFT CONVENTION FOR THE REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC
PELAGIC SEALING

(Document submitted by Sub-Working Group
to be Annexed to the Final Report of the Meeting)

The Contracting Parties,

Recalling the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora, adopted under the Antarctic Treaty;

Recognizing that the seal stocks south of 60° South Latitude are a
resource of potential value which require a binding international
agreement for its effective regulation;

Recognizing that this resource should not be depleted by over-exploi-
tation, and hence that any harvesting should be regulated at the
level of the optimum sustainable yield;

Recognizing that in order to improve scientific knowledge and so
place exploitation on a rational basis, every effort should be made
both to encourage biological research on these seal populations and
to gain information from the statistics of future sealing operations;

Desiring to promote and achieve the objectives of protection, scientific
study and rational use of Antarctic seals;

Have agreed as follows : -

ARTICLE 1

Implementation

Each Contracting Party shall adopt for its nationals, including ships
possessing its nationality, such measures, including a permit system
./...
- 2 -

as appropriate, as may be necessary in order to regulate in accordance 
with the provisions of this Convention pelagic sealing in the area 
to which this Convention applies, that is to say, the seas south of 
60° South Latitude.

ARTICLE 2

Permissible Catch

(1) The total number of seals of each species killed or taken in the 
area to which this Convention applies shall not exceed the number 
specified in Annex A.

(2) The number for each species listed in Annex A shall be fixed in 
the light of the best available scientific evidence and shall be 
reviewed at least every five years and, as necessary, revised by the 
Contracting Parties.

ARTICLE 3

Sealing Methods

A seal shall not be killed when it is in the water, except in an 
emergency or in accordance with a permit issued under Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 4

Ross, Elephant and Fur Seals

The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal (Mirounga leonina) 
and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus shall not be killed or taken, 
except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued under 
Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 5

Weddell Seals

Within the period specified in Annex C, no Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes 
weddelli) one year old, or older, shall be killed or taken, except in 
an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued under Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 6

Sealing Zones

For the purposes of this Convention, the area to which this Convention 
applies shall be divided into the Sealing Zones set out in Annex B. 
No seals shall be killed or taken in a zone which is closed for the 
time being, as specified in Annex B, except in an emergency or in 
accordance with a permit issued under Article 9 (1).

ANT 44
- 3 -

ARTICLE 7

Closed Seasons

No. seals shall be killed or taken within the closed season designated 
in Annex C, except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued 
under Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 8

Seal Reserves

Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that forms a seal 
breeding area or is the site of long-term scientific research on seals 
may be declared a Seal Reserve by the Contracting Parties. Such Seal 
Reserves shall be listed in Annex D. Within any Seal Reserve, no seals 
may be killed or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance with 
a permit issued under Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 9

Permits

(1) A permit may be issued with regard to Articles 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 
only for the following purposes :

    (i) to provide indispensable food for men or dogs in limited 
quantities and in conformity with the purposes and principles 
of this Convention;

   (ii) to provide specimens for scientific study or scientific 
information; or

  (iii) to provide specimens for museums, educational or cultural 
institutions.

(2) Where a Contracting Party institutes a permit system for sealing 
operations other than those specified in paragraph (1) of this Article 
that Contracting Party shall have regard, in issuing permits, to the 
principles and purposes of this Convention and in particular Articles 
2, 6, 7 and 8.

ARTICLE 10

Exchange of information

(1) Each Contracting Party shall provide the other Contracting Parties 
before 31 October of each year with the information relating to the 
preceding period of 1 July to 30 June specified in Annex E.

(2) At the same time, each Contracting Party shall provide to the 
other Contracting Parties information on any steps it has taken in 
accordance with this Convention.

ANT 44         ./...
- 6 -

ANNEX C - CLOSED SEASONS

1.      The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is a
        Closed Season.

2.      No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old or older
        shall be killed or taken between 1 September and 15 December
        inclusive.

ANNEX D - SEAL RESERVES

The following are declared Seal Reserves:

1.      The area around the South Orkney Islands, between 60°20' and
        60°56' South Latitude and 44°05' and 46°25' West
        Longitude.

2.      The area of the south-western Ross Sea south of 76° South
        Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude.

3.      The area of Edisto Inlet, south and west of a line drawn
        between Cape Hallett (Lat. 72°19'S., Long. 170°18'E.) and
        Helm Point (Lat. 72°11'S., Long. 170°00'E.).

ANNEX E - EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.      Contracting Parties shall provide to other Contracting Parties
        statistical information on all seals taken within the area
        to which this Convention applies.

2.      This information shall include :

        (i)     the daily position of ship at noon each operating day; and

        (ii)    the number of adult individuals and pups of each species
                taken on that day.

ANT 44
