TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE               TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE      QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                       ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote        : ANT 42
Date        : November 25, 1968
Original    : In English

REVISED INTERIM GUIDE LINES FOR
VOLUNTARY REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC PELAGIC SEALING

(Submitted by Norway, United-States and United-Kingdom)

Recalling Recommendation IV-21 (Interim Guide Lines for the Volun-
tary Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing) and wishing to revise
them in the light of recent additional scientific advice;

Recalling  the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora, adopted under the Antarctic Treaty;

Recognising that the seal stocks south of 60° South latitude are
a resource of potential value which at some future date may require
a binding international agreement for its effective regulation;

Recognising that this resource should not be depleted by over-
exploitation, and hence that any harvesting should be regulated
at or below the level of the optimum sustainable yield;

Recognising that in order to improve scientific knowledge and so
place exploitation on a rational basis, every effort should be made
both to encourage biological research on these seal populations
and to gain information from the statistics of future sealing
operations;

Desiring to promote and achieve the objectives of protection,
scientific study and rational use of Antarctic seals;

Having regard to the conservation principles developed by the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) of the Inter-
national Council of Scientific Unions, and in particular the
report of SCAR to National Antarctic Committees in 1968 on
pelagic sealing;

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that in
accordance with Recommendation III-11 each Government should
voluntarily take account of the following Revised Guide Lines
for the Voluntary Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing :

.../...
-4-

(2) If Consultative Parties so agree, such a meeting shall be convened as soon as possible in order to consider the situation and the steps it may be necessary to take.

ANNEX A. PERMISSIBLE CATCH

With present information it is not possible to give numbers for the optimum sustainable yield, or for the levels of populations which would provide such yields.Such numbers can only be estima-
ted with any useful precision from the analysis of the popu-
lations after they have been exposed to exploitation for a
period.

If catches do not exceed the following safety levels until the
results of such analysis are available, then the populations
will not be reduced below the level giving the optimum yield.

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon Carcinophagus)

      200,000 individuals in any one year

Leopard Seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)

      15,000 individuals in any one year

Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)

      10,000 individuals in any one year.

ANNEX B. SEALING ZONES

1. The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with those used
by the whaling industry, are designated :

Zone 1     Between 60° and 120° West Longitude

Zone 2     Between 0° and 60° West Longitude, together with that
           part of the Weddell Sea lying westward of 60° West
           Longitude

Zone 3     Between 0° and 70° East Longitude

Zone 4     Between 70° and 130° East Longitude

Zone 5     Between 130° East Longitude and 170° West Longitude

Zone 6     Between 120° and 170° West Longitude.

ANT. 42
-5-

2.  During the season I969-70 no sealing should be permitted
in Zone 1. In the next season Zone 2 should be closed to sea-
ling, and thereafter each Zone should be closed for a season in
sequence.

ANNEX C. CLOSED SEASONS

1.  The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is a closed
season.

2.  No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old or older
should be killed or taken between 1 September and 15 December in-
clusive.

ANNEX D. SEAL RESERVES

The following are declared Seal Reserves :

1.  The area around the South Orkney Islands, between 60°20'
and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05' and 46°25' West Longitude.

2.  The area of the south-western Ross Sea south of 76° South
Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude.

3.  The area of Edisto Inlet, south and west of a line drawn
between Cape Hallett (Lat. 72°19'S., Long. 170°18'E.) and Helm
Point (Lat. 72°11'S., Long. 170°00'E.)

ANNEX E. EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.  Consultative Parties should provide to other Consultative
Parties statistical information on all seals taken within
the area to which these Guide Lines relate.

2.  This information should include the number of adult indi-
viduals and pups of each species killed or taken during each
operating day, specifying in which of the Zones set out in
Annex B they have been killed or taken.

ANT. 42
