TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE         QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

                                     PARIS

Draft as corrected, amended and      Cote : ANT 43 - REV 1
accepted by the working Group on     Date : November 26, 1968
Meteorology and Telecommunications    Original : in English
November 26, 1968

Telecommunications Experts Meeting
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(Tabled by the Drafting Committee)

Recognizing the need for improving the collection and
distribution of meteorological data and other scientific information
and for further improvement in Antarctic telecommunications;

Considering the World Meteorological Organization views, ex-
pressed at the 18th and 20th Sessions of the WMO Executive Committee
on the desireability of setting up Antarctic Meteorological Centers
and of determining provisionaly their functions;

Supporting the principle of the World Weather Watch;

Considering the intention of some governments voluntarilly
to create, within a few years, such Antarctic Meteorological
Centers at their stations;

The representatives recommend to their governments that:

1. In view of the valuable information provided by WMO and
SCAR to Consultative Parties they continue to cooperate through
their representatives with the WMO and through their national
committees with SCAR in the development of future scientific
requirements.

2. They consider the usefulness of creating Antarctic
Meteorological Centers in Antarctica.
- 2 -

3. They hold a meeting of telecommunications experts at Buenos Aires, Argentina, between 15 August and 15 September 1969 to be convened in accordance with Recommendation IV-24. The date set for the meeting should be arranged through diplomatic channels, taking into account relevant meetings of other international organizations which will be held in 1969 and the time required to translate and distribute relevant documents from such meetings.

4. The meeting may proceed without experts from all Consultative Parties being present (although it is expected that all such parties will send experts)but all Consultative Parties must agree with the provisional agenda. Proposals emanating from the meeting will be sent to all Consultative Parties for their consideration.

5. One expert each from WMO, ITU, IOC and SCAR shall be invited to attend as observers. Invited observers may submit documents and make statements with the permission of the Chairman but they may not vote. All experts from Consultative parties Attending will be members of their delegations.

6. The agenda for the meeting will be determined by the Consultative Parties through diplomatic channels and the agreed provisional agenda will be circulated by the host government through diplomatic channels one month prior to the opening of the meeting.

7. The results of the meeting will take the form of proposals on telecommunications unanimously agreed by the delegations of the Consultative Parties participating in the meeting. These will be circulated by the host government to all Consultative Parties for consideration. These proposals will constitute the Report of the Meeting. Other conference documents may be appended for information as Annexes to the Report with the consent of all delegations present. The proposals would not become measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty but Consultative Parties may submit any matter arising from this meeting to a subsequent Consultative Meeting.

8. Information be exchanged through diplomatic channels on the following aspects of telecommunications procedures at least one month prior to the opening of the Meeting:

    (i) A statement covering existing networks, traffic loads and channel capacity on each route;

    (ii) A statement on shortcomings in existing networks and channels;

    (iii) A summary of present traffic carried on each route:
      { a) Administrative and operational traffic
      { b) Meteorological traffic
      { c) Other scientific traffic;
- 3 -

(iv) Existing time schedules for meteorological transmissions;

      (a) Broadcast

      (b) Point-to-point traffic.

9. The fields of discussion at the meeting will include, inter alia :

      (i) New Telecommunication traffic requirements submitted by Consultative Parties WMO, IOC and SCAR, the capacity of the existing facilities and the effect of these new requirements on the existing facilities, taking into account the Report of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting on Telecommunications held in Washington in 1963 and present prevailing conditions;

      (ii) Estimates of requirements for the near future and further projections if possible;

      (iii) Provision for amending telecommunications arrangements from time to time to meet changing conditions;

      (iv) New telecommunications techniques which might be introduced into the Antarctic to meet future requirements;

      (v) Preparation of a standard format for the exchange of information on telecommunications facilities under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

ANT. 43
Cote : ANT 43 - REV 1 Recom.

RECOMMENDATION N°2 ON THE MEASURES FOR
IMPROVING ANTARCTIC TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Recognizing the need for improving the collection and
distribution of meteorological data and other scientific inform-
ation and for further improving Antarctic telecommunications;

Considering the views of the World Meteorological
Organization, as expressed at the 18th and 20th Sessions of the
WMO Executive Committee, on the desirability of setting up
Antarctic Meteorological Centres and of determining provisionally
their functions;

Supporting the principle of the World Weather Watch;

Considering the intention of some Governments voluntarily
to create, within a few years, such Antarctic Meteorological
Centres at their Stations;

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that :

1. In view of the valuable information provided by WMO and
SCAR to Consultative Parties, they continue to cooperate with
the WMO through their Representatives thereto and with SCAR
through their National Committees in defining future scientific
requirements.

2. They consider the usefulness of creating Antarctic
Meteorological Centres in the Antarctic.

3. They hold a meeting of telecommunications experts at
Buenos-Aires, Argentina, between 15 August and 15 September 1969,
in accordance with Recommendation IV-24. The date of this meeting
should be arranged through diplomatic channels, taking into
account relevant meetings of other international organizations
which will be held in 1969 and the time required to translate and
distribute the documents from such meetings.
- 2 -

4.  Although it is expected that all Consultative Parties will 
participate, the meeting in Buenos-Aires may proceed without     
the participation of them all provided all the Consultative      
Parties agree to that procedure and to the provisional agenda.    
Proposals emanating from the meeting will be sent to all          
Consultative Parties for their consideration.

5.  One expert each from WHO, ITU, IOC and SCAR be invited to       
attend as observers.  Invited observers may submit documents and  
make statements with the permission of the Chairman but they       
may not vote.  All experts from Consultative Parties attending    
will be members of their delegations.

6.  The agenda for the meeting be determined by the Consultative    
Parties through diplomatic channels and the agreed provisional    
agenda will be circulated by the host Government through diplomatic 
channels one month prior to the opening of the meeting.

7.  The results of the meeting take the form of proposals on       
telecommunications unanimously agreed by the delegations of the  
Consultative Parties participating in the meeting.  These will    
be circulated by the host government to all Consultative Parties  
for consideration.  These proposals will constitute the report     
of the meeting.  Other conference documents may be appended for     
information as annexes to the report with the consent of all       
delegations present.  The proposals would not become measures      
under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty but any Consultative     
Parties may submit any matter arising from this meeting to a       
subsequent Consultative Meeting.

8.  Information be exchanged through diplomatic channels on         
the following aspects of telecommunications procedures at least    
one month prior to the opening of the Meeting :

    (i) existing networks, traffic loads and channel capacity       
        on each route;

    (ii) shortcomings in existing networks and channels;

    (iii) present traffic carried on each route :
         a) Administrative and operational traffic
         b) Meteorological traffic
         c) Other scientific traffic;

    (iv) existing time schedules for meteorological trans-
         missions;

         a) Broadcast
         b) Point-to-point traffic.
- 3 -

9. The fields of discussion at the meeting include, inter alia :

(i)     New telecommunications traffic requirements submitted 
by Consultative Parties ?i?O, IOC and SCAR, the capacity of the 
existing facilities and the effect of these new requirements on 
the existing facilities, taking into account the report of the 
Antarctic Treaty Meeting on Telecommunications held in Washington 
in 1963 and present prevailing conditions;

(ii)    Estimates or requirements for the near future and 
further projections if possible;

(iii)   Procedure for amending telecommunications arrangments 
from time to time to meet changing conditions;

(iv)    New telecommunications techniques which might be 
introduced into the Antarctic to meet future requirements;

(v)     Preparation of a standard format for the exchange of 
information on telecommunications facilities under Article VII 
of the Antarctic Treaty.
