TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE         QUINTA REUNION CONSULTATIVA
                                        пятое консультативное совещание
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                  PARIS


Cote    : ANT 33
Date    : November,20 1968
Original :  in Spanish

Statement by the Argentine Delegation in course of the discussion
of Agreed Measures for the Protection of Fauna and Flora in
Antarctica.

Although the Recommendations III-8 and IV-1 to IV-19 have
not yet entered into force as provided at subparagraph 4 of
Article IX of the Treaty, the Government of the Republic of Argentina,
which is extremely interested in the conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora, has already approved the said Recommendations and
applies all the measures contained therein on their bases and in
their expeditions. Furthermore, all tourist groups leaving
Argentine territory are instructed to respect and obey all the
provisions of these Measures.

The statistical data on capture and killing of all Antarctic
animals are being compiled by the appropriate authorities, and it
is hoped that beginning from next year, it will be possible to
furnish the above data to all Contracting Parties.

In the event that this Meeting will attempt to adopt a
new Resolution on Conservation, the Delegation of the Republic
of Argentina suggests that the limit date to be fixed should
correspond to the limit date of sending in the operational inform-
ation, in accordance with the Recommendation IV-23, i.e. 31st
October of each year.  The coincidence of these dates will
facilitate the exchange of information between Governments and
other bodies.
- 2 -

shelter can be made available to tourist groups since they 
should be completely self-sufficient.

(f)  Nothing may be removed from South African bases and their 
vicinity without the prior permission of the State Secretary 
for Transport.

(g)  The S.A. Government cannot accept responsibility for any 
accident of loss and tourists will be required to indemnity 
the S.A. Government against any such eventuality.

(h)  In case of emergency, base members will be prepared to 
render assistance as for as possible. If negligence can be 
proved on the part of the tourist group, the organisers may 
be held responsible for the cost of the rescue operations.

(i)  In the event of non-compliance with any of the conditions 
outlined above by individual tourists or the group as a 
whole, the station commander will be at liberty to cancel 
all remaining arrangements previously made with the tour 
leader, and take such further action as he may deem appro-
priate.

These conditions may be amended or added to as may become 
necessary.
