TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                   QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                   ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote : ANT. 25
Date : 18th November 1968


S P E E C H E S   M A D E

AT THE OPENING OF THE FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ON 18TH NOVEMBER 1968

*:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:*
SPEECH BY THE RIGHT HON.MICHEL DEBRE,
FRENCH MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS,
ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968

Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Formally, it is in my capacity as Minister of Foreign
Affairs that there falls to me the honour of welcoming you
here. Clearly, one of the responsibilities of a Foreign
Affairs Minister is to follow the application of treaties
to which his country is a party. The reason for your pres-
ence here is the signing, nine years ago in Washington,
of the Antarctic Treaty concluded by the representatives of
twelve Governments and subsequently ratified by each of the
twelve countries. You have already held meetings in Austral-
ia, in the Argentine Republic, in Belgium and in Chile; it
is now France's turn, and I am happy to welcome you in the
name of my Government.

If I may say so, however, I have a more personal
reason for being here : my constant and long-established
interest in Antarctic questions. I have followed with un-
failing attention the trend of developments in that vast,
mysterious and irresistibly attractive part of the World,
making it my business to be kept regularly informed of the
progress being made by the administrative and scientific
staffs working in the French territories in and near Antarc-
tica. In addition, a long-standing friendship with Paul
Emile Victor has nurtured in me a profound respect and admi-
ration for what has already been achieved and for the untiring
and ceaseless efforts of explorers from all countries.
I therefore feel able to add a more personal note to this
occasion, and to express the great pleasure with which I
have come here this morning to meet you all.

The Treaty which it is your task to implement is a
remarkable one in a great many respects. The politicians and
international law specialists can be satisfied with it : they
can also be satisfied at the manner in which, for the last
nine years, all those concerned in executing the terms of the
Treaty - most of whom have remained loyal to this united
enterprise throughout that time - have performed their task.

When signing this Treaty, the 12 countries which we
here represent agreed to abandon their traditional jealousies,
and undertook to preserve this vast area of the World from
all activities which might have military implications.

ANT. 25
- 2 -

They placed the stress on the concept of co-operation and, 
primarily, on that most altruistic form of co-operation which 
brings together the scientist and the explorer in a common 
effort of discovery. In this way, the political and diploma-
tic representatives involved forged an exemplary link between 
the spirit of human endeavour which continues to apply to 
certain undiscovered reaches of the Earth and the spirit of 
international discipline which the civilised World is 
beginning to recognise. Simultaneously, they harnessed the 
explorer's capacity for endurance and heroic exploits to the 
fundamental requirements of scientific research.

As this Fifth Consultative Meeting commences, I can 
do no more than express the hope that you will continue to 
follow the path which you and your predecessors have chosen, 
which is to say in a healthy spirit of co-operation in the 
interests of not only our own countries, but also in those of 
all the countries of the World.

More particularly, of course, I wish you well in your 
immediately forthcoming discussions. Your agenda has some 
very precise points : conservation of fauna and flora, with 
special reference to control of seal-hunting; provisions 
concerning what may at present be considered as no more than 
a future contingency, but which will rapidly become a topical 
development - I am referring to Antarctic tourism. In addi-
tion to this concern to protect the natural life inhabiting 
the Polar regions, there is also a special desire to preserve 
certain traces of human endeavour which remain there. Every 
respect must be granted to this ambition : as children, we 
so often saw ourselves building and inhabiting Scott's cabin 
that we cannot fail - even after the passage of years - to 
feel the deepest emotion when such venerated relics of the 
past are evoked. It would be quite wrong to consider that 
their preservation is a matter of only very secondary im-
portance.

However, your task is not merely one of conservation 
and protection of existing things : it is also one of har-
nessing the resources of the land which you know so well to 
the furtherance of human progress. Telecommunications and 
meteorological networks demand a joint effort in the Antarctic 
region. It is up to you here to make detailed proposals for 
this.

Looking beyond the immediate matters of interest, 
I would like to express my concern for longer range develop-
ments. All the countries represented here have undertaken, 
for the common good, to apply their best efforts to pre-
serving a special kind of heritage which should undoubtedly 

...
- 3 -

be protected - but which at the same time should be enabled 
to bear its full fruit. The further we progress in this 
direction, the more will we feel the need for a joint effort 
to ensure that the secrets and resources of this outpost of 
humanity are not indiscriminately violated and exploited. It 
is probable - or even certain - that future generations will 
harness the potential of unprecedented scientific and techni-
cal discovery to reaping the maximum benefit from this virgin 
land. It is to be hoped that the foundations of co-operation 
laid at a time when the aims were more limited will serve 
when we, or a later generation, will be in a position to 
nurse more spectacular ambitions for Antarctica. I believe 
that we are now on the right road. Let us continue to follow 
it, in a spirit of sincere international co-operation.

I now solemnly declare the Fifth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting to be open./.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLENCY MONSIEUR PIERRE CHARPENTIER, AMBASSADOR
CHAIRMAN OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
Vth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

I should first of all like to extend my very warmest thanks
to all the Delegations which sponsored or supported my nomination
to the Chair of this Vth Antartic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

This is for me a most moving occasion.  I shall never
forget the delicate negotiations which we undertook nine years
ago in Washington, when the enthousiasm and determination of
all those taking part made it possible - despite innumerable
difficulties - to draw up and sign the Antarctic Treaty.  The
obstacles which we had to overcome were of considerable dimensions :
agreement had to be reached between those participants who
considered the Antarctic to be a res nullius territory and
those who claimed possessions there.  However, the Delegates
present in Washington, together with the Governments which had
appointed them, were determined to achieve a successful
conclusion.  They were inspired by the firm conviction that
their actions and decisions would serve to promote the harmonious
development of that great adventure in which British, French,
American, Russian, Chilian, Japanese and Argentine pioneers all
combine in a fraternal and confident effort directed to piercing
some of Nature's most jealously guarded secrets.  These
negotiatiors were fully justified in taking this attitude : when
Man reaches the confines of human knowledge - whether we consider
Polar exploration, descents into the depths of the Ocean, or
ventures into outer space - it is essential for all Nations to
combine in a joint endeavour.

In the peaceful continent of Antarctica, where some bases
have a population of more than two thousand souls during the
Summer, mutual co-operation is the rule.  Exchanges of information
and of specialist personnel are already numerous and gaining in
momentum, whereas the human solidarity displayed when accidents
or sickness bring the need for emergency evacuation measures
under hasardous conditions is outstanding to a degree.

ANT.25
All of us here, as we sit round the conference table and
discuss all these matters in peace and quiet, must constantly
remember the confidence and high hopes which we nourished nearly
ten years ago, and must bear in mind that our decisions will
apply to men who are working under dangerous conditions, and
whose activities concern each one of us.

As your Chairman, I hope that this spirit will prevail at
the meeting.  If, during the discussions, our thoughts are
constantly turned towards the Antarctic pioneers, progress will
be made and success ensured.

You may be assured that, for my part, I will endeavour by
every means to justify the confidence you have placed in me, and
will spare no efforts in the attempt to reach a successful
conclusion to the Conference.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLENCY Mr. W. DIRKSE-VAN-SCHALKWYK,
SOUTH AFRICAN AMBASSADOR,
HEAD OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION

MR CHAIRMAN.

The South African Delegation offers you its most sincere congratulations on your unanimous election as Chairman. We do not doubt that this Fifih Consultative meeting under your distinguished chairmanship will prove in every way as fruitful and rewarding as those which have preceded it.

My delegation would also like to express its warm thanks and gratitude to the French Government for their generosity and hospitality as host Government on the present occasion and for the admirable conference facilities provided for the conducting of our deliberations.

Perhaps not as spectacular or dramatic as man's efforts to reach the moon is the large-scale scientific assault that has been made in recent years on the secrets locked up in the Antarctic continent. This all-out effort, going back to the commencement of the International Geophysical Year in 1957, was described by Rear Admiral Richard Byrd of the United States, one of the most famous Antarctic explorers "as perhaps the most important co-operative effort of scientists in the history of man".

Admiral's Byrd's emphasis on the co-operative nature of the effort is most appropriate and important. The authors of the Antarctic Treaty, in ensuring continued interest in the white continent, wisely recognised that international co-operation is the key to unravelling the mysteries of Antarctica. While the search for scientific knowledge is the major objective, the handsome bonus of this remarkable example of international co-operation has been an increase in goodwill amongst those participating. Even if it were only for this reason the Antarctic Treaty must rank as a significant milestone of the unfolding drama of man's search for scientific knowledge. I can indeed be emulated in other spheres of international concern.

ANT.25
2.

While great efforts are being made by the Antarctic Treaty 
Powers and also by the non-governmental Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research (SCAR), the surface of this vast scientific 
field of knowledge has hardly been scratched.  Yet the Antarctic 
is coming to be regarded as something more than an area from 
which changes in temperature and pressures of atmosphere, direction 
of ocean currents, the great storms and climatic changes of the 
southern oceans, are generated.

South Africa is proud to be associated with this endeavour. 
Our interests in Antarctica go back to the last century.  Public 
attention was first drawn to the possibility of exploration of 
the Antarctic in 1840 when the two famous British vessels, 
H.M.S. "Erebus" and H.M.S. "Terror" were lying in Table Bay on 
their way to the Far South.

The Cape of Good Hope had long been recognised as a base for 
travellers on their way to the ice ever since the 18th century, 
when Captain Cook, on his historic voyage to "discover or 
disprove the existence of the Antarctic Continent", put in to 
Table Bay with his ship, the "Resolution".

Since those far-off days, Cape Town has served as a stage 
post for vessels of many other countries on their way to the 
Antarctic.  South Africa welcome such opportunities to make 
contact, to extend co-operation and to show hospitality to those 
engaged in the common effort.  In this regard, Mr Chairman, 
I should like to mention in passing that my Government is 
looking forward to welcoming the French expedition in Cape Town 
next month on their way to Antarctica.

The past year has also been marked by a co-operative effort 
between South Africa and Belgium who sent a joint summer 
expedition to Antarctica - an expedition which was most successful. 
This co-operation between South Africa and Belgium is being 
continued this year.

South Africa's present participation in the scientific 
exploration of Antarctica is limited by economic and man-power 
considerations. However, despite its relatively modest scale of 
participation in comparison with that of some of the other 
Treaty Powers, we hope that our efforts will be judged on the 
quality of our performance.  We have recently launched our second 
five-year Antarctic Research Programme.  Under this programme 
South African scientists plan, amongst other things, to carry out 
extensive research in the field of Upper Air Physics and Geology 
and final arrangements are in progress to establish a four-man 
winter-over base in the Borg Massif during 1969/70 to facilitate 
geological investigations along the polar escarpment.

In conclusion I would like to express the wish that the 
deliberations of this Conference will be as successful as those 
held in the past.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLENCY Mr. SARGENT SHRIVER
UNITED STATES AMBASSADOR TO FRANCE
HEAD OF THE UNITED STATES DELEGATION

Mr Chairman, my colleagues from the Corps
Diplomatique, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen:

The French Government has often in the past
demonstrated its enormous and sensitive capacity to provide
the most felicitous and efficient surroundings for conferences
of international significance. But never, I believe, has its
power been more dramatically revealed than today when the
very meteorological conditions themselves have been apparently
manipulated to produce the snow and ice appropriate to the
opening session of the Fifth Antarctic Consultative Meeting.
We congratulate your country, Mr.Chairman and thank you for
your typically gracious and thoughtful hospitality.

I should also like to express my delegation's
congratulations to you, Mr.Chairman, on your unanimous and
well deserved election to preside during this meeting. Your
past efforts on behalf of Antarctica are well known and
justify the responsibility we have given you.

We meet today under the auspices of the Antarctic
Treaty. This treaty ensured that for the first time in modern
history a major area of the world would be used exclusively
for peaceful purposes.

This treaty serves as a model for many other
international agreements seeking to extend the horizon of
peaceful cooperation on this, as well as other, planets.
And it serves as a beacon in the search for international
peace and security.

Those of us participating in this consultative
meeting have a deep responsibility, for these meetings are
gradually developing a sound body of law in Antarctica, to
consolidate and preserve the progress we make annually in
international cooperation in this challenging area of the
world.

ANT. 25
- 2 -

Science, and the support of science, is the principal activity of the countries with expeditons and stations in Antarctica. Enormous strides have been made in exploration and study of the Antarctic environment since the treaty came into force, activities in which all parties to the treaty have shared. We are grateful to the scientific committee on Antarctic research for its advice and commend its efforts, particularly in the field of Antarctic conservation.

One of the most exciting aspects of Antarctic programs is the increasing amount of international cooperation among scientists in Antarctica. We are particularly pleased that the United States expedition in Antarctica has been able to work in cooperation with each of the other eleven consultative countries represented here today.

For example, the United States Antarctic Research Program works with:

    French scientists in the field of oceanography;
    Argentine scientists in the exploration of the Weddell Sea;
    Australia in conducting geodetic satellite observations in Antarctica;
    Belgian scientists in the field of glaciology;
    Chilean scientists in the geologic exploration of Mary Byrd Land and the Ellsworth Coasts and in radio propagation studies for improvement of telecommunications;
    Japanese scientists in cosmic ray balloon flights;
    New Zealand in many areas of science, mutual logistic support, and in developing conservation measures, and regulations for tourists visiting our respective scientific stations;
    Norway in support of a Norwegian geological and topographic team in the Kraul Mountains;
    South African scientists in the field of geology;
    Soviet scientists in geology and upper atmospheric physics;
- 3 -

And with United Kingdom scientists in surveying the 
Antarctic ice cap.

The close cooperation which exists among these men 
of science, often working in the face of a harsh and bitter 
climate proves again that men can achieve much when they will 
to do so, and more when they will to do so together.

Our task remains to ensure that the Antarctic Treaty 
will continue to provide a framework in which these activities 
can be maintained and strengthened, and will continue to 
serve as an example of how peaceful cooperation can benefit 
mankind. It is with this basic goal in mind that my delegation 
looks forward to our deliberations./.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLENCY Mr R.E. GUYER,
ARGENTINE AMBASSADOR TO THE NETHERLANDS,
HEAD OF THE ARGENTINE DELEGATION.

Mr Chairman,

After the recent warm welcome which we received in Santiago de Chile - the capital of one of Argentina's closest neighbours - we find ourselves meeting once again together, but in the wonderful city of Paris, whose cultural influence is such a precious part of our common heritage.

Allow me first of all, Mr Chairman, to congratulate you on your election.  It was my privilege to meet you for the first time some nine years ago, when we negotiated the Antarctic Treaty.  At that time, all present were able to appreciate the lucid and constructive spirit in which you, as the French representative, contributed to the Washington talks.

To-day, almost ten years after the signing of the Treaty, we are meeting anew for the purpose of ensuring the continued application of its provisions.  This agreement, which is currently arousing attention not only by reference to its specific aims, but also as a valuable precedent in view of other legal instruments, marked the conclusion of a long series of lengthy consultations whose success was due to a joint endeavour to identify the areas of agreement and to avoid the pitfalls of sterile discussion of insoluble problems.

It is in the same spirit that the Consultative Meetings held under the auspices of the Treaty since that time have been conducted.  As a result, we can now point to a body of Recommendations which constitutes a valid foundation on which to apply the provisions of the Treaty signed in Washington.

I am convinced that this Meeting will once again reflect a spirit of frank and friendly co-operation and a desire to achieve concrete results capable of effective application.  All our Consultative Meetings have demonstrated that our constant concern is to move slowly but surely in the direction of a strict implementation of the Treaty.

ANT.25
2.

As I have already said, the Antarctic Treaty is one of the 
most outstanding international agreements to have been signed in 
recent years, and the consultations to which it has given rise 
are of the greatest importance for countries which, like 
Argentina, have part of their territory on the Antarctic Continent.

It goes without saying, therefore, that my Delegation is 
fully aware of the implications of this Meeting and will do all 
in its power to ensure a successful outcome.

For the Argentine Republic, a country located in the Southern 
Hemisphere, the Antarctic is a day-to-day matter of concern and 
an inseparable feature of our existence.

My Delegation is especially gratifi ed to be able to say 
that 1969 - the Tenth Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic 
Treaty - is also the sixty-fifth anniversary of Argentina's 
presence in Antarctica.  Our country set up its first Antarctic 
base in 1904 and has there been engaged in scientific research 
without interruption since that time : other bases have been 
established during the intervening years. This and other 
Argentine activities, both before and since 1904, amply demonstrate 
the importance which Argentina has constantly attached to the 
Antarctic Continent and all developments therein.

In conclusion, Mr Chairman, may I express my very best 
wishes for a successful outcome to our discussions here.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY Mr D.F. STYLES,
DEPUTY HEAD OF THE AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION

Mr Chairman,

It is with pleasure that we welcome your chairmanship of
this meeting and recall your distinguished part in the prepar-
ation of the Antarctic Treaty. May I express the regrets of
our representative, Mr Moodie, for his inability to attend this
session. He has had some trouble which will make it impossible
for him to be present until Wednesday.

Ten thousand miles away in Australia we have heard with
interest of the remarkable efforts made to preserve the beauty
and elegance of this wonderful city of Paris.  We are indeed
fortunate to be able to be here at a time when the fruits
of this work can be seen so clearly.  But if our presence in
Paris recalls to us so vividly the great achievements of French
civilisation, the holding of the Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consult-
ative Meeting in Paris reminds us also that France has always
been a leader in the scientific field, even in the remote
continent of Antarctica. It therefore seems to us to be both
fortunate and fitting that this Consultative Meeting of the
Antarctic Treaty States should be held in France in the brilliant
centre of her national life, Paris.

Next year we will be celebrating the tenth anniversary of
the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. Those ten years have seen
a consolidation of the good relations between the countries
participating in scientific research in Antarctica and a
continuing co-operation for greater understanding of the Antarctic
environment.  This friendly co-operation, we believe, has been of
value not only to those countries active in Antarctica but also
to the rest of the world. We hope, most fervently, that the
spirit of co-operation will continue in the years to come and
that this co-operation will always rest on the free and willing
participation of all the nations concerned.

In these ten years there has been an encouraging readiness
to join in measures to protect species living in this most
difficult environment and to exchange information and ideas on
logistical problems of common interest. There is a continuing
desire to improve the arrangements for the distribution of
Antarctic meteorological data.  This is of special interest to

AANT.25
2.

Australia because of the influence of Antarctica on Australian 
weather conditions and because in Melbourne Australia has one 
of the three World Weather Watch centres.  Australia wishes to 
maintain an effective part in these matters and believes that 
all the countries concerned must be able to participate as fully 
as possible in this field.

This is the fifth Consultative Meeting of the states 
signatory to the Treaty.  We think that the pattern of regular 
consultation that has emerged is a welcome sign of the continuing 
desire of states to make a reality of international collaboration 
for peaceful purposes in the Antarctic which is at the very heart 
of the Treaty.

The Australian Government is committed fully to the 
attainment of the objectives of the Treaty which it sees as a 
continuing guarantee of peace and co-operation in Antarctica.  In 
peaceful collaboration in Antarctica lies, we believe, the only 
path which leads finally to the truly rational and beneficial 
use of the southern tenth of the world.

Thank you Mr Chairman.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLENCY MONSIEUR ROBERT ROTHSCHILD,
BELGIAN AMBASSADOR,
HEAD OF THE BELGIAN DELEGATION.

The Belgian Delegation is particularly happy that the Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting should be held in Paris,
as this offers us the opportunity of giving public recognition to the old-established links between the French and Belgian
ventures in the Antarctic - as in many other fields of human endeavour.

Adrien de Gerlache de Gomery, a Belgian pioneer in the Antarctic, was a friend of the eminent Commandant Charcot.
The two men never failed to communicate to each other the results of their research.  I do not wish to embark on a lengthy
account of their mutual co-operation, but it is perhaps appropriate to quote the words of Charcot himself, in a communic-
ation to the Paris Academy of Sciences (of which Gerlache was a visiting Member on 26th December 1934: "Adrien de Gerlache has
always been ready to give the benefit of his advice and support to Polar explorers: the French Antarctic expeditions of
1903-05 and 1908-10, which endeavoured to carry on the work of Gerlache, benefited greatly from his help."

On 15th May 1935 addressing the Belgian Royal Geographical Society in Brussels, Charcot again said "I owe everything to
Gerlache: he guided my first steps and subsequently encouraged and supported me throughout my career".

A lesser-known fact is that he of whom Charcot said "The South Pole was conquered because Gerlache showed the way by being
the first to dare affront an Antarctic Winter", was also active in the Arctic, where he carried the French flag.  In 1905,
he resumed command of the "Belgica", which had been bought by the Duke of Orleans for his Arctic expeditions; for the
first time, a ship went through the ice-cap, from Spitzberg to the East coast of Greenland, and reached it again one hundred
miles higher up than had previously been attained.

Sixty years after his father, Baron Gaston de Gerlache de Gomery led a second Belgian Antarctic expedition: he was the
only member of the whole team to have previous experience of the Pole.  This experience he owed to France.

ANT.25
2.

It had already been decided to send out the Belgian
expedition when the French authorities gave him the opportunity
of acquiring the experience necessary for assuming the
responsibilities of command by inviting him to take part in
a Summer expedition to Terre Adelie as an observer.  Taken
in charge by Bertrand Imbert, he stayed in that territory from
December 1956 to the end of February 1957, taking part in a
number of helicopter and snowcat sorties to Charcot Station.
The Belgian expedition of 1958, and the seven others organised
subsequently, benefited to a large extent from the experience
gained by Gerlache at that time.

One of the later expeditions, incidentally, - that of
1959 - included a French member, Monsieur Dieterlé, and the
French flag flew from the mast at King Baudouin Base.

Belgium continues to take an active interest in Polar
exploration.  Although Baudouin Base has been temporarily closed
down since March 1967, a team of nine Belgians took part in a
Summer expedition organised in January and February 1968 in
co-operation with South Africa.  This most fruitful line of
collaboration will be pursued next Summer when, in
January/February 1969, a team of eight Belgians will take up
position at Sanae Base and will, in particular, establish an
air link with Baudouin Base, taking echo-soundings of the
glaciers along the route.

This brief reminder of the Belgian interest in scientific
research in the Antarctic explains the significance which my
country lends to the Fifth Consultative Meeting.

It is now nine years since the Antarctic Treaty was signed,
representing an entirely new departure to the extent that this
was the first time that an international agreement confirmed
the demilitarisation of a vast continent, the prohibition of
nuclear explosions, and full freedom for scientific research
activities.  It is most satisfactory to be able to observe
that the Treaty has not been left as a mere formal statement of
intention: it is being positively applied, and the control
arrangements introduced to implement the non-militarisation
clauses are operating effectively and with unanimous support.
It is possibly even more heartening to observe that the spirit
of co-operation advocated in the Treaty exists to a highly
satisfactory degree, and that representatives of the various
Governments meet regularly to discuss matters of common
interest.  In the seven years since the Treaty came into force,
we have now had five Consultative meetings, and two expert
working parties have also met in implementation of the agreement.
3.

The Belgian Delegation is convinced that these exchanges of 
views are of the greatest utility, not only because of their 
intrinsic content, but also because they help to maintain the 
impetus initially created by the Treaty.  Some may think that 
- depending on the items which happened to appear on one or other 
Agenda - certain of these meetings were more fruitful than others. 
For its part, however, the Belgian Delegation considers that 
any attempt to establish any such order of merit would be a vain 
exercise.  All the meetings are equally important to the extent 
that they together constitute a whole which is itself the 
overriding consideration.

Matters of major interest have already been examined by 
earlier Meetings, and settled to the satisfaction of all concerned. 
If these matters regularly reappear on the Agenda, this is 
merely because it is always possible to do better and that this 
is always worth trying.  It is not vital that each discussion 
should conclude by our addressing a recommendation to the 
Governments: all the exchanges of views which take place are of 
value, even if no formal agreement or conclusion is reached.

The Belgian Delegation has come to the Fifth Consultative 
Meeting in a spirit of friendly co-operation and is convinced 
that this Paris edition will be worthy of its predecessors.

I should like to express my warmest congratulations to 
Ambassador Charpentier on his election to the Chair.  Remembering 
his outstanding contribution to the 1959 meeting in Washington, 
we can be sure that a successful outcome is ensured under his 
direction and guidance.
SPEECH IADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLIENGY Mr FABIO VIO VALDIVIESO,
CHILEAN AMBASSADOR,
HEAD OF THE CHILEAN DELEGATION.

Mr Chairman, Iadies and Gentlemen,

To all outward appearances, the bird and the rock, the sword and the dewdrop, have nothing in common.  Yet, when the Sun's
giant eye starts to peer over the horizon of a slumbering World,
the bird breaks into flights of song, the rock warms into stark
beauty, the steel of the sword bursts into gleaming pride, and
the dewdrop trembles with secret joy.  Thus is revealed, in all
its splendour, that dominating harmony of the Universe which
triumphs over all elemental differences.

Just as the Sun's appearance demonstrates the fundamental
unity underlying the diversity of all things, so has the Antarctic
Continent proved itself, in the eyes of the whole world, to be
an irresistible focus of attraction for scientific workers from
all countries, devoted to peaceful areas of research in the
interests of all mankind, who have practiced a form of unrestricted
co-operation and thereby developed what may be described as a true
"Antarctic spirit" uniting the signatories to the Treaty drawn
up in Washington in 1959, and which is the reason for our presence
here in this magnificent City of Paris.

I cannot say to what extent - if any - the Antarctic Treaty
system owes its practices to the lessons of Greek history.

However this may be, there is no doubt as to the fact that
the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 has given rise to procedures which
incorporate the same principles as those on which the greatness
of Ancient Greece was founded.

It will be recalled that, at that period in History, the
configuration of Greece's territory was such that its inhabitants
were forced to live in isolated groups - each having its own
separate reasons for rejoicing or lamenting.  For example, there
was no obvious affinity between the Athenians and the Spartans:
the former were vowed to the cult of spiritual and moral virtues,
the latter to that of physical and athletic perfection.  However,
the two groups had one thing in common, something which bound
them together: their pride at belonging to Greater Greece and
the satisfaction of belonging to an integrated whole.

ANT.25
2.

Those who have attempted to explain this phenomenon have 
come to the conclusion that it was due to the existence of the 
famous Olympic Games - culminating point of the Olympiads - 
whose apparent aim was one of athletic selection, but which were 
also a major factor contributing to unification. Periodically, 
men from far-distant parts of the country were brought together 
and learned to live alongside each other, sharing their hopes and 
fears as one community.

The Antarctic Treaty is a transposition of the Olympiad 
system onto the intellectual plane and directed to promoting 
harmonious international co-operation in the field of scientific 
research. The same system of periodical encounters, between 
intervals of preparation, has ensured the successful implement-
ation of the 1959 Treaty.

Twelve sovereign countries, separated alike by their 
geographical situations and their historical backgrounds, gather 
together from time to time and - rejecting any concept of 
"internationalisation of the Antarctic Continent" - examine and 
co-ordinate their several and separate activities in that part 
of the World with a view to the successful pursuit of a glorious 
aim: planning of scientific research in such a manner that the 
whole of Mankind - without exception - will benefit from the 
discoveries made in what was formerly considered to be an 
unfathomable and inaccessible ice-cap.

Gentlemen, on this occasion when our discussions will be 
guided by one of the instigators of the 1959 Treaty, and are 
attended by National Delegations which include a high proportion 
of eminent diplomats who also made their contribution to that 
agreement, I would like to take the opportunity of solemnly 
repeating a statement which I have already made at numerous other 
times over the years. Namely, that the Antarctic Treaty 
constitutes one of the most effective instruments the World has 
known in the field of human co-operation and solidarity, as well 
as being one of the most cleverly co structured.

The Chilean Delegation expresses its heartfelt gratitude to 
all who played a part in bringing this Treaty into being.  They 
presented the World with an example which, if followed in other 
fields, could open up unsuspected prospects of progress through 
the peaceful and harmonious means which are our common ideal.

It is in this state of mind that the Chilean Delegation 
approaches the Fifth Consultative Meeting here in Paris,
determined to spare no effort in ensuring that the spirit of the 
Treaty gains new strength and impetus each day.
3.

In this connection, Gentlemen, it may be appropriate for
me to inform you that, following the damage sustained by our base
known as "Base Pedro Aguirre Cerda" on Deception Island due to
volcanic activity, my country is now making considerable efforts
for the reconstruction of the former Centre on King George's
Island, with a view to resuming our contribution to the exchange
of meteorological data.

Before closing, I should like to congratulate our Chairman,
Mr Charpentier, and the Secretary-General of this Meeting,
Mr Scalabre, on their election and appointment to guide and
administer our talks. Their past records are sufficient guarantee
that the Fifth Consultative Meeting will be fertile in important
decisions.

Finally, my thanks go to the French Authorities for the
extremely kind welcome which has been extended to us.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
by THE Rt. HON. CHRISTOPHER SOAMES, C.B.E.
UNITED KINGDOM AMBASSADOR TO FRANCE
HEAD OF THE UNITED KINGDOM DELEGATION

Mr, Chairman, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Representatives,

It gives me very great pleasure to add my congratulations to those of the previous speakers on your appointment as our Chairman. We all know that France possesses a wonderful record in polar exploration and research. We all know and appreciate the part which you, personally, played in the negotiations ten years ago in Washington which led to the signature of the Antarctic Treaty.

Gentlemen, the Treaty enables the World to use the Antarctic peacefully, jointly, and for one common aim - scientific research. We must try to make sure that in Antarctic matters there is real freedom of research, freedom to publish and freedom to discuss scientific results, to the ultimate benefit of mankind.

It is in this spirit that my Government approaches this Meeting. We have taken some important steps to switch the emphasis of our Antarctic work from the political to the scientific. An outward and visible sign of this is that responsibility for the British Antarctic Survey has been transferred from the former Colonial Office to the Natural Environmental Research Council, which falls under the general guidance and control of the Ministry of Education and Science. Our Parliament has given approval to the Antarctic Treaty Act 1967, which came into operation on 1 July this year and which gives substance and legal sanction to the chief Recommendations of the first four Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings relating to the conservation of wild life.

Mr. Chairman, the period since the last Consultative Meeting in Santiago has been a most fruitful one for international co-operation in the Antarctic. Much has been achieved in the Antarctic itself and at meetings in Tokyo, at Cambridge and elsewhere. I think we are all conscious of the fact that, without the Antarctic Treaty, these

ANT.25
- 2 -

co-operative projects could not and would not have taken 
place.

Today, we are approaching a new range of problems
- those introduced into the Antarctic by man himself. We
know that the steadily increasing radio traffic is causing
unacceptable interference with scientific recording instru-
ments . Other problems arise from the pollution of the
environment and the slow but relentless destruction of
Antarctic animals and vegetation by man. We must also be
aware of the danger of introducing virus diseases against
which the animals have no immunity.

Mr. Chairman, this is one of the special problems
which the United Kingdom Delegation has been studying. We
feel a sense of urgency in seeking internationally agreed
solutions. Antarctic problems are important in their own
right. They can also help to show the way forward through
international co-operation in other fields of human endeavour:
on the sea-beds of the Earth;  perhaps before long upon the
surface of the Moon - and - who knows - one day in the outer
reaches of space./.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLENCY Mr AKIRA MATSUI,
JAPANESE AMBASSADOR TO FRANCE,
HEAD OF THE JAPANESE DELEGATION.

Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is both a great honour and an immense pleasure for me 
to be here among you, and to be given the opportunity of saying 
a few words marking the opening of this Fifth Antarctic 
Consultative Meeting.  Allow me first of all, Mr Chairman, to 
congratulate you most sincerely on your unanimous election to 
the Chair.  Monsieur Michel Debré, the French Foreign Minister, 
in his address of welcome, was good enough to stress the 
importance and deeper implications of the Antarctic Treaty, 
and of the spirit of co-operation which it has engendered for 
the good of all countries.

It is most gratifying for me to see that the Antarctic 
Treaty has made it possible to reserve, for solely pacific ends, 
such a vast region of the World, there to conduct untrammelled 
scientific research operations destined to benefit Mankind as 
a whole.

I am, therefore, fully conscious of the true value of the 
inestimable work which is being carried out by specialists from 
all countries, who affront, in the name of Science, the natural 
hazards and extreme climatic conditions found in the Antarctic.

Since reopening, the Japanese "SHOWA" station is being 
increasingly better-equipped and is also endeavouring to widen 
the scope of its research programme.  Japan has just, for the 
very first time, sent to the South Pole an expedition of eleven 
members led by Mr MURUMAYA.  In this connection, I should like 
to express my deepest gratitude for the help and assistance 
which has been afforded to us by the stations maintained by 
other countries, who were so anxious to contribute to the 
success of our venture.

ANT.25
2.

As concerns Japan's own part, I am happy to be able to 
say that my country has developed her own scientific potential to 
the point where she can now make her full contribution to joint 
research activities at international level.  An example of this 
is the Meeting of Logistics Experts, which was held in Tokio last 
June.  I would like to repeat here my thanks for the significant 
contribution made by the delegates from each of your countries, 
which enabled that meeting to conclude successfully: I should 
also like to express the hope that the results then attained will 
serve to advance logistics research for the benefit of all:

In conclusion, allow me to formulate the sincere hope that 
this Fifth Consultative Meeting in Paris will have a positive 
outcome, not only in the strict interest of Science, but also in 
promoting greater understanding between peoples.
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLENCY Mr HERSLEB VOGT,
NORWEGIAN AMBASSADOR TO FRANCE,
HEAD OF THE NORWEGIAN DELEGATION.

Mr Chairman,

Allow me first of all to congratulate you on your election as 
Chairman of this assembly.

On behalf of the Norwegian Government, it is my privilege 
to express the most sincere thanks to the French Government for 
its hospitality in organising this Fifth Consultative Meeting of 
the Antarctic Treaty here in Paris.

If I may, Mr Chairman, I should then like to acknowledge the 
long and glorious record of French exploration in the Antarctic. 
In the person of one of her illustrious sons, Admiral Dumont 
d'Urville, France was in the forefront of Antarctic pioneering. 
Later, she was also a pioneer in the field of scientific research 
in that region. The names of Jean Charcot and Paul-Emile Victor 
will for ever be linked to the glorious heritage of scientific 
exploration in Antarctica.

My own country, Mir Chairman, has also a long-standing interest 
in the exploration of Polar regions, both in the Arctic and in the 
Antarctic. For various reasons, we were for some time obliged 
to give priority to our Arctic expeditions, but it gives me great 
pleasure to say that, this year, Norway is playing her part in 
scientific exploration in the Antarctic, as evidenced by our 
expedition in Queen Maud Land.

I sincerely hope, Mir Chairman, that this Consultative 
Meeting will prove to be a further step forward on the road of 
fruitful and friendly co-operation which was opened with the 
signing of the Antarctic Treaty.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.

ANT.25
SPEECH MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY HIS EXCELLENCY Mr R.L. HUTCHENS,
NEW ZEALAND AMBASSADOR,
HEAD OF THE NEW ZEALAND DELEGATION.

Mr Chairman,

May I, on behalf of the New Zealand delegation add our own warm congratulations on your unanimous election as our Chairman.  This Fifth Consultative Meeting is fortunate to have as its guide one who has such a long and close association with Antarctic matters.

May I also express our gratitude for the courtesies shown to us by our hosts, and for the help and facilities the Government of France has provided with a view to ensuring the smooth and efficient conduct of our discussions.

Mr Chairman, distinguished delegates, this Consultative Meeting has come at a significant time in the development of New Zealand's Antarctic research programme. Delegates will recall that at the Brussels meeting, we announced that the New Zealand Government had approved a new five-year plan for Antarctic research. This plan will be completed next year and the planning for the following five years is almost completed, and recommendations will shortly be considered by our Minister of Science.  Another major step forward has been the recent establishment of another New Zealand station, called Vanda Station.  During many summer seasons, scientists from countries such as the USA, Japan, the USSR and New Zealand have been studying the abnormal climatic, glaciological, and soil conditions in the Dry Valley area on the Western side of McMurdo Sound, which is snow-free throughout most or all of the year.  They have also made intensive studies of the hot lakes which are covered by ice at the surface but have temperatures of about plus 20 degrees Centigrade near the bottom.  However, a proper understanding of these almost unique phenomena requires meteorological and other relevant measurements for all seasons. On this account, it gives me great pleasure to be able to inform you that a party of four New Zealanders and one American will winter-over at Vanda Station next year and will carry out a comprehensive programme to obtain the necessary observations.

ANT.25
2.

Just as through their research programme Governments are searching out new ways of extending their knowledge of the Antarctic Continent, so should the Treaty Powers be seeking to find new ways of ensuring the effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty.  The framework for consultation, which the Treaty provides, ensures that there is adequate machinery for discussing any difficulties facing the Antarctic Powers.  It allows for informal and flexible arrangements and the fullest possible exchange of information.  It provides, in short, not only a valuable means of ensuring that the progressive principles of the Treaty are maintained but promotes also the free discussion and cooperation which characterise Consultative Meetings - features seldom found at other international gatherings.

I would like to make special reference to the conservation measures on fauna and flora.  Although the Treaty Powers can be justly proud of the Agreed Measures and the additions to them made at the Fourth Meeting, we would not like to think that this is the limit to what can be achieved under Treaty auspices in the field of conservation.  It is very necessary to consider future needs, remembering, for example, that the question of conservation will become increasingly urgent in the Antarctic region as tourists and trawlers infiltrate the deep South.

As delegates will fully appreciate, we shall at this Meeting be discussing several other questions which are highly important in the context of future planning and coordination in Antarctica.  I have in mind particularly the items on telecommunications and meteorology.  It is my delegation's hope that this Meeting will come to some arrangement which will allow greater coordination in these fields in future.  With the help of the expert scientific bodies and their governments, we are confident that this objective can be attained.

Antarctic Treaty meetings have a unique value, in that they coalesce the many exchanges pertaining to Antarctica which take place at varied levels between scientists in the field, other technical experts, and Governmental representatives.  They provide the opportunity to coordinate and direct the future of the Continent.
3.

It is, in short, my Government's hope, Mr Chairman, that 
discussion here will not be limited only to the short-term 
administrative arrangements for Antarctica but that representatives 
will not be deterred from consideration of the more sensitive 
areas in the relationship between Treaty members.  It is our 
fear that unless such problems are brought into the open and 
discussed in the freedom and amity of these Consultative Meetings, 
the Antarctic Treaty may ultimately fail to fulfil its purpose 
and the progressive and far-sighted principles of its founders 
be defeated.
2.

From this standpoint, there can be no doubting that the 
Fifth Consultative Meeting which has just started will be 
equally successful.

The matters which we shall be discussing refer to a widening 
of the scope of scientific research, the conservation of 
Antarctica's unique fauna and flora, and the introduction of 
certain measures designed to facilitate collective and 
co-ordinated operations in severe climatic conditions.

If I may be allowed to say so, the Soviet Union has been 
concerned to implement all the recommendations adopted at 
previous Meetings. Her scientific workers in the Antarctic 
have tended to increase the number of observations made.  Last 
year, for instance, a fifth Soviet station was established at 
Bellingshausen in the South Shetlands. The activities of the 
existing stations are also being developed further, with 
special reference to our project for making atmospheric soundings 
by rockets from Molodionaja station.

A large number of scientific articles and papers dealing 
with Natural History matters in Antarctica are published in the 
Soviet Union, and Volume II of the Soviet Atlas of the 
Antarctic is now in the press.

As always, our Polar expeditions maintain close 
relationships with scientific workers in other countries. 
The current expedition includes specialists from Bulgaria, 
the United States, Argentina, and the German Democratic Republic. 
These relationships will not only continue to be maintained in 
the future, but will be developed still further.

We find it especially gratifying that this Fifth 
Consultative Meeting should be held in France, since the Soviet 
Union maintains close scientific contact with French specialists 
in a large number of fields - including that of Antarctic 
scientific activities. As an example of this, a joint expedition 
employing snowcats is planned to take place in the Antarctic 
hinterland during the coming year.

I should be happy if all the representatives of the Parties 
to the Treaty who are present at this Meeting found it possible 
to work together on the same friendly and understanding basis 
as is so well displayed by their operational counterparts in 
Antarctica.

Finally, please accept my best wishes for a fruitful 
outcome to our work.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
SPEECH OF THANKS MADE ON 18th NOVEMBER 1968
BY M. Hubert ARGOD
HEAD OF THE FRENCH DELEGATION

Mr Chairman,

I wish to thank, in the name of the French Delegation,
all the Representatives who have just spoken, and to say how
much I myself was moved on hearing the very kind words which they
employed in their references to my Country.

Our intention, when making very careful preparations for
this Fifth Consultative Meeting, was to demonstrate thereby
our full recognition of the importance of the matters which
we are about to discuss. I would like to say to all present that
the French Delegation is determined to spare no efforts in the
attempt to make this a fertile and constructive debate, and one
which will still further enhance the record of co-operation in
the Antarctic.
