TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE         QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        пятое консультативное совещание
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

                                  PARIS

Reference :        ANT 50
Date :             29th November
                   1968

FINAL REPORT

of the

FIFTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

-: -:- :-: -:-: -
1. 
In accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty, representatives of the Contracting 
Parties (South Africa, United States, Argentina, Australia, 
Belgium, Chile, United Kingdom, France, Japan, Norway, 
New Zealand and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) met 
at Paris on 18th November 1968 for the purpose of 
discussing, and recommending to their Governments, measures 
in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the 
Treaty.

2. 
His Excellency Ambassador Pierre Charpentier was 
appointed by the French Government to act as Temporary 
Chairman of the Meeting pending election of a Chairman.

3. 
The Meeting was formally opened.by the Right Honourable 
Michel Debré, the French Minister for Foreign Affairs and 
former Prime Minister.

4. 
Ambassador Charpentier was then elected Chairman of 
the Meeting and Monsieur Guy Scalabre of the French 
Diplomatic Corps was appointed Secretary-General.

5. 
Opening statements were delivered by the Heads of 
all Delegations.

.../. . .
- 2 -

6.	The Meeting then adopted the following Agenda:
===
	1) Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Fauna and Flora

	2) Pelagic Sealing

	3) Amendments to the Agreed Measures for Conservation of Fauna 
	   and Flora as instituted by Recommendation III-8.

	4) Report on Meeting of Logistics Experts held in Tokyo from 
	   3rd to 8th June 1968.

	5) Telecommunications

	6) Meteorology

	7) Tourist Activities in the Antarctic

	8) Commemorative Postage Stamp

	9) Historic Traces

	10) Co-ordinating Group for Southern Ocean established by the 
	    Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commission on 27th October 
	    1967.

	11) Co-ordination of General Meetings of SCAR and Antarctic 
	    Treaty Consultative Meetings.

7.	The Meeting considered all the items on the Agenda in 
===	Plenary Session, appointing two Working Parties of which one 
	to examine Items 1,2 and 3 of the Agenda and the other to 
	included representatives of all Delegations wishing to parti-
	cipate in them.

8.	The opening and closing Plenary Sessions were held in public,
===	but all others were held in private.

9.	The Meeting agreed unanimously to the adoption of the 
===	following Recommendations
-3-

RECOMMENDATION V-1
COMMEMORATIVE STAMP ISSUE

The Representatives recommend to their Governments :

1) 	that, on the occasion of the Tenth anniversary of the 
	entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, each Consul-
	tative Party should issue a commemorative postage 
	stamp during I97I;

2) 	that this stamp should bear, in the language or 
	languages of each issuing country, the following 
	words :

	"Antarctic Treaty I96I - I97I";

3) 	that the most prominent feature of the stamp should 
	be the Antarctic Treaty emblem representing a map of 
	the Antarctica which appears on the official documents 
	of Consultative Meetings;

4) 	that any additional matter should be consonant with the 
	provisions and the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty;

5) 	that the denomination of the stamp should remain at the 
	discretion of each issuing country.
- 4 -

RECOMMENDATION V-2

MEASURES FOR IMPROVING ANTARCTIC TELECOMIUNICATIONS

Recognizing the need for improving the collection and 
distribution of meteorological data and other scientific informa-
tion and for further improving Antarctic telecommuni cations ;

Considering the views of the World Meteorological
Organization, as expressed at the 18th and 20th Sessions of the
WMO Executive Committee, on the desirability of setting up
Antarctic Meteorological Centres and of determining provisionally
their functions ;

Supporting the principle of the World Weather Watch ;

Considering the intention of some Governments voluntarily to
create, within a few years, such Antarctic Meteorological Centres
at their Stations ;

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that :

1.  In view of the valuable information provided by WMO and SCAR
to Consultative Parties, they continue to cooperate with the WMO
through their National Committees in defining future scientific
requi . nents.

2.  They consider the usefulness of creating Antarctic
Meteorological Centres in  the Antarctic.

3.  They hold a meeting of telecommuni cations experts at Buenos-
Aires, Argentina, between 15 August and 15 September 1969, in
accordance with Recommendation IV-24.  The date of this meeting
should be arranged through diplomatic channels, taking into
account relevant meetings of other international organizations
which will be held in 1969 and the time required to translate
and distribute the documents from such meetings.

4.  Although it is expected that all Consultative Parties will
participate, the meeting in Buenos-Aires may proceed without the
participation of them all provided all the Consultative Parties
agree to that procedure and to the provisional agenda.  All
Consultative Parties will com unicate before 1st June 1969 to the
host Government their intentions as to sending experts. Proposals
emanating from the meeting will be sent to all Consultative
Parties for their consideration.

..../..
- 5 -

5. One expert each from WMO, ITU, IOC and SCAR be invited to 
attend as observers.  Invited observers may submit documents and 
make statements with the permission of the Chairman but they 
may not vote.  All experts from Consultative Parties attending 
will be members of their delegations.

6. The agenda for the meeting be determined by the Consultative 
Parties through diplomatic channels and the agreed provisional 
agenda will be circulated by the host Gove:nment through diplomatic 
channels one month prior to the opening of the meeting.

7. The results of the meeting take the form of proposals on 
telecommunications unanimously agreed by the delegations of the 
Consultative Parties participating in the meeting.  These will  be 
circulated by the host government to all Consultative Parties for 
consideration.  These proposals will constitute the report of the 
meeting.  Other conference documents may be appended for inform-
ations as annexes to the report with the consent of all delegations 
present.  The proposals would not become measures under Article IX 
of the Antarctic Treaty but any Consultative Parties may submit 
any matter arising from this meeting to a subsequent Consultative 
Meeting.

8. Information be exchanged through diplomatic channels on the 
following aspects of telecommunications procedures at least one 
month prior to the opening of the Meeting :

    (i) existing networks, traffic loads and channel capacity on 
        each route ;

   (ii) shortcomings in existing networks and channels ;

  (iii) present traffic carried on each route -
         a) Administrative and operational traffic
         b) Meteorologic traffic
         c) Other scientific traffic ;

   (iv) existing time schedules for meteorological transmissions -
         a) Broadcast
         b) Point to point traffic.
- 6 -

9.      The fields of discussion at the meeting include, inter alia :

(i)     New telecommunications traffic requirements submitted 
by Consultative Parties WMO, IOC and SCAR, the capacity of the 
existing facilities and the effect of these new requirements on the 
existing facilities, taking into account the report of the Antarctic 
Treaty meeting on Telecommunications held in Washington in 1963 and 
present prevailing conditions;

(ii)    Estimates or requirements for the near future and 
further projections if possible;

(iii)  Procedure for amending telecommunications arrangments 
from time to time to meet changing conditions;

(iv)   New telecommunications techniques which might be 
introduced into the Antarctic to meet future requirements;

(v)     Preparation of a standard format for the exchange of 
information on telecommunications facilities under Article VII of the 
Antarctic Treaty.
-7-

RECOMMENDATION V 3
ON THE SOUTHERN OCEAN

The Representatives,

Considering that the Southern Ocean is an integral part of 
the Antarctic environment and that the Consultative Governments 
have made substantial contributions towards knowledge of this 
ocean in the Treaty Area,

Noting that Resolution 5 of the Vth Session of the Inter-
governmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) established a 
Coordination Group for the Southern Ocean and that the terms of 
reference for this group include plans for the gradual development 
of a comprehensive study of the Southern Ocean;

Noting further the significant contribution the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has made to these studies 
and that SCAR is invited to participate in the Coordination Group 
as an observer;

Welcome the proposed study of the Southern Ocean by the IOC 
with the participation of SCAR as well as other interested scientific 
bodies;

Recommend to their Governments that they encourage SCAR 
through their National Committees to continue its interest in 
scientific matters related to the Southern Ocean and to make 
available scientific advice as appropriate to the IOC Coordination 
Group in order to aid in its development of plans for the com-
prehensive study of the Southern Ocean.
- 9 -

RECOMMENDATION V-5

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS :
FILDES PENINSULA

The Representatives, considering that Fildes Peninsula
has several small lakes which, being ice-free in summer, are
of outstanding ecological interest and that the most interesting
one of them should be specially protected, recommend to their
Governments that, in place of the description in Recommendation
IV-12, the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected
Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora :

"SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 12, Fildes Peninsula,
King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Lat. 62°11'S,
long. 58°52'W.

Description : The fresh-water lake, including the
surrounding land within 100 metres of the shore, situated
about 500 metres north of Suffield Point and 2.5 kilometres
East-North-East of Bellingshausen Station on Fildes Peninsula.
The area is shown on the attached map."
PLACE NAMES                                  DESIGNATIONS GEOGRAPHIQUES
1.  Suffield Point                          1.  Point Suffield
2.  Bellingshausen Station                  2.  Station Bellingshausen
3.  Fildes Peninsula                        3.  Peninsule Fildes

DESIGNACIONES GEOGRAFICAS                   ГЕОГРАФИЧЕСКИЕ ОБОЗНАЧЕНИЯ
1.  Punto Suffield                          1.  Стрел?а Сюффилд
2.  Estaci?n Bellingshausen                 2.  Станция ?элингсхаузен
3.  Pen?nsula Fildes                        3.  Полуостров Файлдс.
- 10 -

RECOMMENDATION V-6

MODIFICATION OF THE AGREED MEASURES ADOPTED UNDER
RECOMMENDATION III - 8 FOR THE
CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that :

(1) in paragraph (d) of Article II after the words "Agreed
Measures" they add the following :

"The functions of an authorised person will be carried out
within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty. They will be
carried out exclusively under scientific principles and
will have as their sole purpose the effective protection
of Antarctic fauna and flora in accordance with these
Agreed Measures"

(2) in paragraph (e) of Article II, after the words "appropriate
authority", they add the following :

"as defined at paragraph (d) above".
-11-

RECOMMENDATION V-7

PROPOSALS OF SCAR FOR THE REVISION OF THE INTERIM GUIDE LINES FOR 
THE VOLUNTARY REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC PELAGIC SEALING.

Taking into account the importance of conserving seal 
south of 60° South Latitude;

Considering that in the future an international 
Convention for the regulation of Antarctic pelagic sealing may 
be required;

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that, 
when implementing Recommendation IV-21 and until a decision is 
taken on the conclusion of an international Convention, they 
should voluntarilly take account of the proposals of SCAR in its 
report to National Antarctic Committees in 1968 on the modifi-
cation of the "Interim Guide Lines for the Voluntary Regulation 
of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing", as appended in a revised form to 
the Report of the Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
- 12 -

RECOMMENDATION V - 8

EXAMINATION OF A DRAFT CONVENTION FOR
FOR THE REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC PELAGIC SEALING

The Representatives,

Having had a preliminary exchange of views at the Fifth
Consultative Meeting on the draft Convention for the Regulation
of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing contained in the Final Report of the
Meeting,

Recognising the need to study the preparation of such a
Convention,

Recommend to their Governments that, before the next
Consultative Meeting, they study the draft Convention with a
view to its consideration at that Meeting.
-13-

RECOMMENDATION V-9

SIXTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that they accept the offer by the Delegation of Japan to hold the Sixth Consultative Meeting under Article IX of the Antarctic treaty in Tokyo, on a date in I970 to be mutually decided upon by the Consultative Governments.
- 14 -

10        As concerned the other items of the agenda :

Following an examination of the account of the expert 
meeting on logistics, held in Tokyo from 3rd to 8th June 1968,
the Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting expressed to 
the Government of Japan its satisfaction and gratitude for 
the organisation of this expert meeting which permitted the 
work to be particularly fruitful.

There was a useful exchange of views on the effect 
of tourism in Antarctica, reports were circulated about certain 
trips which have been made recently and about the conditions 
which various countries had made applicable to any tourist 
groups wishing to visit their stations.

11        Furthermore, in accordance with the provisions of 
Recommendation V-7, the text of the SCAR proposals concerning 
a revised version of the interim instructions concerning the 
voluntary regulation of pelagic sealing in Antarctica will be 
found at Annex 1 hereto.

In application of the provisions of Recommendation V-8,
a Draft Convention to regulate Antarctic pelagic sealing is 
also attached, at Annex 2.

12        The Final Report of the Fifth Consultative Meeting was 
unanimously adopted on 29th November 1968.

13        Closing speeches were made on 29th November 1968 by or 
on behalf of all the Heads of Delegations.

The Chairman then declared that the Meeting was 
closed.
ANNEX 1

MODIFIED VERSION OF THE REPORT OF 1968
TO NATIONAL ANTARCTIC COMMITTEES
BY THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC
RESEARCH (SCAR)

1. The total number of seals of each species taken in the area
south of 60° South Latitude should not exceed the number
for that species set so as to bring the population to, or
maintain it at, the level giving the optimum sustainable
yield.

2. The number will be set in the light of the best available
scientific evidence, and will be revised at regular intervals.
The best present advice regarding numbers is given in
Annex A.

3. A seal should not be killed or taken when it is in the
water.

4. The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal
(Mirounga leonina), and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus
should not be killed or taken, except in an emergency or
in accordance with a permit.

5. Within the period specified in Annex C, no Weddell Seal
(Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old, or older, should be
killed or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance
with a permit.

6. For the purposes of these Guide Lines, the area south of
60° South Latitude should be divided into the Sealing Zones
set out in Annex B. No seals should be killed or taken
except in the zones and at the times specified in Annex B.
However, a permit may be issued in accordance with
paragraph 9.

7. No seals should be killed or taken within the closed season
designated in Annex C, other than in an emergency or in
accordance with a permit.
ANNEX 1                                  - 2 -

8.  Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that 
forms a seal breeding area or is the site of long-term
scientific research on seals may be declared a Seal
Reserve by the Governments.  Such Seal Reserves are listed
in Annex D.  Within any Seal Reserve seals should not be
killed or taken except in an emergency or in accordance
with a permit.

9.  Permits should be issued only for the following purposes :

    (i)     to provide indispensable food for men or dogs in
            limited quantities and in conformity with the
            purposes and principles of the Agreed Measures for
            the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and
            these Guide Lines,

   (ii)     to provide specimens for scientific study or

  (iii)     to provide specimens for museums, educational or
            cultural institutions.

10. Each Government should provide the other Governments
before 31 October of each year with the information relating
to the preceding period of 1 July to 30 June specified
in Annex E.

11. At the same time, each Government should provide to the
other Governments information on any steps it has taken
in accordance with these Guide Lines.

12. When it appears to any Government that the harvest of any
species of seal in the area south of 60° South Latitude
is having a significant effect on the stocks therein, or
in any locality is disturbing the ecological system
therein, that Government may propose through diplomatic
channels that a Consultative Meeting shall be convened
under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  If all
Consultative Parties so agree, such a meeting will be
convened as soon as possible to consider the situation
and the steps it may be necessary to take.
- 3 -                                          ANNEX 1

ANNEX A. PERMISSIBLE CATCH

With present information it is not possible to give figures
for the optimum sustainable yield, or for the levels of
population which would provide such yields. Such figures can
only be estimated with any useful precision from the analysis of
the populations after they have been exposed to exploitation for
a period.

It is suggested that if catches do not exceed the following
safety levels until the results of such analysis are available,
then the populations will not be reduced below the level giving
the optimum yield.

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon carcinophagus)  200,000 individuals
                                        in any one year

Leopard Seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)       15,000 individuals
                                        in any one year

Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)  10,000 individuals
                                        in any one year

ANNEX B. SEALING ZONES

1.  The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with those used
    by the whaling industry, are designated :

    Zone 1 Between 60o and 120o West Longitude

    Zone 2 Between 0o and 60o West Longitude together
    with that part of the Weddell Sea lying
    westwards of 60o West Longitude.

    Zone 3 Between 0o and 70o East Longitude

    Zone 4 Between 70o and 130o East Longitude

    Zone 5 Between 130o East Longitude and 170o West
    Longitude

    Zone 6 Between 120o and 170o West Longitude.

2.  During the season 1969-1970, being the first season to
    which these Guide Lines apply, no sealing should be permitted
    in Zone 1.  In the second season of application, Zone 2
    should be closed to sealing, and thereafter each zone should
    be closed for a season in sequence.
ANNEX 1                                 - 4 -

ANNEX C. CLOSED SEASONS

1.  The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is a
    Closed Season.

2.  No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old or
    older should be killed or taken between 1 September and
    15 December inclusive.

ANNEX D. SEAL RESERVES

The following areas are declared Seal Reserves :

1.  The area between 60°20' and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05'
    and 46°25' West Longitude, including the South Orkney
    Islands.

2.  The area of the south-western Ross Sea south of 76° South
    Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude, including Ross
    Island.

3.  The area of Edisto inlet south and west of a line drawn
    between Cape Hallett (72°19'S. : 170°18'E) and Helm Point
    (72°11'S.: 170°00'E).

ANNEX E. EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION:

1.  Each Government should provide to other Governments
    statistical information on all seals taken within the
    area to which these Guide Lines relate.

2.  This information should include the number of adult
    individuals and pups of each species killed or taken during
    each operating day, specifying in which of the Zones set
    out in Annex B they have been killed or taken.
Cote : ANT.-INF. 1
Original : in English

STATEMENT OF STEPS TAKEN BY UNITED KINGDOM
GOVERNMENT TO IMPLEMENT THE AGREED MEASURES ON
CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA

(Submitted by United Kingdom Delegation)

The United Kingdom Government has so far taken the following
action:

1.  The Antarctic Treaty Act 1967, which enabled us to give effect
to the Agreed Measures, was passed through both Houses of Parliament
and received the Royal Assent on 27 July 1967. It came into full
operation on 1 July 1968. Copies have been sent to the other con-
tracting parties to the Treaty. This Act of Parliament applies to
nationals of the United Kingdom whilst they are in the Antarctic.
It establishes a permit system and imposes appropriate scales of
penalties for contraventions. In addition, it enables certain
further provisions to be made by Order in Council.

2.  During the Southern Summer of 1967-1968 the British Antarctic
Survey organised an experimental run for one year of the proposed
permit system and of the collection of statistics. Special Stan-
ding Instructions (copy in Annex) were issued to every Station
Commander, with pro-forma permits. A personal letter of explana-
tion was also sent by the Director to every member of the Survey.
It was considered desirable to make quite certain that everyone
fully understood that it would in future be a criminal offence,
with heavy penalties, if they killed penguins or seals (for
example) without a permit.This experimental run for one year also
made it possible to improve, in the light of experience gained,
the standing instructions about how to collect the information
which is to be transmitted to the other Consultative Parties.
- 2 -

3.      There was no authority to enforce the provisions of the 
Antarctic Treaty Act until four Orders in Council had been made.
One of them established 1 July 1968 as the date when the scheme 
came into formal operation. Others designated the Specially Pro-
tected Areas and Specially Protected Species so far agreed. It is 
expected, therefore, that the United Kingdom will be able to 
comply with all these Recommendations, starting on 1 July 1968.
Cote     :  ANT.-INF.2
Original :  in English

APPROVAL AND APPLICATION OF THE AGREED MEASURES
FOR THE CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA

(Submitted by the South-African Delegation)

These Agreed Measures (Recommendation III-8) for the @onserv-
ation of Fauna and Flora in the Antarctic Treaty Area have been
formally approved by the South-African Government and are being
implemented administratively.

The statistics concerning the annual number and species of
seals killed or captured have already been submitted in terms of
Recommendation IV-19 of the Fourth Consultative Meeting.  For easy
reference, the following figures are repeated :

For period 1 July 1966 to 30 June 1967 ; locality :
Admiral Byrd Bay 69°S, 1°E.

SPECIES           SEX      AGE         For FOOD
Weddell seal  ........ {  M       A           18
                         F       A            4
Elephant seal .........  M       A            1

For period 1 July 1967 to 30 June 1968 ; locality :
Lat. 70° 11'S , Long. 02° 10' W.

SPECIES           SEX      AGE         For FOOD
Leopard seal ..........  M       J            1
Crabe-eater  ..........  M       J            5
Weddell seal .......... {  M       J to A      21
                         F       J to A      12
Code : ANT.-INF. 3
Original : French

The Japanese Representative informs the Meeting that his Government referring to Article IX, para 4 of the Antarctic Treaty, accepts Recommendations IV-20 to IV-28 inclusive adopted at the Fourth Consultative Meeting held at Santiago in 1966.

On the other hand, however, the Government of Japan wishes to maintain its reservations concerning the acceptance of Recommendations IV-1 to IV-19 inclusive, pending its acceptance of Recommendation III-8 concerning measures for the conservation of fauna and flora.
ANNEX 2

DRAFT CONVENTION FOR THE REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC

PELAGIC SEALING

The Contracting Parties,

Recalling the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora, adopted under the Antarctic Treaty;

Recognizing that the seal stocks south of 60° South Latitude are
a resource of potential value which require a binding internat-
ional agreement for its effective regulation;

Recognizing that this resource should not be depleted by over-
exploitation, and hence that any harvesting should be regulated
at the level of the optimum sustainable yield;

Recognizing that in order to improve scientific knowledge and so
place exploitation on a rational basis, every effort should be
made both to encourage biological research on these seal popul-
ations and to gain information from the statistics of future
sealing operations;

Desiring to promote and achieve the objectives of protection,
scientific study and rational use of Antarctic seals;

Have agreed as follows : -

ARTICLE 1

Implementation

Each Contracting Party shall adopt for its nationals,
including ships possessing its nationality, such measures,
including a permit system as appropriate, as may be necessary in
order to regulate in accordance with the provisions of this
Convention pelagic sealing in the area to which this Convention
applies, that is to say, the seas south of 60° South Latitude.
ANNEX 2

- 2 -

ARTICLE 2

Permissible Catch

(1) The total number of seals of each species killed or taken in
the area to which this Convention applies shall not exceed the
number specified in Annex A.

(2) The number for each species listed in Annex A shall be fixed
in the light of the best available scientific evidence and shall
be reviewed at least every five years and, as necessary, revised
by the Contracting Parties.

ARTICLE 3

Sealing Methods

A seal shall not be killed when it is in the water, except
in an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued under
Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 4

Ross, Elephant and Fur Seals

The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal (Mirouna
leonina) and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus shall not be
killed or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance with a
permit issued under Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 5

Weddell Seals

Within the period specified in Annex C, no Weddell Seal
(Leptonychotes weddeli) one year old,or older, shall be killed or
taken, except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit
issued under Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 6

Sealing Zones

For the purposes of this Convention, the area to which this
Convention applies shall be divided into the Sealing Zones set
out in Annex B. No seals shall be killed or taken in a zone
- 3 -
ANNEX 2

which is closed for the tine being, as specified in Annex B,
except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued
under Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 7
Closed Seasons

No seals shall be killed or taken within the closed season
designated in Annex C, except in an emergency or in accordance
with a permit issued under Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 8
Seal Reserves

Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that forms
a seal breeding area or is the site of long-term scientific
research on seals may be declared a Seal Reserve by the Contrac-
ting Parties. Such Seal Reserves shall be listed in Annex D.
Within any Seal Reserve, no seals may be killed or taken, except
in an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued under
Article 9 (1).

ARTICLE 9
Permits

(1) A permit may be issued with regard to Articles 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
and 8 only for the following purposes :

    (i) to provide indispensable food for men or dogs in
    limited quantities and in conformity with the purposes
    and principles of this Convention;

   (ii) to provide specimens for scientific study or scientific
   information; or

  (iii) to provide specimens for museums, educational or
  cultural institutions.

(2) Where a Contracting Party institutes a permit system for
sealing operations other than those specified in paragraph (1) of
this Article that Contracting Party shall have regard, in issuing
permits, to the principles and purpose of this Convention and in
particular Articles 2, 6, 7 and 8.
ANNEX 2                                  - 4 -

ARTICLE 10

Exchange of information

(1) Each Contracting Party shall provide the other Contracting 
Parties before 31 October of each year with the information 
relating to the preceding period of 1 July to 30 June speci?ied 
in Annex E.

(2) At the same time, each Contracting Party shall provide to the 
other Contracting Parties information on any steps it has taken 
in accordance with this Convention.

ARTICLE 11

Consultations between Contracting Parties

(1) Should it appear to any Contracting Party that the harvest 
of any species of seal in the area to which this Convention 
applies is :

    (i) approaching the number for the species ?ixed in 
accordance with Article 2 above,

   (ii) having a signi?icant effect on the total stocks 
therein, or

  (iii) disturbing the ecological system in any particular 
locality,

that Party may propose through diplomatic channels that a meeting 
of Contracting Parties be convened.

(2) If Contracting Parties so agree, such a meeting shall be 
convened as soon as possible in order to consider the situation 
and the steps it may be necessary to take.

ARTICLE 12
Signature

(To be drafted at the next Consultative Meeting)

ARTICLE 13

Ratification

This Convention is subject to rati?ication. Instruments of 
rati?ication shall be deposited with...
- 5 -
ANNEX 2

ARTICLE 14
Accession
(To be drafted at the nextConsultative Meeting)

ARTICLE 15
Entry into force

This Convention shall enter into force on 1st July following
the date of deposit of the..... instrument of ratification or
accession.

ARTICLE 16
Amendment
(To be drafted at the next Consultative Meeting)

ANNEX A - PERMISSIBLE CATCH

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon carcinophagus)
      200,000 individuals in any one year.

Leopard Seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)
       15,000 individuals in any one year.

Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)
       10,000 individuals in any one year.

ANNEX B - SEALING ZONES

1.  The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with those used
by the whaling industry, are designated :

Zone 1  Between 60° and 120° West Longitude

Zone 2  Between 0° and 60° West Longitude, together with that
part of the Weddell Sea lying westward of 60° West Longitude
ANNEX 2                                  - 6 -

Zone 3     Between 0° and 70° East Longitude
Zone 4     Between 70° and 130° East Longitude
Zone 5     Between 130° East Longitude and 170° West Longitude
Zone 6     Between 120° and 170° West Longitude.

2.      During the season immediately following the entry into
force of this Convention, being the first season to which this
Convention applies, no sealing shall be permitted in Zone 1. In
the next season Zone 2 shall be closed to sealing, and there-
after each Zone shall be closed for a season in sequence .

ANNEX C - CLOSED SEASONS

1. The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is a
Closed Season.

2. No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old or
older shall be killed or taken between 1 September and
15 December inclusive.

ANNEX D - SEAL RESERVES

The following are declared Seal Reserves :

1. The area around the South Orkney Islands, between
60°20' and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05' and 46°25' West
Longitude.

2. The area of the south-western Ross Sea south of 76° South
Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude.

3. The area of Edisto Inlet, south and west of a line drawn
between Cape Hallett (Lat. 72°19'S., Long. 170° 18'E.) and
Helm Point (Lat. 72°11'S., Long 170°00'E.).
- 7 -
ANNEX 2

ANNEX E - EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1. Contracting Parties shall provide to other Contracting 
Parties statistical information on all seals taken within the 
area to which this Convention applies.

2. This information shall include :

    (i) the daily position of ship at noon each operating day;
    and

    (ii) the number of adult individuals and pups of each species 
    taken on that day.
