TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                      пятое консультативное совещание
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

                                  Cote: ANT.42 - Rev.3

DOCUMENT CONCERNING THE PROPOSALS OF SCAR
FOR THE REVISION OF THE INTERIM GUIDE LINES FOR THE VOLUNTARY
REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC PELAGIC SEALING (submitted by Sub-
Working Group)

Taking into account the importance of conserving seal
stocks south of 60° South Latitude;

Considering that in the future an international Convention
for the regulation of Antarctic pelagic sealing may be required,

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that,
when implementing Recommendation IV-21 and until a decision is
taken on the conclusion of an international agreement, they
should voluntarily take account of the proposals of SCAR in
its report to National Antarctic Committees in 1968 on the
modification of the "Interim Guide Lines for the Voluntary
Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing", as appended in a
revised form to the Report of the Fifth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting.
- 2 -

MODIFIED VERSION OF THE REPORT OF 1968
TO NATIONAL ANTARCTIC COMMITTEES
BY THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC
RESEARCH (SCAR).

1. The total number of seals of each species taken in the area
south of 60° South Latitude should not exceed t'e number
for that species set so as to bring the population to, or
maintain it at the level giving the optimum sustainable
yield.

2. The number will be set in the light of the best available
scientific evidence, and will be revised at regular
intervals. The best present advice regarding numbers is
given in Annex A.

3. A seal should not be killed or taken when it is in the
water.

4. The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal
(Mirounga leonina), and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus
should not be killed or taken, except in an emergency or
in accordance with a permit.

5. Within the period specified in Annex C no Weddell Seal
(Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old, or older, should
be killed or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance
with a permit.

6. For the purposes of these Guide Lines, the area south of
60° South Latitude should be divided into the Sealing Zones
set out in Annex B. No seals should be killed or taken
except in the zones and at the times specified in Annex B
and in accordance with a permit.

7. No seals should be killed or taken within the closed
season designated in Annex C, other than in an emergency
or in accordance with a permit.
- 3 -

8. Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that 
forms a seal breeding area or is the site of long-term 
scientific research on seals may be declared a Seal 
Reserve by the Governments.  Such Seal Reserves are listed 
in Annex D.  Within any Seal Reserve seals may not be 
killed or taken except in an emergency or in accordance 
with a permit.

9. Permits should be issued only for the following purposes :

    (i) to provide indispensable food for men or dogs in 
limited quantities and in conformity with the 
purposes and principles of the Agreed Measures for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and 
these Guide Lines,

   (ii) to provide specimens for scientific study or 
scientific information, or

  (iii) to provide specimens for museums, educational or 
cultural institutions.

10. Each Government should provide the other Governments 
before 31 October of each year with the information relating 
to the preceding period of 1 July to 30 June specified 
in Annex E.

11. At the same time, each Government should provide to the 
other Governments information on any steps it has taken 
in accordance with these Guide Lines.

12. When it appears to any Government that the harvest of any 
species of seal in the area south of 60° South Latitude 
is having a significant effect on the stocks therein, or 
in any locality is disturbing the ecological system 
therein, that Government may propose through diplomatic 
channels that a Consultative Meeting shall be convened 
under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  If all 
Consultative Parties so agree, such a meeting will be 
convened as soon as possible to consider the situation 
and the steps it may be necessary to take.
- 4 -

ANNEX A. PERMISSIBLE CATCH

With present information it is not possible to give figures
for the optimum sustainable yield, or for the levels of population
which would provide such yields.  Such figures can only be
estimated with any useful precisions from the analysis of the
populations after they have been exposed to exploitation for a
period.

It is suggested that if catches do not exceed the following
safety levels until the results of such analysis are available
then the populations will not be reduced below the level giving
the optimum yield.

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon carcinophagus)  200,000 individuals
                                    in any one year

Leopard Seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)    15,000 individuals
                                    in any one year

Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)  10,000 individuals
                                    in any one year

ANNEX B. SEALING ZONES

1.  The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with those used
by the whaling industry are designated :

    Zone 1  Between 60° and 120° West Longitude

    Zone 2  Between 0° and 60° West Longitude together
with that part of the Weddell Sea lying
westwards of 60° West Longitude.

    Zone 3  Between 0° and 70° East Longitude

    Zone 4  Between 70° and 130° East Longitude

    Zone 5  Between 130° East Longitude and 170° West
Longitude

    Zone 6  Between 120° and 170° West Longitude.

2.  During the season 1969-1970, being the first season to
which these Guide Lines apply, no sealing should be permitted
in Zone 1. In the second season of application, Zone 2
should be closed to sealing, and thereafter each zone should
be closed for a season in sequence.
- 5 -

ANNEX C. CLOSED SEASONS

1. The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is a 
Closed Season.

2. No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old or 
older should be killed or taken between 1 September and 
15 December inclusive.

ANNEX D. SEAL RESERVES

The following areas are declared Seal Reserves:

1. The area between 60°20' and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05' 
and 46°25' West Longitude, including the South Orkney 
Islands.

2. The area of the South western Ross Sea south of 76° South 
Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude, including Ross 
Islands.

3. The area of Edisto inlet south and west of a line drawn 
between Cape Hallett (72°19'S.: 170°18'E) and Helm Point 
(72°11'S.: 170°00'E).

ANNEX E. EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1. Each Government should provide to other Governments 
statistical information on all seals taken within the 
area to which these Guide Lines relate.

2. This information should include the number of adult 
individuals and pups of each species killed or taken during 
each operating day, specifying in which of the Zones set 
out in Annex B they have been killed or taken.
