TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA

ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Côte : ANT 2
Date : 18 Novembre 1968
Original : Français

Explanatory note presented by Belgium on
the "Pelagic Seals Hunting".

Sub-paragraph one of the Recommendation IV-21
forsees that the problem of the Pelagic Seals Hunting
might require in future a formal international agreement.

Belgium is fully conscicus of the importance of
conservation of seals on the high seas and considers
that measures should be taken and that they should go
further than the voluntary rules indicated in recommen-
dation IV-21.

It is considered that consultative meetings are
fully qualified to study this problem, be it only in
virtue of paragraph One of Article IV of the Antarctic
Treaty.

Nevertheless, Belgium has serious doubts on the
possibility of introducing "agreed measures", similar
to those indicated by the recommendation III-VIII
referring to the Antarctic and ice-shelves.

Article VI of the Treaty is formal:

"The provisions of the present Treaty shall apply to
the area south of 60° South Latitude, including all
ice shelves, but nothing in the present Treaty shall
prejudice or in any way affect the rights, or the
exercise of the rights, of any State under interna-
tional law with regard to the high seas within the
area."

./.
3.

Pelagic Seals hunt covered by the liberty on the high seas, escapes all dispositions contained in the Treaty, and it will be difficult to envisage "agreed measures" which would fall under this Treaty.

However, close bonds that exist between the protection of seals in Antarctic and the pelagic hunt should certainly permit consultative meeting to study this question, as it was already done in Santiago.

Therefore, Belgium will deem it acceptable if the Fifth Consultative Meeting will examine all pertinent measures and recommend the conclusion of a special agreement on this matter. It would not be an obstacle if this recommendation would be presented in a form of convention.

If the Governments of the twelve Contracting Parties named in the preamble of the Treaty accept the recommendation, it will suffice if They will accord their Ambassadors in Paris full powers to sign this convention. The formal conclusion of same will, therefore, follow soon after the approval of the original recommendation, and it's ratification will than be submitted in accordance with the constitutional procedures of each State.

In addition, this convention will be opened for accession to any State that has not acceded to the Antarctic Treaty. By itself, it is an advantage.
