TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE               TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE      QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                      ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cute : ANT 8
Date : 18 Novembre 1968
Original : In English

U. S. Proposals to Improve
the Communication of Meteorological Data in Antarctica
for consideration at the Fifth Consultative Meeting
under the Antarctic Treaty in Paris, November 18-29 November 1968

The United States would accept the designation of McMurdo Station as
an Antarctic Meteorological Center within the following parameters :

1.      The meteorological collection and transmission functions would
be for data collected only from the United States stations (other than
Palmer), from ships in the Ross Sea Area, and from Dumont d'Urville.

2.      The use of McMurdo as an Antarctic Meteorological Center would
be with due regard to the priority of operational and scientific communi-
cations requirements.

3.      The construction of the communications facilities required would
be in accordance with criteria to meet operational and scientific requi-
rements.

During the 1968-69 operating season, the United States will make a feasi-
bility and design study regarding the orientation of a directional antenna
at McMurdo Station toward the Antarctic Peninsula to improve communication
between those areas. Provided the construction of such an antenna is
feasible, McMurdo would be able to exchange data with any single designated
station in the Peninsula area.

Due to limited communications facilities, the United States cannot accept
the designation of Palmer Station as an Antarctic Meteorological Center.
Although the United States has no preference as to which station in the
Peninsula area is an Antarctic Meteorological Center, it woul simplify
communications if a single station were so designated.
- 2 -

The United States desires to continue to receive meteorological data from
Vostok, Novolazarevskaya, Molod:shnaya, Anbel et Mirny stations through
Mirny or Molodezhnaya (Mirny/Molodezhnaya). To simplify communications,
the United States suggests the possibility of Mirny/Molodezhnaya as the
point for transmission to McMurdo of weather data from Mawson, Sanae, Showa
and Wilkes.  This season the United States is making a feasibility and
design study regarding the orientation of a directional antenna at McMurdo
toward Mirny/Molodezhnaya.

The United States presently receives at McMurdo some meteorological infor-
mation from the Chilean and Argentine Stations in the antarctic Peninsula.
This information is now transmitted via Buenos-Aires to the United States
for onward routing to Christchurch, New Zealand and thence to McMurdo.
Due to the number of relays involved, this data is not received at McMurdo
in time for use in forecasting.  This circuit through Buenos-Aires would
not be used by the United States after the establishment of a single sta-
tion in the antarctic Peninsula area to transmit directly to McMurdo.  A
small amount of this information is also available in the Port Stanley
collective which is received at McMurdo on a scheduled broadcast via relay
through Byrd.  This collective also includes most of the United Kingdom
Antarctic Stations, as an information item on forecast coverage and not
related to antarctic meteorological communication problems, The United
States receives the following additional weather information at McMurdo :

1.      From Canberra, either through : : : church or directly, weather
information from the Australian stations located outside antarctica as well
as from the Indian Ocean Island stations and such information as is recei-
ved from the whaling ship reports.

2.      From New Zealand, either through Christchurch or the Wellington
broadcast, information from the New Zealand stations located outside the
Antarctic including Campbell Island, MacQuarie island and the Block 91
Islands.

From McMurdo the United States is presently able to supply meteorological
information to the following places in antarctica :

1.      The weather information received from the U.S. Stations (excep-
ting Palmer) and Dumont d'Urville is transmitted to Mirny/Molodezhnaya.

2.      The weather information received from Mawson, Showa, Sanae and
Wilkes is sent to Mirny/Molodezhnaya.

Provided the United States is able to ronstruct a directional antenna system
oriented toward the antarctic Peninsula, McMurdo would be prepared to trans
mit to a designated station on the Peninsula, the weather information from
all U.S. Stations (except Palmer), from ships in the Ross Sea Area, and
from Dumont d'Urville.

All meteorological information received at McMurdo is sent to Christchurch,
N.Z. and is transmitted from there to other communication stations outside
Antarctica.

..../..
- 3 -

To meet WMO requirements in the establishment of McMurdo as an Antarctic 
Meteorological Center, the United States has the following objectives :

1.      A target figure for a transmission time delay of not more than 
one hour from McMurdo to Christchurch for data collected from U.S. stations 
(except Palmer) and Dumont d'Urville.

2.      Providing construction of the necessary directional antennas 
at McMurdo is feasible, a similar maximum time delay of less than one hour 
for transmission of the same data to the Palmer Peninsula Area and Mirny/
Molodezhnaya.

3       The United States does not dedicate telecommunication circuits 
for a single use within Antarctica but would have common user circuits 
available on an agreed upon schedule and subject to the priority of opera-
tional and scientific data.

4.      Dailay coded analysis (and prognosis) will be available at 
McMurdo upon request during the austral summer operating season.  These 
will concentrate on the area westward from 50 degrees South latitude, 150 degrees East longitude direct to 60 degrees South latitude; 90 degrees West longitude, direct to 50 degrees South latitude, 150 degrees West longitude.

5.      Terminal forecasts will be available at McMurdo twice daily 
upon request during the operating season.

6.      During the operating season facsimile surface and 700 Millibar 
weather charts will be broadcast twice daily on circuit US 14 from McMurdo.

7.      During the operating season McMurdo will issue Maritime Wind/Nil 
warnings for the area, bounded by 50 degrees South latitude, the Antarctic 
coast, 120 degrees East longitude, and 170 degrees West longitude, plus 
the Ross Sea.

The term Antarctic Meteoro?gical Center is utilized in this Proposal im 
view of the decision of the WMO Executive Committee at its 20th session in 
Geneva in June 1968 that this is the appropriate term to use in Antarctica 
rather than the term Regional Meteorological Center which is used in the 
World Weather Watch Plan. See paragraph 4. 7. 6. on the report of the 
WMO Executive Committee at its 20th Session.
