TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE         QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        пятое консультативное совещание
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote : ANT  9
Date : 18 November 1968
Original : in English

COMMUNICATION BY THE UNITED KINGDOM GOVERNMENT

ANTARCTIC TELECOMMUNICATIONS

The attached papers arising from the Tenth Meeting of SCAR
held in Tokyo in June 1968 have been circulated to all National
Committees with e request that they be forwarded to governments.
SCAR expressed the hope that these matters will be dis•ussed at the
Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

The British National Committee has endorsed these papers and
forwarded them to the United Kingdom Government.  The United Kingdom
Government now submits them as one of the working papers to be
discussed at the Consultative Meeting.
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                  ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ANTARCTIC TREATY                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ANT 9
                                  PARIS
CIRCULAR NO. 215 (cont'd)         3rd September,1968

FUTURE SCIENTIFIC USES OF RADIO CIRCUITS

1.      At its Meeting in Tokyo in June 1968, SCAR found that three reasons had been suggested for reviewing the Antarctic communications network.
These were : -

        (i)     The proposals of the World Meteorological organisation's
                Executive Committee to establish Regional Meteorological
                Centres in Antarctica.

        (ii)    The forecast that scientific traffic will make ever increasing
                demands on the network.

        (iii)   The data from the Antarctic peninsula area has not been reaching
                the World Weather Centre at Melbourne and the forecasting cen-
                tres at Mirny and McMurdo early enough for inclusion in their
                analises (although recently it had been advised that Mirny was
                now receiving broadcasts from Orcadas in the ANTARCTIC Peninsula
                area).

2.      SCAR emphasized that, in order to undertake a review of the commu-
        nications network it was essential to collect and process data on :

        (i)     The existing facilities and their channel capacity on each route,
                their actual load, their real effectiveness and the possibility
                of improving this effectiveness.

        (ii)    The estimated traffic load required to be carried by 1973 in
                units of channel time (in bands) on each route, specifying
                traffic load on each channel, its type, delay requirements and
                details of types of emission required,     The estimate
                should include, as far as possible, details for each link at
                each station and should utilize the internationally recognised
                definitions and units in each particular field (such as the
                CCIR definitions of radio terms, the expression of traffic
                loads in bands etc..).

        It was realized that the collection and collation of these data
        is a formidable task and will take many months, but it was
        emphasised that it was an essential pre-requisite without which
        a network cannot be studied, nor can the existing network
        logically be reviewed.

        If these estimates indicate that the traffic likely to be
        offering cannot be cleared in the requisite time ont the existing
        channels it may be necessary to supplement or, in the extreme
        case, to reorganise them.

                                                                 .../...
ANT 9                                  - 2 -

2(ii) cont'd

Alternative routes might be investigated, as suggested at 
Brussels, bu experiments should not be bases for planning the 
network. Routes inthe develomental stage should not be incor-
porated in the plan until it has been proved that they have 
more value than the routes already available.

3.      Each member for the SCAR Working Group on Logistics has been asked 
to obtain the basic planning data listed in section 2 above from the appro-
priate Antarctic user organisations in his own country and send it to the 
Secretary of the Working Group as soon as possible.

        Each member has further been asked to send to the Secretary of the 
group by 1st September 1968, a statement of meteorological traffic at each 
of his stations expressed as a percentage of the total channel time occu-
pied by traffic of all kinds at that station.  The Secretaryof the group 
will include this information in that which will be offered by SCAR to the 
Antarctic Treaty Meeting in Paris in November , 1968.

4.      In principle the present limited number of trans-Antarctic links 
should be retained and sufficient channels might be made available on them 
when necessary to handle any traffic required in Antarctica.  If this at 
times requires more than one channel the reliability will thereby be 
improved.

5.      In the light of these considerations SCAR recommends :

        Recognising that the general use of communications for scientific 
traffic is expected to increase in the future.

        Recognising that whatever the increase, the need to communicate 
will remain.

        Considering that, in order to plan the future use of communications, 
information on the actual and future requirements is an absolute 
necessity.

        THAT SCAR request all the permanent Working Groups and National 
Committees to send to the Secretary of the SCAR Working Group on 
Logistics, details of their actual use and estimates for the next 
five years of Scientific Communications needs.

        THAT this estimate needs to be reviewed from time to time.

        THAT the Secretary of the SCAR Working Group on Logistics keeps 
himself informed and reports to "Working Group on Logistics members 
and telecommunications correspondents on the progress of implemen-
tation of the World Weather Watch circuitry.

..../.
ANT 9                                  - 3 -

THAT an assessment of the channel time occupied  by meteorologial 
traffic be made as rapidly as possible, in order to distribute 
the results before October 1968.

SCAR CIRCULAR N° 219 cont'd

THE ANTARCTIC RADIO COMMUNICATION GUIDANCE MANUAL .

It was recognized than an Antarctic Radio Communications Guidance 
Manual  should be published as soon as possible, and that it should keep 
to fact peculiar to the Antarctic and the Antarctic Radio Stations, and 
not necessarily repeat what could be found in standard communication hand-
books in general use.

It was recommended that SCAR publish the Antarctic Radio Communica-
tion Guidance Manual  as soon as possible ; that 300 copies cf the manual 
be printed ; that each national member of the SCAR Working Group on 
Logistics checks, completes and returns the data sheets of his nation's 
radio stations in Antarctica within the shortest time ; keeps the 
Secretary of the SCAR Working Group on Logistics informed of amendments to 
the above sheets in order to permit the timely publications of up-to-date 
revisions of information.

COMMUNICATION PANEL

The Meeting recognized  that the scientific use of communications 
will increase in the future.  Therefore SCAR interest in communication 
cannot be abandoned.

It was recommended that a communication panel comprising engineers, 
users and operators with Antarctic experience, and a representative from 
WMO , be formed by the permanent Working Group on Logistics to continue 
the work begun in Brussels in 1968.

TECHNICAL AND SCIENTIFIC PROBLEMS AFFECTING ANTARCTIC COMMUNICATIONS

SCAR has agreed to form a small group of specialists to investigate 
technical and scientific problems affecting communications in the Antarctic. 
It is expected that this group will investigate radio propagation, inter-
ference, drift static and other problems affecting radio communications.
The questions of membership and terms of reference for this group of spe-
cialists are now under consideration.

..../.
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

PARIS

ANTARCTIC TELECOMMUNICATIONS

By A.H. Sheffield
(Commonwealth Telecommunications Board London)

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-

(Abstract : This paper relates the history of Antarctic Telecommunications
and discusses some of the difficulties which arise from the existence of
three separate groups each intervening in telecommunications arrangements.
Possible methods of dealing with the day-to-day operational problems are
also discussed.)

There can be no doubt of the value and importance of effective
communications for the effective prosecution of the scientific objectives
of modern Antarctic expeditions.

Between 1918 and 1941 most Antarctic expeditions used radio but made
their own arrangements for communications between field parties and the
home base. Throughout this period it was uncommon for expeditions in the
Antarctic to communicate regularly with the outside world. There was a
marked change in communications patterns after 1944 when Antarctic explo-
ration was resumed by governments rather than by privately organized
expeditions. Not only did governments establish more than one station at
that time - in 1955, before the opening of the International Geophysical
Year, four governments had established a total of 21 stations - but the
expeditions were continuous from year to year. This situation required
efficient communications between stations and between national groups of
stations and their home country. But this period between 1944 and 1957
was not remarkable for any degree of international co-operation and so
governments tended to establish their radio networks with only a minimum
of attention to the practices of their Antarctic neighbours. The Interna-
tional Geophysical Year, which emphasized the virtues and rewards of in-
ternational co-operation, radically altered the self-sufficient attitude
towards communications which had marked the previous period.

When the programme for the International Geophysical Year was being
planned in 1955 it was realised that the large increase in the number of
Antarctic expeditions would result in greatly increased radio traffic.
It was also realized that an international radio network suitable for the
transmission of administrative and scientific traffic between the stations
of several expeditions, as well as to the outside world, would necessitate
special co-ordination. For this purpose, at the International Geophysical
Year Antarctic Conference held in Paris in July 1955, a Working Group on
Radio Transmissions was created. This Group had preliminary meetings
during that Conference and it met again at Brussels in September 1955 ;
and at Paris in 1956 and 1957.

TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA

ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

X-SCAR-8.2
- 2 -

                                                                 ANT 9
                                                      X-SCAR-8.2

In the course of these meetings it was necessary to foresee the 
pattern of traffic between stations and to co-ordinate the installation of 
radio equipment, aerial systems, modes of transmission and many other 
factors bearing on the capabilities of the network to carry the expected 
traffic loads.  A major difficulty in radio communication nowadays is that 
the frequency spectrum is overcrowded.  Too many radio transmitters are 
using too few frequencies.  For the Antarctic programme provision had, and 
still has, to be made not only for local transmissions between mother and 
daughter stations, and between those stations, mobile parties, and temporary 
bases, but for long distance communication to the home countries of the 
various expeditions, and for their ships and aircraft. Radio beacons were 
set up here and there, and provision was made for amateur radio operators 
at many bases.  It was decided at an early stage that frequencies for the 
new stations would be sought in the internationally recognized frequency 
bands,and the International Frequency Registration Board co-operated in 
clearance of the frequencies put forward by the Working Group, which in 
effect had constituted itself as a temporary frequency clearing agency for 
the Antarctic. When the I.G.Y. began, over 60 radio stations were operating 
in the Antarctic, using more than 1000 separate frequencies.  Each frequency 
had to be checked to ensure that there was no duplication, or likelihood 
of interference with other stations. Where there appeared to be a danger of 
interference, suggestions for other frequencies were made.  In the event, 
no complaints of interference between Antarctic stations, or interference 
with other traffic, were received by the Working Group during the whole 
period of the I.G.Y.

All available information about the Antarctic radio network was 
collated in the International Geophysical Year 1957-58 Antarctic Radio 
Communication Manual (Pergamon Press, London, 1956).  The manual included 
lists of bases with their geographical positions, radio frequencies to be 
used, information on procedures, time signals, standard frequency signals, 
call signs, schedules of meteorological broadcasts, and other information 
likely to be of use to radio operators.

Throughout this period of exciting scientific developments and broad-
ening horizons it was clear to all the participating nations that the 
effective development of the Antarctic telecommunications system depended 
on each nation following the Radio Communications Manual and, more important, 
that some central point should be informed when alterations in practice 
were adopted in response to current problems.  It was my privilege during 
this period and subsequently to act as this central point.  The information 
about alterations in practice adopted in the light of experience in the 
field required a revised edition of the Radio Communication Manual to be 
produced in 1957 in ti.e for the I.G.Y.  Since then no comparable compila-
tion of current telecommunications procedures has been produced.

..../.
- 3 -
X-SCAR-8.2

After the end of the International Geophysical Year in 1958, on the formation of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) it became evident that if the stations of the twelve member nations of SCAR continued to operate in the Antarctic some form of overall co-ordination of radio operations would be required on a permanent basis, and it was decided to continue the former International Geophysical Year Communications Working Group susbstantially in the same pattern under SCAR auspices.  The Group was established at the 2nd Meeting of SCAR in Moscow in 1958 and continued its work with Meetings at Cambridge in 1960, in Wellington in 1961 and by correspondence.

At the First and Second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings antarctic telecommunications were discussed with a view to referring outstanding problems to a meeting of experts to be held under the auspices of the Treaty.  In 1963 a meeting of telecQmunications specialists from the Antarctic Treaty Nations was held at Washington and certain recommendations for improvement of the antarctic network were made.

It was not clear from the terms of reference for this meeting whether the Recommendations were to be approved by governments in the same manner as the Recommendations of Eonsultative Meetings held under Article IX (2) of the Treaty.  In the event some nations did not approve them and so their implementation never became binding on governments.  In the light of Recommendations III-V and IV-26 of the Third and Fourth Consultative Meetings held in 1964 and 1966, both of which call for a review of the 1963 Washington Recommendations, it is probably fair to point out that these Recommendations did not present definitive solutions to the problems of antarctic télécommunications. The subsequent calls for their review perhaps testify to the new generally accepted realisation that any recommended scheme for radio communications is essentially transitory. New problems and new technology require a continuous process of adaptation.  At the Washington meeting an attempt was made to provide for this continuing liaison (Recommendation XI) but the time was not ripe for implementation. Consequently by the 7th meeting of SCAR in Cape Town, 1963, noted that despite the Recommendations made to Treaty Governments by the Washington Meeting the co-ordination of overall supervision of the antarctic communications network remained a responsibility of the SCAR Communications Working Group until such time as the Treaty Powers provided an effective alternative.

Since 1963 there has been a gradual decline in the amount of interest and support given by the Members of the Communications Working Group.  In 1966 in an attempt to improve the situation, the 9th meeting of SCAR decided to replace the Group by a smaller group of three or four active communications experts.  Up to the present time it has not been found possible to set up this group or to find a convenor.  At the 1967 meeting in Cambridge the SCAR Working Group on Logistics was attended by a few telecommunications specialists, who recommended that an exploratory telecommunications meeting should be held in March 1968, to discuss the outstanding technical problems .

..../..
ANT 9
X-SCAR-8.2

- 4 -

The proposed meeting was heldin Brussels in March 1958 but it was 
not possible for specialists from all the SCAR nations to be present.
There was a useful interchange of views and a number of suggestions were
put forward for consideration in readiness for the 1968 meeting  in Tokyo.

Over the whole period of the operation of the SCAR Communications
Working Group there has been a certain amount of pressure from the meteo-
rologists to ensure that meteorological traffic can be handled expeditiously
and there were suggestions that such traffic should be given priority over
other forms of traffic. Meteorological data constitute somewhere between
50% and 65% of radio traffic from antarctic stations and it has always
been recognised that if the information does not reach those who require
it within, say, two hours or less, its value rapidly decreases. Schedules
for meteorological traffic have been established which take this require-
ments into account but it has also been recognised by all governments
organizing Antarctic expeditions that meteorology is only one out of many
sciences which require communications time and that no absolute priority
can be given to it on the basis of the high proportion of the total traffic
that it constitutes.

The World Meteorological Organization has consistently held that its
responsibilities in facilitating co-operation in the establishment of
meteorological stations and of systems for the rapid exchange of data are
world wide and do not stop short at 60°S. leaving the Antarctic T caty 
Area to take care of itself. Recognising this, the W.M.O. were closely
associated in the planning of the I.G.Y. radio network and with the SCAR
Working Group on Communications.  They were represented by an observer
at the Washington Telecommunications meeting held under the auspices of the
Antarctic Treaty. The W.M.O. has recently asked governments to arrange
that co-operation in antarctic meteorological matters should be established
through the permanent representatives of the Traty Powers on W.M.O. along
the lines already approved by all Consultative Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty in Recommendation I-V of the First Consultative Meeting held in
Canberra in 1961.

Under the terms of Recommendation IV-26 of the Fourth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting, Antarctic Treaty Governments agreed to
"consider including the Agenda for the Fifth Consultative Meeting an examina
tion of the Recommendations made by the Washington Meeting on Telecommu-
nications in 1963, in the light of conditions prevailing in 1968". The
Government of Chile tabled a document at the Second Preparatory Meeting
for the Fifth Consultative Meeting in which the Washington Recommendations
are redrafted to take account of the designation of Regional Meteorological
Centres in the Antarctic in relation to the World Weather Watch. It has
been agreed by Treaty Governments that antarctic télécommunications shall
be discussed at the Fifth Consultative Meeting in Paris in November this
year.

..../.
- 5 -
				X-SCAR-8.2


Anybody responsible for maintaining national telecommunications
facilities in the Antarctic, and for planning their future development
in the light of changing requirements and rapidly advancing technology
might be excused some degree of irritation at the prospect
of three separate grops intervening in Antarctic telecommunications
arrangements.  The organizational problem presented by the interests of
SCAR, W.M.O. and Treaty Governements (the latter acting through the
Consultative procedures of the Treaty), is made worse by the fact that
there is no generally recognized division of the Antarctic telecommuni-
cations field into sphères of interest appropriate to each group.  Indeed,
apart from the more clearly defined interest of the W.M.O., it is difficult
to see how the field can best be divided.  Nevertheless, the problems
posed by overlapping responsibilities should be resolved so that Antarctic
telecommunications may develop rationally and economically in the future.

It is not always appreciated by those not intimately concerned that
an effective radio network cannot be static.  A constant watch on opera-
tions must be maintained to take account of changing cojditions of propa-
gation, varying volumes and directions of traffic, establishment of new
stations, new requirements of users and similar matters.  The machinery
for dealing with such matters must be capable of acting speedly on a day-
to-day basis.  Users and those responsible for the operation of radio
stations must be able to report quickly about difficulties which have
arisen and they should expect to be able to achieve a quick resolution.
The danger of delay lies in the pressure for operators to adopt unilate-
rally procedures which conflict with other scientific of international
requirements of which they may not be aware.  When this type of alteration
to procedures, which always seems a sensible action at the time (it is
made), is repeated many times the network operates with reduced effdciency
and is highly resistant to change because no one can describe in detail the
manner in which the system is being worked.

We are in this situation now.  Since the revision of the I.G.Y.
Radio Communications Manual in 1957 the Antarctic telecommunications system
has evolved to the point where it is difficult to change it because there
is no clear idea as to how it is working at present.  It was for this
reason that the SCAR Working Group on Logistics suggested in 1967 that a
detailed questionnaire should be sent to all Antarctic expeditions asking
them to list in detail their telecommunications equipment and their present
working procedures.  To this information should be added a breakdown of
the traffic on each international circuit into two groups - meteorological
traffic and other traffic.  It is essential to the rational discussion of
any network that there should be a clear understanding of the type and
volume and destination of traffic it will be designed to handle.  An
additional benefit would be that it would be possible for the first time
since the I.G.Y. to get a clear idea of the relative demands of meteorolo-
gy other sciences and logistics on international circuits.

Only when this information is made available in a digested form
will it be possible to consider alterations.

..../..
ANT 9
- 6 -                  X-SCAR-8.2

It is certain that the procedure of proposing special recommenda-
tions at bi-annual Treaty Meetings, adoption of recommendations by those
meetings, and the need for subsequent approval and implementation by
governments is too formal, cumbersome and slow. Technical spacialists
are only rarely in attendance at Treaty Meetings and this is a factor
leading to further delays and possibly the adoption of recommendations
which may not be technically practicable. The machinery devised for the
International Geophysical Year and continued by the SCAR has the merit of
being to a considerable extent, informal. A fully representative Tele-
communications Working Group, provided it is composed of persons specia-
lising in Antarctic Telecommunications who participate fully and actively
in its work may be the best means of promoting an efficient network. The
Chairman or convenor should be responsible for the day-to-day work by
comments on any matters requiring immediate attention and he will take any
necessary action in correspondence with members or will summon meetings
if necessary. There would be no objection to discussion of problems
between any two or three members of the Group on matters affecting their
own stations, but it would be essential that any agreement reached or
decisions taken would be circulated to all members of the group.

The group should include in its membership a meteorological tele-
communications specialist, who will be responsible for advising on the
requirements of the meteorologists whose traffic forms a large proportion
of the total traffic carried on the network and it would be the responsi-
bility of the group to ensure as far as practicable that meteorological
data are circulated speedily and in accordance with the agreed schedules.

In the longer term this group would have to scrutinize any proposals
for large-scale alterations to the network in the light of ways in which
telecommunications are likely to develop. It would, for instance, be
unwise to call for the costly development of trans-auroral belt communi-
cations involving high powered transmitters and purpose designed arial
arrays when much less costly equipment might feed meteorological data
northwards out of the Antarctic to connect with the Main Trunk Circuit of
the World Weather Watch with a view to analysed data being re-transmitted
back into the Antarctic for those who need it. The possible future de-
velopment of southern hemisphere communications via satellite would also
have to be born in mind.

---------------------------------------------------
9 may 1968
