TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                   QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
                                                   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Reference : ANT 50  Corr.
Date : 29th November 1968

F I N A L   R E P O R T
of the
FIFTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

:-:-:-:-:-:-:
1. 
In accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty, representatives of the Consultative 
Parties (South Africa, United States of America, Argentina, 
Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Japan, Norway, New 
Zealand and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) met 
at Paris on 18th November 1968 for the purpose of discussing, 
and recommending to their governments, measures in further-
ance of the principles and purposes of the Treaty.

2. 
His Excellency Ambassador Pierre Charpentier was 
appointed by the French Government to act as Temporary 
Chairman of the Meeting pending election of a Chairman.

3. 
The Meeting was formally opened by the Right Honourable 
Michel Debré, the French Minister for Foreign Affairs .

4. 
Ambassador Charpentier was then elected Chairman of the 
Meeting and Monsieur Guy Scalabre of the French Diplomatic 
Corps was appointed Secretary-General.

5. 
Opening statements were delivered by the Heads of all 
Delegations.

6. 
The Meeting then adopted the following Agenda :

1) Agreed Measures for Conservation of Antarctica Fauna and 
Flora

2) Pelagic Sealing

3) Amendments to the Agreed Measures for Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora as instituted by Recommendation 
III-8

4) Report on Meeting of Logistics Experts in Tokyo, 
June 3-8 1968

5) Telecommunications

6) Meteorology

7) Tourist Activities in Antarctic

8) Commemorative Postage Stamp

9) Historic Monuments

10) Co-ordination Group for Southern Ocean established by 
Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commission on 27th 
October 1967.

11) Co-ordination of General Meetings of the SCAR and 
Consultative Meetings of the Antarctic Treaty.
- 2 -

7.      The Meeting considered all the items on the Agenda in
========  Plenary Session, appointing two Working Groups of which
one examined Items 1, 2 and 3 of the Agenda and the other
examined Items 5 and 6. In both cases, these Working
Groups included representatives of all Delegations wishing
to participate in them.

8.      The opening and closing Plenary Sessions were held in
========  public, but all others were held in private.

9.      The Meeting agreed unanimously to the adoption of the
========  following Recommendations.

RECOMMENDATION V-1

COMMEMORATIVE STAMP ISSUE

The Representatives recommend to their governments :

1) that, on the occasion of the Tenth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, each Consultative
Party should issue  a commemorative postage stamp during
1971;

2) that this stamp should bear, in the language or languages
of each issuing country, the following words :

"Antarctic Treaty 1961 - 1971";

3) that the most prominent feature of the stamp should be the
Antarctic Treaty emblem representing a map of Antarctica
which appears on the official documents of Consultative
Meetings;

4) that any additional matter should be consonant with the
provisions and the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty;

5) that the denomination of the stamp should remain at the
discretion of each issuing country.

...
- 3 -

RECOMMENDATION V-2

MEASURES FOR IMPROVING ANTARCTIC TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Recognizing the need for improving the collection and distribution of meteorological data and other scientific information and for further improving Antarctic telecommunic-
ations;

Considering the views of the World Meteorological Organization, as expressed at the 18th and 20th Sessions of the WMO Executive Committee, on the desirability of setting up Antarctic Meteorological Centres and of determining provision-
ally their functions;

Supporting the principle of the World Weather Watch;

Considering the intention of some governments voluntarily to create, within a few years, such Antarctic Meteorological Centres at their Stations;

The Representatives recommend to their governments that:

1.      In view of the valuable information provided by WMO and SCAR to Consultative Parties, they continue to cooperate with the WMO through their Representatives thereto and with SCAR through their National Committees in defining future scientific requirements.

2.      They consider the usefulness of creating Antarctic Meteorological Centres in the Antarctic.

3.      They hold a meeting of telecommunications experts at Buenos Aires, Argentina, between 15 August and 15 September 1969, in accordance with Recommendation IV-24. The date of this meeting should be arranged through diplomatic channels, taking into account relevant meetings of other international organizations which will be held in 1969 and the time required to translate and distribute the documents from such meetings.

4.      Although it is expected that all Consultative Parties will participate, the meeting in Buenos Aires may proceed without the participation of them all provided all the Consultative Parties agree to that procedure and to the provisional agenda. All Consultative Parties will communicate
- 4 -

before 1 June 1969 to the host government their intentions 
as to sending experts. Proposals emanating from the meeting 
will be sent to all Consultative Parties for their consider-
ation.

5.      One expert each from WMO, ITU, IOC and SCAR should be 
invited to attend as observers. Invited observers may 
submit documents and make statements with the permission 
of the Chairman but they may not vote. All experts from 
Consultative Parties attending will be members of their 
delegations.

6.      The agenda for the meeting should be determined by 
the Consultative Parties through diplomatic channels and the 
agreed provisional agenda will be circulated by the host 
government through diplomatic channels one month prior to 
the opening of the meeting.

7.      The results of the meeting should take the form of 
proposals on telecommunications unanimously agreed by the 
delegations of the Consultative Parties participating in 
the meeting. These will be circulated by the host government 
to all Consultative Parties for consideration. These 
proposals will constitute the report of the meeting. Other 
conference documents may be appended for informations as 
annexes to the report with the consent of all delegations 
present. The proposals would not become measures under 
Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty but any Consultative 
Parties may submit any matter arising from this meeting to 
a subsequent Consultative Meeting.

8.      Information should be exchanged through diplomatic 
channels on the following aspect of telecommunications 
procedures at least one month prior to the opening of 
the Meeting :

    (i) existing networks, traffic loads and channel 
capacity on each route;

    (ii) shortcomings in existing networks and channels;

    (iii)present traffic carried on each route

         a) Administrative and operational traffic

         b) Meteorological traffic

         c) Other scientific traffic;
- 5 -

(iv) existing time schedules for meteorological transmission

a) Broadcast
b) Point to point traffic

9.      The fields of discussion at the meeting should include,
inter alia :

(i) New telecommunications traffic requirements sub-
mitted by Consultative Parties, WMO, IOC and SCAR,
the capacity of the existing facilities and the effect
of these new requirements on the existing facilities,
taking into account the report of the Antarctic Treaty
Meeting on Telecommunications held in Washington in 1963
and present prevailing conditions;

(ii) Estimates or requirements for the near future and
further projections if possible;

(iii) Procedure for amending telecommunications
arrangements from time to time to meet changing
conditions;

(iv) New telecommunications techniques which might be
introduced into the Antarctic to meet future
requirements;

(v) Preparation of a standard format for the exchange
of information on telecommunications facilities under
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

RECOMMENDATION V-3

SOUTHERN OCEAN

The Representatives,

Considering that the Southern Ocean is an integral
part of the Antarctic environment and that the Consultative
Governments have made substantial contributions towards
knowledge of this ocean in the Treaty Area,

Noting  that Resolution 5 of the VIth Session of the Inter-
governmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) established a
Co-ordination Group for the Southern Ocean and that the terms
- 6 -

of reference for this group include plans for the gradual development of a comprehensive study of the Southern Ocean;

Noting further the significant contribution which the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has made to these studies and that SCAR is invited to participate in the Co-ordination Group as an observer;

Welcome the proposed study of the Southern Ocean by the IOC with the participation of SCAR as well as other interested scientific organizations;

Recommend to their governments that they encourage SCAR through their National Committees to continue its interest in scientific matters related to the Southern Ocean and to make available scientific advice as appropriate to the IOC Co-ordination Group in order to aid in its development of plans for the comprehensive study of the Southern Ocean.

RECOMMENDATION V-4

HISTORIC MONUMENTS

The Representatives,

Recalling  Recommendation I-9,

Recommend to their governments :

1) that a list of historic monuments which should be preserved be drawn up;

2) that each government circulate a list of historic monuments through diplomatic channels to other Consultative Governments;

3) that this subject be considered further at the next Consultative Meeting;

4) that, in the meantime, they do what is feasible to ensure the survival as far as possible of any historic monument which has been included on any list circulated under paragraph 2.
- 7/8 -

RECOMMENDATION V-5

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS :

FILDES PENINSULA

The Representatives, considering that Fildes Peninsula
has several small lakes which, being ice-free in summer,
are of outstanding ecological interest and that the most
interesting one of them should be specially protected,
recommend to their governments that, in place of the
description in Recommendation IV-12, the following be
inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and
Flora :

"SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA N° 12, Fildes Peninsula,
King George Island/25 May, South Shetland Islands,
Lat. 62°11'S., long. 58°52'W.

Description : The fresh-water lake, including the
surrounding land within 100 metres of the shore,
situated about 500 metres north of Suffield Point and
2.5 kilometres east-north-east of Bellingshausen
Station on Fildes Peninsula. The area is shown on the
attached map."
DESIGNATIONS GEOGRAPHIQUES

1. Point Suffield
2. Station Bellingshausen
3. Péninsule Fildes


____________________________________________________


                  1 Km
                  0,5
                  nautical
                  mile

                  W         N
                            E

                  58°55'
                  W
                  62°12' S


PLACE NAMES                                  DESIGNACIONES GEOGRAFICAS
1. Suffield Point                            1. Punto Suffield
2. Bellingshausen Station                    2. Estacion Bellingshausen
3. Fildes Peninsula                          3. Peninsula Fildes
- 10 -

RECOMMENDATION V-6

MODIFICATION OF THE AGREED MEASURES ADOPTED UNDER

RECOMMENDATION III - 8 FOR THE

CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTICA FAUNA AND FLORA

The Representatives recommend to their governments that :

(1)     in paragraph (d) of Article II after the words "Agreed
Measures" they add the following :

"The functions of an authorised person will be carried out
within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty. They will be
carried out exclusively in accordance with scientific prin-
ciples and will have as their sole purpose the effective
protection of Antarctic fauna and flora in accordance with
these Agreed Measures".

(2)     in paragraph (e) of Article II, after the words "appropriate
authority", they add the following :

"as defined at paragraph (d) above".

RECOMMENDATION V-7

CONCERNING THE PROPOSALS OF SCAR FOR THE REVISION OF THE

INTERIM GUIDE LINES FOR THE VOLUNTARY REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC

PELAGIC SEALING

     Taking into account the importance of conserving seals
south of 60° South Latitude;

     Considering that in the future an international
Convention for the regulation of Antarctic pelagic sealing may
be required;

     The Representatives recommend to their governments that,
when implementing Recommendation IV-21, and until a decision is
taken on the conclusion of an international Convention, they
should voluntarily take account of the proposals of SCAR in its
report to National Antarctic Committees in 1968 on the modifi-
cation of the "Interim Guide Lines for the Voluntary Regulation
of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing", as appended in a revised form
to the Report of the Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.*

* See page 13.
- 11 -

RECOMMENDATION V-8

EXAMINATION OF A DRAFT CONVENTION FOR
THE REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC PELAGIC SEALING

The Representatives,

Having had a preliminary exchange of views at the Fifth
Consultative Meeting on the draft Convention for the Regulation
of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing contained in the Final Report of
the Meeting,*

Recognising the need to study the preparation of such
a Convention,

Recommend to their governments that, before the next
Consultative Meeting, they study the draft Convention with a
view to its consideration at that Meeting.

RECOMMENDATION V-9

SIXTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

The Representatives recommend to their governments that
they accept the offer by the Delegation of Japan to hold the
Sixth Consultative Meeting under Article IX of the Antarctic
Treaty in Tokyo, on a date in 1970 to be mutually decided
upon by the Consultative Governments.

Concerning the other items of the agenda :

Following an examination of the account of the expert
meeting on logistics, held in Tokyo from 3rd to 8th June 1968,
the Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting expressed to
the Government of Japan its satisfaction and gratitude for
the organisation of this expert meeting which permitted the
work to be particularly fruitful.

There was a useful exchange of views on the effect of
tourism in the Antarctic. Reports were circulated about
certain trips which have been made recently and about the
conditions which various countries have made applicable to
any tourist groups wishing to visit their stations.

* See page 17
- 12 -

11
Furthermore, in accordance with the provisions of
Recommendation V-7, the text of the SCAR proposals concerning
the "Interim Guide Lines for the Voluntary Regulation of
Antarctic Pelagic Sealing" in a revised form, will be found
at Annex 1.

In accordance with the provisions of Recommendation V-8,
a Draft Convention for the regulation of Antarctic Pelagic
Sealing is also attached, at Annex 2.

On this occasion the Argentine Representative made the
following statement:

"The Argentine Delegation wishes to state that its
approval of the Recommendations concerning Pelagic Sealing,
and of Recommendations IV-21 and IV-22 which also bear on this
question, must not be considered as a precedent affecting in
any way whatsoever the application of the provisions of
Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty".

12
The Final Report of the Fifth Consultative Meeting was
unanimously adopted on 29th Novembre 1968.

13
Closing speeches were made on 29th November 1968 by
or on behalf of all the Heads of Delegations.

The Chairman then declared that the Meeting was closed.
- 13 -

ANNEX     1

MODIFIED VERSION OF THE REPORT OF 1968
TO NATIONAL ANTARCTIC COMMITTEES
BY THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC
RESEARCH (SCAR)

1. The total number of seals of each species taken in the area
south of 60° South Latitude should not exceed the number
for that species set so as to bring the population to, or
maintain it at, the level giving the optimum sustainable
yield.

2. The number will be set in the light of the best available
scientific evidence, and will be revised at regular intervals.
The best present advice regarding numbers is given in
Annex A.

3. A seal should not be killed or taken when it is in the
water.

4. The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal
(Mirounga leonina), and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus
should not be killed or taken, except in an emergency or
in accordance with a permit.

5. Within the period specified in Annex C, no Weddell Seal
(Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old, or older, should be
killed or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance
with a permit.

6. For the purposes of these Guide Lines, the area south of
60° South Latitude should be divided into the Sealing Zones
set out in Annex B. No seals should be killed or taken
except in the zones and at the times specified in Annex B.
However, a permit may be issued in accordance with
paragraph 9.

7. No seals should be killed or taken within the closed season
designated in Annex C, other than in an emergency or in
accordance with a permit.

8. Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that forms
a seal breeding area or is the site of long-term scientific
research on seals may be declared a Seal Reserve by
governments. Such Seal Reserves are listed in Annex D.
Within any Seal Reserve seals should not be killed or taken
except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit.
Annex I                                  - 14 -

9. Permits should be issued only for the following purposes :

    (i)     to provide indispensable food for men or dogs in 
            limited quantities and in conformity with the 
            purposes and principles of the Agreed Measures for 
            the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and 
            these Guide Lines,

    (ii)    to provide specimens for scientific study or 
            scientific information, or

    (iii)   to provide specimens for museums, educational or 
            cultural institutions.

10. Each government should provide the other governments before 
    31 October of each year with the information relating to the 
    preceding period of 1 July to 30 June specified in Annex E.

11. At the same time, each government should provide to the 
    other governments information on any steps it has taken in 
    accordance with these Guide Lines.

12. When it appears to any government that the harvest of any 
    species of seal in the area south of 60o South Latitude is 
    having a significant effect on the stocks therein, or in 
    any locality is disturbing the ecological system therein, 
    that Government may propose through diplomatic channels 
    that a Consultative Meeting shall be convened under 
    Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. If all Consultative 
    Parties so agree, such a meeting will be convened as soon 
    as possible to consider the situation and the steps it may 
    be necessary to take.

ANNEX A.  PERMISSIBLE CATCH

With present information it is not possible to give 
figures for the optimum sustainable yield, or for the levels 
of population which would provide such yields. Such figures 
can only be estimated with any useful precision from the 
analysis of the populations after they have been exposed to 
exploitation for a period.

It is suggested that if catches do not exceed the 
following safety levels until the results of such analysis 
are available, then the populations will not be reduced below 
the level giving the optimum yield.
Annex 1
- 15 -

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) 200,000 individuals
in any one year

Leopard Seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)         15,000 individuals
in any one year

Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)    10,000 individuals
in any one year

ANNEXE B.  SEALING ZONES

1.  The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with those
used by the whaling industry, are designated :

    Zone 1 Between 60° and 120° West Longitude

    Zone 2 Between 0° and 60° West Longitude together
    with that part of the Weddell Sea lying
    westwards of 60° West Longitude.

    Zone 3 Between 0° and 70° East Longitude

    Zone 4 Between 70° and 130° East Longitude

    Zone 5 Between 130° East Longitude and 170° West
    Longitude

    Zone 6 Between 120° and 170° West Longitude.

2.  During the season 1969-1970, being the first season to
which these Guide Lines apply, no sealing should be permitted
in Zone 1. In the second season of application, Zone 2 should
be closed to sealing, and thereafter each zone should be
closed for a season in sequence.

ANNEX C.  CLOSED SEASONS

1.  The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is
a Closed Season.

2.  No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old
or older should be killed or taken between 1 September and
15 December inclusive.
Annex 1                                  - 16 -

ANNEX D.  SEAL RESERVES

The following areas are declared Seal Reserves :

1. The area between 60°20' and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05'
and 46°25' West Longitude, including the South Orkney Island.

2. The area of the south-western Ross Sea south of 76° South
Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude, including Ross
Island.

3. The area of Edisto inlet south and west of a line drawn
between Cape Hallett (72°19'S. : 170°18'E) and Helm Point
(72°11'S.: 170°00'E).

ANNEX E.  EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1. Each government should provide to other governments statistical
information on all seals taken within the area to which Guide
Lines relate.

2. This information should include the number of adult individuals
and pups of each species killed or taken during each operating
day, specifying in which of the Zones set out in Annex B they
have been killed or taken.
. Annex 2
- 17 -

ANNEX 2

DRAFT CONVENTION FOR THE REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC
PELAGIC SEALING

The Contracting Parties,

Recalling the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora, adopted under the Antarctic Treaty;

Recognizing that the seal stocks south of 60° South Latitude
are a resource of potential value which require a binding
international agreement for its effective regulation;

Recognizing that this resource should not be depleted by
over-exploitation, and hence that any harvesting should be
regulated at the level of the optimum sustainable yield;

Recognizing that in order to improve scientific knowledge and
so place exploitation on a rational basis, every effort should
be made both to encourage biological research on these seal
populations and to gain information from the statistics of
future sealing operations;

Desiring to promote and achieve the objectives of protection,
scientific study and rational use of Antarctic seals;

Have agreed as follows :

ARTICLE 1

Implementation

Each Contracting Party shall adopt for its nationals,
including ships possessing its nationality, such measures,
including a permit system as appropriate, as may be necessary
in order to regulate in accordance with the provisions of
this Convention pelagic sealing in the area to which this
Convention applies, that is to say, the seas south of 60°
South Latitude.

...
Annex 2                                  - 18 -

ARTICLE 2

Permissible Catch

(1)     The total number of seals of each species killed or 
taken in the area to which this Conventionapplies shall not 
exceed the number specified in Annex A.

(2)     The number for each species listed in Annex A shall be 
fixed in the light of the best available scientific evidence 
and shall be reviewed at least every five years and, as 
necessary, revised by the Contracting Parties.

ARTICLE 3

Sealing Methods

A seal shall not be killed when it is in the water, 
except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued 
under Article 9 (par.1).

ARTICLE 4

Ross, Elephant and Fur Seals

The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal 
(Mirounga leonina) and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus 
shall not be killed or taken, except in an emergency or in 
accordance with a permit issued under Article 9 (par.1).

ARTICLE 5

Weddell Seals

Within the period specified in Annex C, no Weddell Seal 
(Leptonychotes weddeli) one year old,or older, shall be 
killed or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance with 
a permit issued under Article 9 (par.1).

ARTICLE 6

Sealing Zones

For the purposes of this Convention, the area to which 
this Convention applies shall be divided into the Sealing 
Zones set out in Annex B. No seals shall be killed or taken ...
Annex 2
- 19 -

in a zone which is closed for the time being, as specified
in Annex B, except in an emergency or in accordance with a
permit issued under Article 9 (par.1).

ARTICLE 7
Closed Seasons

No seals shall be killed or taken within the closed
season designated in Annex C, except in an emergency or in
accordance with a permit issued under Article 9 (par.1).

ARTICLE 8
Seal Reserves

Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that
forms a seal breeding area or is the site of long-term
scientific research on seals may be declared a Seal Reserve
by the Contracting Parties. Such Seal Reserves shall be listed
in Annex D. Within any Seal Reserve, no seals may be killed
or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance with a
permit issued under Article 9 (par.1).

ARTICLE 9
Permits

(1)  A permit may be issued with regard to Articles 3, 4, 5,
6, 7 and 8 only for the following purposes :

     (i) to provide indispensable food for men or dogs in
limited quantities and in conformity with the
purposes and principles of this Convention;

     (ii) to provide specimens for scientific study or
scientific information; or

     (iii) to provide specimens for museums, educational or
cultural institutions.

(2)  Where a Contracting Party institutes a permit system
for sealing operations other than those specified in
paragraph (1) of this Article that Contracting Party shall
have regard, in issuing permits, to the principles and
purpose of this Convention and in particular Articles 2, 6,
7 and 8.
Annex 2                                 - 20 -

ARTICLE 10
Exchange of information

(1)     Each Contracting Party shall provide the other
Contracting Parties before 31 October of each year with the
information relating to the preceding period of 1 July to
30 June specified in Annex E.

(2)     At the same time, each Contracting Party shall provide
to the other Contracting Parties information on any steps
it has taken in accordance with this Convention.

ARTICLE 11
Consultations between Contracting Parties

(1)     Should it appear to any Contracting Party that the
harvest of any species of seal in the area to which this
Convention applies is :

        (i) approaching the number for the species fixed in
accordance with Article 2 above,

        (ii) having a significant effect on the total stocks
therein, or

       (iii) disturbing the ecological system in any particular
locality,

that Party may propose through diplomatic channels that a
meeting of Contracting Parties be convened.

(2)     If Contracting Parties so agree, such a meeting shall
be convened as soon as possible in order to consider the
situation and the steps it may be necessary to take.

ARTICLE 12
Signature

(To be drafted at the next Consultative Meeting)
Annex 2                                 - 21 -

ARTICLE 13
Ratification

This Convention is subject to ratification. Instruments 
of ratification shall be deposited with...

ARTICLE 14
Accession

(To be drafted at the next Consultative Meeting)

ARTICLE 15
Entry into force

This Convention shall enter into force on 1 July 
following the date of deposit of the....... instrument of 
ratification or accession.

ARTICLE 16
Amendment

(To be drafted at the next Consultative Meeting)

ANNEX A - PERMISSIBLE CATCH

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon carcinophagus)  200,000 individuals 
                                         in any one year
Leopard Seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)        15,000 individuals 
                                         in any one year
Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)   10,000 individuals 
                                         in any one year.

ANNEX B - SEALING ZONES

1.  The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with 
    those used by the whaling industry, are designated :
Annex 2                                 - 22 -

Zone 1     Between 60° and 120° West Longitude

Zone 2     Between 0° and 60° West Longitude, together with that 
           part of the Weddell Sea lying westward of 60° West 
           Longitude

Zone 3     Between 0° and 70° East Longitude

Zone 4     Between 70° and 130° East Longitude

Zone 5     Between 130° East Longitude and 170° West Longitude

Zone 6     Between 120° and 170° West Longitude .

2.         During the season immediately following the entry into 
           force of this Convention, being the first season to which 
           this Convention applies, no sealing shall be permitted in 
           Zone 1. In the next season Zone 2 shall be closed to sealing, 
           and thereafter each Zone shall be closed for a season in 
           sequence.

ANNEX C - CLOSED SEASONS

1.         The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is 
           a Closed Season.

2.         No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old 
           or older shall be killed or taken between 1 September and 
           15 December inclusive.

ANNEX D - SEAL RESERVES

The following are declared Seal Reserves :

1.         The area around the South Orkney Islands, between 
           60°20' and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05' and 46°25' West 
           Longitude.

2.         The area of the south-western Ross Sea south of 76°South 
           Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude.

3.         The area of Edisto Inlet, south and west of a line 
           drawn between Cape Hallett (Lat.72°19'S., Long.170°18'E.) 
           and Helm Point (Lat.72°11'S., Long 170°00'E.).
Annex 2

- 23 -

ANNEX E - EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.      Contracting Parties shall provide to other Contracting
        Parties statistical information on all seals taken within
        the area to which this Convention applies.

2.      This information shall include :

        (i)     the daily position of ship at noon each operating
                day; and

        (ii)    the number of adult individuals and pups of each
                species taken on that day.
Cote : ANT.-INF. 1
Original : in English

STATEMENT OF STEPS TAKEN BY UNITED KINGDOM
GOVERNMENT TO IMPLEMENT THE AGREED MEASURES ON
CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA

(Submitted by United Kingdom Delegation)

The United Kingdom Government has so far taken the following
action:

1.  The Antarctic Treaty Act 1967, which enabled us to give effect
to the Agreed Measures, was passed through both Houses of Parliament
and received the Royal Assent on 27 July 1967. It came into full
operation on 1 July 1968. Copies have been sent to the other con-
tracting parties to the Treaty. This Act of Parliament applies to
nationals of the United Kingdom whilst they are in the Antarctic.
It establishes a permit system and imposes appropriate scales of
penalties for contraventions. In addition, it enables certain
further provisions to be made by Order in Council.

2.  During the Southern Summer of 1967-1968 the British Antarctic
Survey organised an experimental run for one year of the proposed
permit system and of the collection of statistics. Special Stan-
ding Instructions (copy in Annex) were issued to every Station
Commander, with pro-forma permits. A personal letter of explana-
tion was also sent by the Director to every member of the Survey.
It was considered desirable to make quite certain that everyone
fully understood that it would in future be a criminal offence,
with heavy penalties, if they killed penguins or seals (for
example) without a permit.This experimental run for one year also
made it possible to improve, in the light of experience gained,
the standing instructions about how to collect the information
which is to be transmitted to the other Consultative Parties.
- 2 -

3. There was no authority to enforce the provisions of the 
Antarctic Treaty Act until four Orders in Council had been made.
One of them established 1 July 1968 as the date when the scheme 
came into formal operation. Others designated the Specially Pro-
tected Areas and Specially Protected Species so far agreed. It is 
expected, therefore, that the United Kingdom will be able to 
comply with all these Recommendations, starting on 1 July 1968.
Cote  :     ANT.-INF.2
Original  :  in English

APPROVAL AND APPLICATION OF THE AGREED MEASURES
FOR THE CONSERVATION OF FAUNA AND FLORA

(Submitted by the South-African Delegation)

These Agreed Measures (Recommendation III-8) for the @onserv-
ation of Fauna and Flora in the Antarctic Treaty Area have been 
formally approved by the South-African Government and are being 
implemented administratively.

The statistics concerning the annual number and species of 
seals killed or captured have already been submitted in terms of 
Recommendation IV-19 of the Fourth Consultative Meeting.  For easy 
reference, the following figures are repeated :

For period 1 July 1966 to 30 June 1967 ; locality :
Admiral Byrd Bay 69°S, 1°E.

SPECIES           SEX      AGE      For FOOD
Weddell seal  ..........{  M       A         18
                           F       A          4
Elephant seal  .........   M       A          1

For period 1 July 1967 to 30 June 1968 ; locality :
Lat. 70° 11'S , Long.02° 10' W.

SPECIES           SEX      AGE      For FOOD
Leopard seal  ..........   M       J          1
Crabe-eater    ..........   M       J          5
Weddell seal  ..........{  M     J to A       21
                           F     J to A       12
Cote : ANT.-INF. 3
Original : French

The Japanese Representative informs the Meeting that his Government referring to Article IX, para 4 of the Antarctic Treaty, accepts Recommendations IV-20 to IV-28 inclusive adopted at the Fourth Consultative Meeting held at Santiago in 1966.

On the other hand, however, the Government of Japan wishes to maintain its reservations concerning the acceptance of Recommendations IV-1 to IV-19 inclusive, pending its acceptance of Recommendation III-8 concerning measures for the conservation of fauna and flora.
PRESS RELEASE


The Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting was held in Paris from 18th to 29th November 1968.  These meetings are held every two years in accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the 1959 Treaty signed in Washington.  They enable representatives of the Signatory countries to examine and recommend to Governments, measures affecting the Antarctic area and founded on the principles and aims described in the Treaty.

The Meeting was attended by representatives of the following countries :

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Chile
France
Japan
New Zealand
Norway
South Africa
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Kingdom
United States

His Excellency Ambassador Pierre Charpentier was elected as Chairman of the Meeting.  M. Guy Scalabre and M. Jacques Longuet were appointed Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary-General respectively.

The Representatives formulated and adopted nine Recommendations.  The main subjects of discussion were Telecommunications and the Conservation of Antarctic Wild Life.  A number of other questions were also examined, including Antarctic tourism and the protection of sites and remains of historic value.

All the discussions were marked by the spirit of friendly co-operation in which they were conducted.

By unanimous decision of all the Representatives, Member Governments were recommended to accept the Japanese Government's invitation to hold the Sixth Consultative Meeting in Tokyo during 1970.
29th November 1968

DRAFT MESSAGE TO THE ANTARCTIC STATIONS

Representatives at the Antarctic Treaty Fifth
Consultative Meeting in Paris would like you, the Members
of stations and field parties in the Antarctic, to know
that they are very conscious of the realities of your
situation in the Antarctic and offer sincere wishes for
the successful conclusion of your projects and a happy
return to your home countries.
