TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
ANTARCTIC TREATY
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
PARIS
TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

Cote : ANT 20
Date : 18 Novembre 1968
Original : in English

POLICY STATEMENT OF NEW ZEALAND

ON CONDITIONS OF ACCESS FOR TOURIST EXPEDITIONS

TO NEW ZEALAND STATIONS IN ANTARCTICA

1.  The New Zealand Government does not control the access of
ships into Antarctic waters for peaceful purposes.  The New Zealand
Government does however exercise control on whether and under what
conditions tourists may visit any New Zealand stations in
Antarctica.

2.  Under the Antarctic Treaty, the New Zealand Government in
common with the other Governments parties to the Treaty is respon-
sible to ensure as far as possible that persons visiting Antarctica
comply with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, the Recommen-
dations of Consultative Meetings then effective, and, in particular
with the Agreed Measures for the conservation of Antarctic fauna
and flora.

3.  Under the Antarctic Treaty, the New Zealand Government is
required to inform the other Contracting Parties, in advance, of
all expeditions to and within Antarctica, organised in and pro-
ceeding from its territories.  In the case of tourist expeditions
special notice must also be given to any other Government whose
station the expedition plans to visit.

4.  New Zealand Government approval in principle to visit New
Zealand stations (including historic huts) must be sought through
the Superintendant Antarctic Division Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research.  He will require :

..../.
- 2 -

(a) Evidence that a proposed tourist expedition is entirely 
self-supporting, that adequate safety precautions are 
being undertaken, and that the tour organisers show and 
accept a strict sense of responsibility ;

(b) Assurances that the tourist organisers will comply with 
the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, the Recommendations 
of Consultative Meetings then effective, the Agreed 
Measures for the conservation of Antarctic fauna and 
flora, and the conditions applicable at stations to be 
visited.

5.      Conditions Applicable to Tourist Groups Visiting 
        New Zealand Antarctic Stations

New Zealand Government approval in principle notwithstanding 
approval by the Leader, Scott Base,will also be required for the 
final details of visits to New Zealand stations historic huts and 
science areas.

In the event of non-compliance with any of the conditions 
outlined below by individual tourists or by a tourist group as a 
whole, the Leader, Scott Base,will be at liberty to cancel all 
remaining arrangements previously made with the tour leader. He 
would in such a case then report his action to the New Zealand 
Government through the Superintendant Antarctic Division, D.S.I.R.

The following specific conditions will normally apply, but 
may be amended or added to as necessary in specific circumstances.

1)      Leader, Scott Base, must receive a minimum of six hours and 
        maximum of twenty-four hours prior notice of a proposed 
        visit to a New Zealand base, historic hut, or science area. 
        He would then advise the tour leader whether such a visit 
        at the time requested is permissible.

2)      The number and length of visits by any tourists expedition 
        will be limited. Leader, Scott Base, will determine these 
        limits depending on the situation at Scott Base at that 
        particular time.

3)      At the commencement of the agreed visit, Leader, Scott Base, 
        will brief tourist groups on various aspects of the New Zealand 
        Antarctic Research Programme and the local restrictions to 
        be observed by all visiting tourist groups.

4)      Normal courtesies will be extended to tourists, but opera-
        tional limitations within Antarctica will restrict such 
        courtesies and common services.

..../. .
- 3 -

(5) Since the tour group must be entirely self-sufficient,
the New Zealand Government will not be required to
assist with transportation, operational support, food
or shelter.  Such support and assistance will be provi-
ded only in an emergency situation.  Reimbursement by
the tour organisers will be required where goods and
services are furnished beyond a humanitarian assistance
and rescue situation.

(6) The safety of all members of a tourist party is the
responsibility of the tour organiser. Whilst all
reasonable precautions will be taken to ensure the
safety of tourists visiting New Zealand bases, the
New Zealand Government will not accept any liability
for accident or injury sustained by tourists at any
time within Antarctica, and tourists may be required
as a condition of visit to complete a document releas-
ing the New Zealand Government from any such liability.

(7) Designated "Science Areas" are out of bounds to tourists
unless they are guided through such areas as part of an
organised visitor group and accom?anied by an official
from Scott Base.

(8) Although Scott Base is designed for male only living,
suitable arrangements can normally be made for women
to accompany tourist groups.

(9) Post Office facilities at Scott Base will be available
for use by tourists.  Under existing circumstances
these facilities are limited and hours of business
restricted.  Leader, Scott Base, should receive prior
notice from the tour leader detailing numbers of
persons desiring to use these facilities at any time
other than during an organised visit.  Permission
granted by the Leader, Scott Base, in these circum-
stances does not entitle tourists to visit any other
part of the base.

(10) Visits of station personnel to the expedition ship must
only be arranged through the Leader, Scott Base.
