TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUINTA REUNION CONSULTATIVA

ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Côte : ANT 19
Date : 18 November 1968
Original:in spanish
Translation: in english

EXPLANATORY NOTE PRESENTED BY
C H I L E

Télécommunications

PREAMBLE

To this date there have been various meetings to consider the urgent need of the Governments signatory to the Antarctic Treaty to make an official pronouncement in regard to Antarctic telecommunications.  These meetings have brought forth valuable proposals for co-ordination and traffic schemes.

Thus Recommendations I-XI and II-III of the First and Second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting  respectively gave rise to the Meeting in Washington from 24 to 28 June 1968, on Telecommunications in the Antarctic Treaty Area, in which the co-ordination of Antarctic radio-communications was considered.  These studies produced eleven Recommendations, which were ratified by the Third Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

At the Third Consultative Meeting, which took place in Brussels from 2 to 13 June 1964, it was resolved (Recommendation III-V) to leave analysis of the results of the Recommendations on Telecommunications from the Washington Meeting for the Preparatory Meeting on
..../..
- 2 -

In September 1966 The Preparatory Meetings of the Fourth Consulta-
tive Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty were held in Santiago, and it was
resolved to leave the definitive study of the Washington Meeting Recom-
mendations until the actual meeting in November of that year.  Nevertheless,
since different delegations had no telecommunications experts, it was agreed
to recommend the uinclusion (in the Agenda of the Fifth Consultative
Meeting) pf an examination of the aforementioned recommendations (see annex
to Preamble for the Draft Recommendation approved on this occasion).

Besides this, the Meeting held in Melbourne from 23 February to
3 March this year established the Antarctic Meteorological Group of WMO
which, among other matters, analysed the Recommendations on Telecommuni-
cations in the Antarctic Treaty Area made by the Washington Meeting,
suggesting certain modifications which would usefully integrate the
Antarctic network of observations and meteorological reports with the
scheme proposed for the WWW.

From the foregoing it seems necessary to study a series of recommen-
dations on Antarctic Telecommunications on the basis of the technical
material available to us drom the Washington and Melbourne Meetings and the
experience gained by the signatory countries in the operation of their
own telecommunication systems.

Analysis of the Washington Recommendations and of the satisfactory
results already obtained by their partial fulfilment, leads us to add to and
improve these Recommendations with a view to their effective and general
implementation.  In the same way, analysis of the Melbourne Recommendations
in the light of the international advantages implied for WWW, shows, the
value of making the corresponding modifications in the Washington
recommendations.

In accordance then, with the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, it is
proposed that this Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting consider
the adoption of the following resolutions on Telecommunications in the
Antarctic Treaty Area.
- 3 -

Fourth Antarctic Treaty                  Document n° 62 Rev.
Consultative Meeting                      Spanish

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION PRESENTED BY CHILE

ITEM  5  OF THE AGENDA

TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Considering the need to keep up to date the traffic system of
radio communications in Antarctica, and the desirability of being able
to transmit observation data from the Antarctic Treaty Area to the world
system for the collection of meteorological information :

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that, before
the Consultative Meeting scheduled to take place in Paris in 1968, they
consider the inclusion in the Agenda of an examination of the Recommenda-
tions on Telecommunications made by the Washington Meeting, in the light
of the new data existing on the subject at the time.
- 4 -

RECOMMENDATION  I

CO-ORDINATED TIMETABLE FOR URGENT TRAFFIC.

CONSIDERING  :

a)  That meteorological information constitute a large proportion of 
the total traffic handled by operators at Antarctic stations ;

b)  That such information loses much of its value for analysis and 
forecast if it does not arrive at the analysing centres within a few 
hours of the observations having been made ;

c)  That forecasts for flying and for land operations are urgently 
needed by many Antarctic stations;

d)  That the Southern Hemisphere Analysis Center (SHAC), situated in 
Melbourne, needs meteorological data collected in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area, as well as in the rest of the Hemisphere; and

e)  That both the Melbourne Meeting and the World Weather Watch (WWW) 
recommend setting up three Regional Meteorological Centres in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area ;

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS  :

1.  That all Antarctic stations adjust their radio timetables to hours 
which allow meteorological information compiled to reach the Region-
al Meteorological Centres (RMC) ans SHAC as soon as possible, but under no 
circumstances with a delay of more than one Hour and thirty minutes 
for the surface meteorological information collected every six hours, 
and of not more than four hours for upper air data; after the 
nominal time of commencement of the relevant observation ;

2.  That the timetables so established are so arranged as to allow 
other urgent transmissions to be made by the same means and 
during the same hours ;

3.  That the necessary adjustments be made in the regular links 
according to the adjoined timetable, as soon as possible, and

4.  That other transmissions which the contracting parties may arrange 
do not interfere with this timetable except in cases of emergency 
where human life is endangered or in cases where the station head, 
with full justification, may so decide.
- 5 -

ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION  I

SCHEME FOR A PROVISIONAL TIMETABLE OF REGULAR LINKS  (※)

( Daughter-stations to Main stations before 01.00Z
( 
( Main stations to RMC (oo)           "  01.15Z
( 
21.00Z and 00.00Z, ( RMC to SHAC (ooo)         "  01.30Z
synoptic         ( 
( Daughter stations to Main stations before 03.00Z
( 
( Main stations to RMC               "  03.30Z
00.00Z, upper    ( 
atmosphere       ( RMC to SHAC               "  04.00Z
( 
( 
( 
( Daughter stations to Main stations before 07.00Z
( 
03.00Z and 06.00Z, ( Main stations to RMC         "  07.15Z
synoptic         ( 
( RMC to SHAC               "  07.30Z
( 
( Daughter-stations to Main stations before 13.00Z
( 
09.00Z and 12.00Z ( Main stations to RMC         "  13.15Z
synoptic         ( 
( RMC to SHAC               "  13.30Z
( 
( Daughter-stations to Main stations before 15.00Z
( 
( Main stations to RMC               "  15.30Z
12.00Z upper     ( 
atmosphere       ( RMC to SHAC               "  16.00Z
( 
( 
( Daughter-stations to Main stations before 19.00Z
( 
15.00Z and 18.00Z ( Main stations to RMC         "  19.15Z
synoptic         ( 
( RMC to SHAC               "  19.30Z
( 

(※) : In addition, arrangements must be made between the appointed RMC
stations and SHAC, in order to set a timetable of regular bilateral
links especially in relation to the interchange of processed infor-
mation (regional and hemispheric analysis and forecasts).

(oo) : RMC : Regional Meteorological Centre

(ooo): SHAC : Southern Hemisphere Analysis Centre (Melbourne)
- 6 -

RECOMMEND.ATION  II

LINKS BETWEEN RMC STATIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

CONSIDERING :

a)  That the meteorological information gathered throughout
    Antarctica is required for analysis in SHAC and for forecasts
    at Mc Murdo, Mirny (Molodezhnaya) and Presidente Aguirre Cerda
    (now Gabriel Gonzáles Videla) ; and

b)  That radio transmission of meteorological data across the auroral
    zone offers a less reliable route than is required.

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

    That they do all they can to find the best method for obtaining
reliable links to RMC stations, between RMC stations, and between
RMC and SHAC.
- ? - 
RECOMMENDATION     III

PROVISIONAL ROUTING OF METEOROLOGICAL DATA
GATHERED IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

CONSIDERING :

a)  That it is necessary to establish certain new channels in order
    to obtain the desired improvements in the transmission of
    meteorological data ;

b)  That there are, nevertheless, important limitations of a practical
    nature dependent on the financial resources available to some
    Antarctic stations ; and

c)  That the Representatives have analysed these limitations for each
    terminal of the new routing desired for radio circuits;

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

    That the normal routes  for transmitting meteorological data from
the observation areas to SHAC be the RMC stations.  (*)
(*) The system of channelling for the observation areas in the
Antarctic Peninsula is set out in the attached Annex to this Recom-
mendation.
- 8 -

ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION    III

PROVISIONAL ROUTING OF METEOROLOGICAL DATA COLLECTED
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

(System for the Antarctic Peninsula)

Daughter-stations                                  Main stations                                  RMC

Halley Bay      (UK)
Deception Is.   (UK)
Argentine Is.   (UK)                                ? (1)                                         
Signy Is.       (UK)                                                                              
Adelaide        (UK)
Stonington Is.  (UK)

Deception       (A)
Matienzo        (A)
Esperanza       (A)
Gral Belgrano   (A)
Almte Brown     (A)                                ? (2)                  New GGV                SHAC
Orcadas         (A)                                                                  Melbourne

O'Higgins       (CH)                                                     G.G.V.                   
Arturo Prat     (CH)                                                                                
G.Gonzalez V.   (CH)
PACo            (CH)                                        Mirny
                                                                                   (Molodezhnaya

Palmer          (USA)                               Palmer                                          

Notes :
______  link within the Antarctic Traty Area
------  link with an area outside the Antarctic Treaty Area
? (1)   main station to be designated by the United Kingdom from among
        its daughter-stations
? (2)   main station to be designated by the Republic of Argentina from
        among. its daughter-stations
o       when operating.
- 9 -

RECOMMENDATION IV

ORGANIZATION OF INTERNATIONAL LINKS

CONSIDERING :

a) That it is advisable to keep the number of international radio 
links in the Antarctic to the minimum necessary for the amount 
of traffic required ;

b) That the capacity and quality of the RMC telecommunications 
systems is equal to that of the Regional Telecommunications 
Hubs (RTH), and therefore the main points in the international 
Antarctic network should be considered ;

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

That the international radio links in the Antarctic be limited, 
as far as possible, to the routes inferred from the Recommendation III.
- 10 -

RECOMMENDATION V

ALTERNATIVE ROUTES FOR INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC

CONSIDERING :

      The need to keep open a limited number of alternative
routes in case the route chosen for one of the main links should,
for any reason, fail ;

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

      That alternative routes be studied and test transmissions
be effected by these routes at regular intervals.
- 11 -

RECOMMENDATION VI

AERIALS

CONSIDERING :

The need to co-ordinate the design of the aerial systems 
at both ends of each international radio link in order to create 
suitable circuit conditions ;

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

1. That each of those links be provided, if possible, with 
directive aerials, and

2. That in each of those links, by agreement among the parties 
concerned, the transmitting and receiving aerials for each of 
the main channels be compatible as regards polarization 
and take-off angle.
- 12 -

RECOMMENDATION    VII

MODES OF TRANSMISSION

CONSIDERING :

The need to co-ordinate the techniques used at both ends
of each international radio link if communication is to be
effective :

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

1.      That all modes of transmission used by the main stations be
        brought into line, as far as possible, with the recommendations
        of the International Telegraphy and Telephony Consultative
        Committee (including, inter alia, the use of transmission
        speeds of 50 bauds instead of 45 bauds), and of the Interna-
        tional Radiocommunications Consultative Committee ;

2.      That the aim to be use, as soon as possible, on the RMC ..
        channels, 5-unit radio-teletype[s] which are among the most
        modern automatic error-detection systems.

3.      That consideration be given to the possibility of using such
        systems as frequency modulation, which would be less
        susceptible to interference than amplitude modulation.
- 13 -

RECOMMENDATION VIII

SEARCH AND RESCUE PROCEDURES

CONSIDERING :

a) That the stations requiring search and rescue services are precisely those which cannot on their own provide the means of rendering timely aid to any person who might need it ;

b) That the stations from which such assistance is requested are very probably those which operate aircraft for long-distance flights in the Antarctic;

c) That such aircraft are not normally in a position to take off immediately on long transcontinental flights, and that it takes time to prepare an operation of that nature ; and

d) That when the rescue aircraft reaches the area, presumably a search would have to be made for the persons requiring assistance;

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

That they adopt the following uniform procedure for the operation of radio equipment used in search and rescue operations in Antarctica:

(i) Communications regarding assistance should have absolute priority over all other communications awaiting transmission at the time ;

(ii) The procedure for radio operations will be that specified for mobile services in Chapter VIII, Article 36, of the Radio Regulations, adopted by the International Telecommunications Union at Geneva in 1959 ;

(iii) In addition, after transmitting the original call for help, the station or stations providing assistance should keep in constant touch, throughout the search and rescue operations, with the station requesting assistance, until such time as the latter considers that the operation has been concluded.
- 14 -

RECOMMENDATION   IX

RADIO AIDS TO AIR NAVIGATION

CONSIDERING :

(a) That international flights in Antarctica are becoming daily more
frequent ;

(b) That for purposes of increasing the safety of aircraft operating
in this area it is essential for certain land stations to have
basic radionavigation equipment ;

(c) That agreement should be reached regarding a system to whi?h the
various countries can adhere in the next five years, when they
undertake the installation of land radio aids for air navigation
or when they envisage any change in the installations at their
stations ; and

(d) That the definitive system for the Antarctic should be formulated
with due regard for the system of channels existing at the time,
which should be requested from the International Civil Aviation
Organization or any other international agency it might suggest.

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

1. That, as soon as possible, an omnidirectional radio beacon with
sufficient power to serve air navigation be installed at each
station possessing landing facilities, and omnidirectional medium-
frequency radio beacons be istalled at such stations on the ooast.

2. That the details of types, frequency and power of the radio aid
equipments installed be the subject of the information exchanged
yearly in accordance with the terms of Recommendation I-VI,
paragraph (8), of the First Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting,
in order that the parties wishing to equip their aircraft so as
to make use of the land radio aids may do so.
- 15 -

RECOMMENDATION  X

TIME SCHEDULE FOR THE BEGINNING AND END RADIO TRANSMISSIONS

CONSIDERING :

(a)    That it is not always possible to avoid interference between
radiotransmission and ionospheric observation services, owing to
the fact that, for logistic reasons, the installations are located
in small areas ;

(b)    That it is advisable to promote broad international understanding
on this question, since ionospheric observations should begin
simultaneously at all stations, and the reports are transmitted at
the same time from the radiocommunications centres at all bases ;

(c)    That excessive traffic is noted at H+00 minutes, and then 'dimini-
shes rapidly ;

(d)    That the recommendations of the international scientific organi-
zations, stipulate that the ionospheric probing data must be
obtained at H+00 minutes over the entire world ;

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS :

That, except in emergencies, radio transmissions on international
channels by these Antarctic stations where ionospheric probing is required
must end systematically at H-05 and begin systematically at H+05, whenever
radio traffic is between H-05 and H+05.
