TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE   QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                 ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Code : ANT 26
Date : 18 November 1968
Original : English

DRAFT CONVENTION FOR THE REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC
PELAGIC SEALING

(Document submitted by United Kingdom)

The Contracting Parties,

Recalling the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora, adopted under the Antarctic Treaty ;

Recognizing that the seal stocks south of 60° South Latitude
are a resource of potential value which require a binding
international agreement for its effective regulation ;

Recognizing that this resource should not be depleted by over-
exploitation, and hence that any harvesting should be regulated
at or below the level of the optimum sustainable yield ;

Recognizing that in order to improve scientific knowledge and so
place exploitation on a rational basis, every effort should be
made both to encourage biological research on these seal popul-
ations and to gain information from the statistics of future
sealing operations ;

Desiring to promote and achieve the objectives of protection,
scientific study and rational use of Antarctic seals ;

Have agreed as follows : -

ARTICLE 1

Implementation

Each Contracting Party shall adopt for its nationals, including
ships possessing its nationality, such measures, including a
permit system, as may be necessary in order to regulate in
accordance with the provisions of this Convention pelagic sealing
in the area to which this Convention applies, that is to say,
the seas south of 60° South Latitude.

./.
- 2 -

ARTICLE 2
Quotas

(1) The total number of seals of each species taken in the 
area to which this Convention applies shall not exceed a quota 
for that species fixed so as to bring the population to or 
maintain it at the level giving the optimum sustainable yield.

(2) The quota for each species shall be the number specified 
from time to time in Annex A. The quota for each species shall 
be fixed in the light of the best available scientific evidence 
and shall be reviewed at regular intervals by the Contracting 
Parties or in accordance with the provisions of Article 11.

ARTICLE 3
Sealing Methods

A seal shall not be killed or taken when it is in the water.

ARTICLE 4
Ross, Elephant and Fur Seals

The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal (Mirounga 
leonina) and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus shall not be 
killed or taken except in an emergency or in accordance with a 
permit issued under Article 9(1).

ARTICLE 5
Weddell Seals

Within the period specified in Annex C, no Weddell Seal 
(Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old, or older, shall be killed 
or taken, except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit 
issued under Article 9(1).

ARTICLE 6
Sealing Zones

For the purposes of this Convention, the area to which this 
Convention applies shall be divided into the Sealing Zones set 
out in Annex B. No seals shall be killed or taken in a zone 
which is closed for the time being, as specified in Annex B 
except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit issued 
under Article 9(1).

ANT 26
- 3 -

ARTICLE 7

Closed Seasons

No seals shall be killed or taken within the closed season
designated in Annex C, except in an emergency or in accordance
with a permit issued under Article 9(1).

ARTICLE 8

Seal Reserves

Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that forms
a seal breeding area or is the site of long-term scientific
research on seals may be declared a Seal Reserve by the
Contracting Parties.  Such Seal Reserves shall be listed in
Annex D.  Within any Seal Reserve, no seals may be killed or
taken except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit
issued under Article 9(1).

ARTICLE 9

Permits

(1) A permit may be issued with regard to Articles 4, 5, 6, 7
and 8 only for the following purposes :

    (i) to provide indispensable food for men or dogs in
limited quantities and in conformity with the purposes
and principles of (the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and) this
Convention ;

    (ii) to provide specimens for scientific study or scientific
information ; or

   (iii) to provide specimens for museums, educational or
cultural institutions.

(2) Where a Contracting Party institutes a permit system for
sealing operations other than those specified in paragraph (1) of
this Article that Contracting Party shall have regard, in issuing
permits, to the principles and purposes of this Convention and in
particular Articles 2, 6, 7 and 8.

ARTICLE 10

Exchange of information

(1) Each Contracting Party shall provide the other Contracting
Parties before 31 October of each year with the information relating
to the preceding period of 1 July to 30 June specified in Annex E.
(2) At the same time, each Contracting Party shall provide to the
other Contracting Parties information on any steps it has taken
in accordance with this Convention.

ANT 26
- 4 -

ARTICLE 11

Consultations between Contracting Parties

(1) Should it appear to any Contracting Party that the harvest 
of any species of seal in the area to which this Convention 
applies is:-

        (i)     approaching the quota for the species fixed in 
                accordance with Article 2 above,

       (ii)     having a significant effect on the total stocks 
                therein, or

      (iii)     disturbing the ecological system in any particular 
                locality,

that Party may propose through diplomatic channels that a meeting 
of Contracting Parties be convened.

(2) If Contracting Parties so agree, such a meeting shall be 
convened as soon as possible in order to consider the situation 
and the steps it may be necessary to take.

(3) The Annexes to this Convention may be amended by agreement 
between the Contracting Parties, notified through the diplomatic 
channel.

ARTICLE 12

Signature

This Convention shall be open for signature by all States Members 
of the United Nations or of any of the Specialised Agencies or 
Parties to the Statute of the International Court of Justice 
until......L12 months7.

ARTICLE 13

Ratification

This Convention is subject to ratification. Instruments of 
ratification shall be deposited with ....

ARTICLE 14

Accession

This Convention shall remain open for accession by any State 
belonging to a category mentioned in Article 12. Instruments of 
accession shall be deposited with ....

ANT 26
- 5 -

ARTÍCLE 15

Entry into force

This Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day 
following the date of deposit of the nth instrument of 
ratification or accession.

(Testimonium)

ANNEX A - QUOTAS

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon carcinophagus)
                  200,000 individuals in any one year.

Leopard Seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)
                  15,000 individuals in any one year.

Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)
                  10,000 individuals in any one year.

ANNEX B - SEALING ZONES

1.  The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with those used 
by the whaling industry, are designated. All zones are bounded 
to the northward by the northern limit of the area to which this 
Convention applies, and to the south by the coastline of 
Antartica:

    Zone 1  Betwenn 60° and 120° West Longitude

    Zone 2  Between 0° and 60° West Longitude, together with that 
    part of the Weddell Sea lying westward of 60° West 
    Longitude

ANT 26
- 6 -

Zone 3      Between 0° and 70° East Longitude

Zone 4      Between 70° and 130° East Longitude

Zone 5      Between 130° East Longitude and 170° West Longitude

Zone 6      Between 120° and 170° West Longitude.

2.  During the season /insert next season after signature7,
being the first season to which this Convention applies, no
sealing shall be permitted in Zone 1. In the2nd serson application
Zone 2 shall be closed to sealing, and thereafter each Zone
shall be closed for a season in sequence.

          ANNEX C - CLOSED SEASONS

1.  The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive is a
Closed Season.

2.  No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old or older
shall be killed or taken between 1 September and 15 December
inclusive.

          ANNEX D - SEAL RESERVES

The following are declared Seal Reserves:

1.  The area around the South Orkney Islands, between 60°20'
and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05' and 46°25'
West Longitude.

2.  The area of the south-western Ross Sea south of 76° South
Latitude and west of 170° East Longitude.

3.  The area of Edisto Inlet, south and west of a line drawn
between Cape Hallet (lat. 72°19'S., Long. 170°18'E.) and
Helm Point (Lat. 72°11'S., Long. 170°00'E.)

          ANNEX E - EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.  Contracting Parties shall provide to other Contracting Parties
statistical information on all seals taken within the area
to which this Convention applies.

2.  This information shall include:

    (i) Daily position of ship at noon each operating day.

   (ii) The number of adult individuals and pups of each species
taken on that day.

ANT 26
