TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE          QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                         пятое консультативное совещание
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote : ANT 16
Date : 18 Novembre
       1968
Original: French
Translated: English

Note presented by the French Delegation on the:

Meteorological Regional Centers

The term of Meteorological Regional Center (MRC) is
utilized in the World Meteorological Watch to designate
Centers that assume the responsiblity of a certain number
of functions on the international scale.

There is a great need in Antarctica of Centers that
assure, in the general interest of all those who execute
scientific tasks in this part of the world, a general or
applied (aerial and maritime navigation, particular
tests, etc.) meteorological assistance.

These centers having more limited functions than
those defined within the framework of the V.M.W., may
be designated as Antarctic Meteorological Centers (AmC),
as it was already asked by the Executive Committee of the
O.M.M. during its twentieth session in Geneva in June
1968.

The A.M.C. in order to fullfill their mission of
meteorological information throughout the Antarctic, should
be equipped with important telecommunication gear to be
able to broadcast and concentrate the informations.

The number of these A.M.C.'s and the definition of
their functions should be determined during the meeting.

The French Delegation will volontarily give it's
accord to a program based on the following conditions:
- Installation of three A.M.C.'s on the Antarctic. The
MC MURDO and MOLODEZNAYA stations seem to be able to
fulfill this role, a third A.M.C. should be designed 
from the Antarctic Peninsula.

- Establishing a list of stations whose informations will 
be collected by each A.M.C., without taking into consi-
deration their nationality, but only on their geographi-
cal position.

- Attributing the A.M.C.'s such telecommunications equip-
ment that will permit them to gather observations, to 
have exchanges with the URC's outside of the Antarctic, 
to broadcast the data elaborated by the A.M.C.

- Establishment of a list of needs of each user of A.M.C. 
that refers to rough or elaborated information.
