TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE          QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                          ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING               ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS

Cote : ANT 11
Date : 18 Novembre
1963
Original: French
Translation: English

Note presented by the French Delegation on the
MEETING OF LOGISTIC EXPERTS

Logistic experts have met in Tokyo from 3 to 8 of
June, according to the recomendation IV 35 and upon the
invitation of Japanese Government.

This meeting was a complete success on organizational
plan and the inviting Authorities should be, once again,
thanked for the warm reception reserved to the delegates.

Final report of the meeting mentions that:
" a fruitful exchange of logistic information has been
" established. The representatives were convinced that
" means must be found in order to continue such exchanges.
" It was accepted that the representatives would draw to
" the attention of their governments the advantages that
" may be derived from the continuation of such meetings.
" They feel that it is convenient to introduce this
" question in the number of subjects that will be discussed
" on the Fifth Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty,
" that will be held in Paris during the month of November
" 1963. There are reasons to think that the Working Group
" of the S.C.A.R. on Logistics will continue their activi-
" ties inscribed within the framework of the S.C.A.R."

S.C.A.R's Logistics Group, on it's part, met in
Tokyo on June 10th, that is to say, the week following
the one on which have met the Treaty's experts.

./.
3.

A certain confusion was noted when most of these 
experts participated in this logistic meeting of the SCAR, 
not in their capacity of governmental experts, but in 
their quality of members of the National Committees of 
the SCAR, and when they had to discuss some subjects that 
were similar to those debated during the meeting of experts.

It should also be asked if these meetings,held 
within one week of interval and discussing identical sub-
jects, were not duplicating the work.

The S.C.A.R., an unofficial organisation, but 
officially accepted,and animated by personalities that 
directly participate in antarctic activities, is function-
ning continuosly since it's creation in 1958. It's working 
groups are composed of specialists that are best known in 
different fields of antarctic activities. This osmosis is 
therefore logical and inevitable.

What to the contrary is not, it is to multiply the 
meetings, whose financial cost is non-negligeable.

This is why, it seems logical, in order to avoid 
the above mentionned inconveniences and taking into consi-
deration the need of information exchange, as expressed in 
the final report of Tokyo's meeting, it should be proposed 
to every government, that on many occasions have already 
recognized the efficiency of the SCAR, to consider it as a 
consultative organism, whose working groups will study all 
problems submitted to them. The SCAR then will emit, upon 
being requested, opinions and advises which will be in turn 
studied by the meetings of the Treaty, who will submit the 
recommendations to the governments,in other words the 
proceedure that is actually followed.

BA?T. !1
