TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE        
QUINTA REUNION CONSULTATIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                
ПЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING        
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

PARIS


Côte : ANT 22
Date ; 18 Novembre 1968
Original : en anglais

PELAGIC SEALING

(Document submitted by United Kingdom)

1.      The Third Consultative Meeting in 1964 recognized that the "Agreed Measures on the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora" did not give any protection to seals on floating ice (Recommendation III-XI), and urged that this should be taken up at the next meeting.

2.      The Fourth Consultative Meeting in 1966 recognized the probable need for a binding international agreement to regulate sealing and drew up "Interim Guide Lines for the Voluntary Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing" (Recommendation IV-21). There was a wide measure of agreement on the need for regulation and on the kind of measures required, but in the time available it was not possible to draft a binding agreement or to complete the two Annexes. Without these Annexes, the most important provisions of the Interim Guide Lines cannot be put into operation.

3.      Recommendation IV-22 recognized the interest of SCAR in Antarctic pelagic sealing and invited them to prepare reports from time to time ; more especially on the content of the Annexes. In July-August 1968 the Working Group on Biology of SCAR and its specialist Sub-Committee on Seals reviewed the whole subject and prepared their suggestions in the form of a revised version of the Interim Guide Lines in Recommendation IV-21, together with a note explaining their proposed alterations and additions (SCAR Papers WGB/68/3, WGB/68/4 and WGB/68/5, dated 3 August 1968). These were subsequently approved by theSCAR Executive on 1 November 1968 and were circulated to National Antarctic Committees with a request that they be forwarded to governments.

..../..
- 2 -

4. The British National Committee has endorsed these papers and forwarded them to the United Kingdom Government.  The United Kingdom now submits them as working papers to be discussed at the Consultative Meeting (Annexes A, B and C).

5. The United Kingdom Government favours these proppsals by SCAR and hopes that a binding international agreement along these lines can be nagotiated during the Fifth Consultative Meeting.  While recognizing that this agreement could take other forms, the United Kingdom will submit for discussion a draft Convention based on these SCAR recommendations.

Annex A.  SCAR Paper WGB/68/3.  Proposed Revision of the "Interim Guide Lines for the Voluntary-Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing" 3 August 1968.

Annex B.  SCAR Paper WGB/68/4.  Report od SCAR Working Group on Biology. 3 August 1968.

Annex C.  SCAR Paper WGB/68/5.  Note explaining the proposed alterations and additions to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting Recommendation IV-21.  3 August 1968.
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         TRATADO ANTARTICO
CINQUIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  QUINTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                 пятое консультативное совещание
FIFTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
PROPOSED REVISIONS OF THE
"INTERIM GUIDE LINES FOR THE VOLUNTARY REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC
                         "PELAGIC SEALING "

(Recommendation IV-21 of Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting)

Recognizing that the seal stocks south of 60° South Latitude are a resource
of potential value which at some future date may require a binding inter-
national agreement for its effective regulation ;

Recognizing that this resource should not be depleted by over-exploitation,
and hence that any harvesting should be regulated at or below the level of
the optimum sustainable yield ;

Recognizing that in order to improve scientific knowledge and so place
exploitation on a rational basis, every effort should be made both to
encourage biological research on these seal populations and to gain infor-
mation from the statistics of future sealing operations ;

Desiring to promote and achieve the objectives of protection, scientific
study and rational use of Antarctic seals ;

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that in accordance
with Recommendation III- XI each Government should voluntarily take account
of the following Guide Lines for the Voluntary Regulation of Antarctic
Pelagic Sealing :

1.   The total number of seals of each species taken in the area south
     of 60° South Latitude should not exceed a quota for that species set
     so as to bring the population to, or maintain it at the level giving
     the optimum sustainable yield.

2.   The quota shall be set in the light of the best available scientific
     evidence, and shall be revised at regular intervals. The best
     present advice regarding quotas is given in Annex A.

3.   A seal should not be killed or taken when it is in the water.

4.   The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi), the Elephant Seal (Mirounga leo-
     nina), and fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus should not be killed
     or taken except in an emergency or in accordance with a permit.

5.   Within the period specified in Annex C no Weddell Seal (LEPTONYCHOTES
     weddelli) one year old, or older, should be killed or taken, except
     in accordance with a permit.

ANT 22
WGB/68/3                                 - 2 -

6.    For the purposes of these Guide Lines, the area south of 60o South 
      Latitude should be divided into the Sealing Zones set out in Annex B. 
      No seals should be killed or taken except in the zones, and at the 
      times spedified in Annex B.

7.    No seals should be killed or taken within the closed season designa-
      ted in Annex C, other than in an emergency or in accordance with 
      a permit.

8.    Within the zones established in Annex B, any area that forms a seal 
      breeding area or is the site of long-term scientific research on 
      seals may be declared a Seal Reserve by the Contracting Governements. 
      Such Seal Reserves shall be listed in Annex D. Within any Seal 
      Reserve seals may not be killed or taken except in an emergency or 
      in accordance with a permit.

9.    Permits shall be issued only for the following purposes :

      (i)   to provide indispensable food for men or dogs in limited 
            quantities and in conformity with the purposes and principles 
            of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of fauna and 
            flora in the Antarctic and these Guide Lines.

     (ii)   to provide specimens for scientific study or scientific 
            information.

    (iii)   to provide specimens for museums, educational or cultural 
            institutions.

10.   Each Government should provide the other Contracting Governments 
      before 31 October of each year with the information relating to the 
      preceding period of 1 July to 30 June specified in Annex E.

11.   At the same time, each Government should provide to the other 
      Contracting Governments information on any steps it has taken in 
      accordance with these Guide Lines.

12.   When it appears to any Consultative Party that the harvest of any 
      species of seal in the area south of 60o South Latitude is having 
      a significant effect on the stocks therein, or in any locality is 
      disturbing the ecological system therein, that party may propose 
      through diplomatic channels that a Consultative Meeting shall be 
      convened under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  If all Consul-
      tative Parties so agree, such a meeting shall be convened as soon 
      as possible to consider the situation and the steps it may be 
      necessary to take.

ANT 22                                                    x
WGB/68/3                                  - 3 -


ANNEX A - PERMISSIBLE YIELD

With present information it is not possible to give figures for 
the optimum sustainable yield, or for the levels of population which would 
provide such yields. Such figures can only be estimated with any useful 
precisions from the analysis of the populationsafter they have been 
exposed to exploitation for a period.

It is suggested that if catches do not exceed the following safety 
levels until the results of such analysis are available, then the popula-
tions will not be reduced below the level giving the optimum yield.

Crabeater Seals (Lobodon carcinophagus)      200,000 individuals 
                                            in any one year

Leopard Seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)           15,000 individuals 
                                            in any one year

Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli)      10,000 individuals 
                                            in any one year


ANNEX B - SEALING ZONES

1.  The following Sealing Zones, corresponding with those used by the 
whaling industry are designated. All zones are bounded to the northward 
by 60° South Latitude, and to the south by the coastline of Antarctica:

    Zone 1  Between 60° and 120° West Longitude

    Zone 2  Between 0° and 60° West Longitude together with that part 
            of the Weddell Sea lying westwards of 60° West Longitude.

    Zone 3  Between 0° and 70° East Longitude

    Zone 4  Between 70° and 130° East Longitude

    Zone 5  Between 130° East Longitude and 170° WestLongitude

    Zone 6  Between 120° and 170° West Longitude.

2.  During the season 1969-1970, being the first season to which these 
Guide Lines apply, no sealing should be permitted in Zone 1.  In the second 
season of application, Zone 2 should be closed to sealing, and thereafter 
each zone should be closed for a season in sequence.

..../..

ANT 22
WGB/68/3

- 4 -

ANNEX C - CLOSED SEASONS

1. The period between 1 March and 31 August inclusive shall be a 
   Closed Season.

2. No Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) one year old or older 
   should be killed or taken between 1 september and 15 december 
   inclusive.

ANNEX D - SEAL RESERVES

The following areas shall be declared Seal Reserves :

1. The area between 60°20' and 60°56' South Latitude and 44°05' and 
   46°25' West Longitude, including the South Orkney Islands.

2. The area of the south western Ross Sea south of 76° South Latitude 
   and west of 170° East Longitude, including Ross Island.

3. The area of Edisto inlet south and west of a line drawn between 
   Cape Hallett (72°19'S.: 170°18'E) and Helm Point (72°11'S: 
   170°00'E).

ANNEX E - EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1. Contracting Governments should submit to other Contracting Govern-
   ments statistical information on all seals taken by commercial 
   sealers within the area to which these Guide Lines apply, according 
   to the following pro-forma, :

   (Date)               (Non position    (Number of adult 
                        of vessel)       individuals of each 
                                         species taken on 
                                         that day)
                        (Number of pups 
                        of each species 
                        taken on that 
                        day)

2. Contracting Governments should exchange statistical information on 
   all seals taken under permit issued in accordance with clause 9 
   within the area to which these Guide Lines apply. Recommendation 
   IV-19 of the Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

ANT 22
WGB/68/4                  - 5 -               ANNEX B

SCAR WORKING GROUP ON BIOLOGY

The Working Group on Biology of SCAR met at Cambridge on 27 July
to 3 August, 1968.

The Group considered Recommendations IV-21 and IV-22 of the Fourth
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting held at Santiago, Chile, on 3-18 No-
vember 1966.  They had before them the conclusions of the Sub-Committee on
Seals established at the Ninth Meeting of SCAR held at Santiago on 20-24
September 1966.

The Group concluded:

1.      That Recommendation IV - 21, "Interim Guide Lines for the Voluntary
Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing", provides an effective basis for
the regulation of an Antarctic pelagic sealing industry.

2.      That certain alterations and additions to that document should be
suggested in the light of a careful review of the latest investigations
of the biology of Antarctic seal species, so that their populations can be
properly protected from over-exploitation.

3.      That, in accordance with Recommendation IV-22, "Interest of SCAR in
Antarctic Pelagic Sealing", proposals can now be made for the contents of
Annexes A and B of the Interim Guide Lines ..., and that three additional
Annexes should be suggested.

4.      That it is unreasonable to press for a prohibition of all
Antarctic sealing pending further scientific study of the populations,
and that indeed scientific knowledge of the pelagic species would be best
advanced under present circumstances by a properly controlled sealing
industry.  SCAR should therefore be advised not to stand by Recommenda-
tion 3 of paper IX SCAR 39.

5.      That, despite the recent severe drop in the price of seal skins,
there are no convincing reasons for believing that an antarctic pelagic
sealing industry could not be a profitable undertaking in the near future.

6.      That, consequently, SCAR should ask National Antarctic Committees
to request their Governments to consider the possibility of superceding
the "Interim Guide Lines for Voluntary Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic
Sealing" as soon as possible with an international agreement that will
be binding on Contracting Governments.

7.      That, Antarctic pelagic sealing may be carried out by nations which
have not yet accepted the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty.

Attached papers':  Proposed revision of the "Interim Guide Lines for the
Voluntary Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing" (Antarctic Treaty
Recommendation IV-21). (Paper WGB/68/3)/.
Note explaining the proposed alterations and additions to Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting Recommendation IV-21. (Paper WGB/68/5).

3 August 1968          ..../..

ANT 22
WGB/68/5                  - 6 -              ANNEX    C

NOTE EXPLAINING THE PROPOSED ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO
ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING RECOMMENDATION IV-21

1.      Clause 3.of the Interim Guide Lines was considered to be incapable
of precise scientific definition, and to be rendered unnecessary in the new
draft.  It is therefore proposed to omit it.

2.      Clause 5 of the Interim Guide Lines, now Clause 4 of the new draft,
should be extended to embrace the fur seals of the genus Arctocephalus and
the elephant seal, Mirounga leonina.  The former is proposed because of the
rarity of these seals in the Antarctic zone, where they are still recovering
from the disastrous effects of uncontrolled sealing in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries.  If any commercial harvesting of fur seals is permitted
at a later date, this should be done at the breeding colonies, and not
pelagically. The Elephant Seal is proposed for inclusion because it is
best cropped at its breeding grounds.  None of these species is common in
the pack ice, and their exclusion would not significantly restrict any
industry.

3.      Clause 5 of the new draft is an addition to deal with the Weddell
Seal (Leptonychotes weddelli).  This species is not common in the pack ice,
except fairly close inshore, but breeds on fast ice about the Antarctic
coastlines in well-defined breeding groups.  It would be easy for any
sealer to eliminate a series of breeding groups completely, without
exceeding a limiting figure established in Annex A.  In addition to seeking
to control an industry by establishing a "permisible yield" figure, it is
thought important to protect breeding groups.  This would be achieved by
the measure suggested in Clause 5 and Annex C, which would permit only the
taking of pups from breeding aggregations.  After weaning, when the breeding
groups disperse, Weddell Seals older than one year would become available
to the industry, but it is unlikely that they would be taken in large num-
bers.

4.      Clause 6 of the new draft, like that of the Interim Guide Lines,
establishes Sealing Zones which are defined in Annex B.  To make the system
by which zones are closed to sealing adjustable in the light of increasing
knowledge, the mechanism for thus closing them is defined in the Annex
rather than in the main clause, as in the Interim Guide Lines.

5.      Clause 7 of the new draft establishes a closed season, the duration
of which is fixed in Annex C.  This restriction of sealing to half the cal-
endar year is considered a wise precaution in the present state of knowledge.

6.      Clause 8 of the new draft provides for the establishment of Seal
Reserves.  This is suggested primarily to protect breeding groups of Weddell
Seals which may be subject of long-term scientific study.  The first three
reserves proposed are all the location of important long-term research
programmes.  It would he most undesirable and productive of unfortunate
incidents, were there any risk of sealers taking animals from these breeding
groups, many of which are closely watched over by the scientists working on
them.  It would also render fruitless the considerable investment of funds
which is involved when a population is marked and observed over the

..../.. 
ANT 22
WGB/68/5                                  - 7 -

potential life span of an animal such as the Weddell Seal, which can bred
up to at last 20 years old. It is recognised that such reserves should be
few in number, and clearly defined.

7.      Clause 9 of the new draft establishes a framework for the issue of
permits to allow the taking of seal species debarred from commercial
harvesting, and the taking of seals in Seal Reserves.

8.      Clause 10 of the new draft closely follows Clause 7 of the Interim
Guide Lines, but allows adjustment of the form of information exchanged by
specifying this in an Annex.

9.      The Annexes to the new draft follow logically from these premises.
Annex A set provisional figures for the take of Crabeater, Leopard and
Weddell Seals. In arriving at these figures, the lower range of population
estimates have been taken as a basis in view of inadequate knowledge of the
actual population sizes. It must also be kept in mind that a significant
part of the seal population may at times be on floating ice north of 60°
South Latitude and hence outside the scope of the Guide Lines.

10.     The Sealing Zones in Annex B correspond with those used by the
whaling industry. This has the advantage that they are already familiar,
and also that they have already been used as the basis for a large volume
of statisics. The provision to close one zone in each year to commercial
sealing would result in the protection in each year of about one sixth of
the total pelagic seal population. We do not consider on the evidence
available to us that there is justification for considering that the abun-
dance of seals varies dramatically from zone to zone, although we are of
the opinion that zones 1 and 6 may prove to be less well stocked than
the others.

11.     Annex C established a six month closed season. This is also the
period when operations in the antarctic become most difficult and haza[r]-
dous. The Annex also prohibits the taking of Weddell Seals other than pups
during the breeding season, thus achieving the objectives of paragraph 3
above.

12.     Annex D specifies the boundaries of Seal Reserves, justified
in paragraph 6 above.

13.     Annex E provides a proforma for theexchange of information.

14.     The Sub-Committee on Seals and the Working Group on Biology,
consider that if the substance of this new draft can be accepted by Governmen
nments it will form a reasonable basis for the control of any sealing in-
dustry that may develop in the Antarctic. At the same time, if the inne-
xes are open to revision in the light of increasing knowledge, this method
of control will retain flexibility. The Working Group has agreed to esta-
blish the Sub-Committee on Seals as a continued specialist group and hopes
in this way to be able to keep this whole subject under review and give
fresh advice from time to time when more research has been done.

- - - - - - -

ANT 22
