

XXVI ATCM
Working Paper WP-29
Item 10 of the Agenda
Submitted by France
Original: French



Usefulness of an intersessional working group on the adoption of a regulation on tourism activities in Antarctica

Item 10 of the Agenda : Tourism and non governmental activities
in the Antarctic Treaty Area


At the XXV ATCM (Warsaw, 2002), France tabled a working paper setting out the advantages of a new Annex to the Madrid Protocol dealing with tourism activities in Antarctica (XXV ATCM/WP 02).
This proposal led to discussions within the working group on both legal and institutional issues. The Final Report of the XXV ATCM notes that a number of delegations present at that meeting showed interest in discussing tourism activities and that France offered to coordinate an informal intersessional discussion in order to carry out complementary discussions on tourism to take place during the XXVI ATCM (Madrid, 2003).
Eleven states (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Norway), the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) and the Antarctic Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) participated.
The discussions that took place merely pave the way for more substantial talks on the matter, but participants showed how much they are concerned with the issue of Antarctic tourism because of the impact it may have on the environment.
That is precisely why France considers that it would be useful and timely to continue the discussions which have taken place so far.
It is indeed important to stage a real discussion on the need for a regulation of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica. State Parties seem to be developing national regulations implementing the Madrid Protocol without seeking a global consistency. Since the Madrid Protocol was adopted, tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica have considerably grown and become more diversified. Problems related to tourism are addressed during consultative meetings. However, these are specific discussions when a working paper is tabled at a meeting.
The number of participants at informal discussion groups on tourism show there is a growing awareness of the importance of tourism in Antarctica and its environmental impact. An in-depth and more formal discussion is essential to ensure that both environmental protection and tourism development may be pursued in parallel. It would be a good opportunity for the State Parties, the tourism industry and environment-related NGOs, actually for all stakeholders, to share their points of view and concerns.
The informal discussion group allowed us to define an operational framework that should now be pursued and developed.
The discussion could carry on within a dedicated working group whose terms of reference remain to be defined.
It would include specialists and representatives of all Consultative Parties who have shown their willingness to participate.
A number of issues deserve special attention at the onset: a) the benefits of a tourism regulation, b) the definition of tourism, c) the format of such a tourism regulation.
Experts on tourism regulations and non-governmental activities in Antarctica could be consulted in a second phase.
France would be prepared to coordinate this working group, thereby contributing to the preparation of discussions that could take place at the XXVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

