

ProtectiveMarking: 
Descriptor: 
Caveat: 
CoveringPM: 
CovDescriptor: 
CovCaveat: 
Subject: 
DocumentStyle: 
Draft: 
FolderReference: 
CreatedBy: 
RegisteredOn: 
RegisteredBy: 
DocumentDate: 
SysDocumentDate: 
FromInd: 
FromOrg: 
ToInd: 
ToOrg: 
AdditionalText: 
Finalised: 
OfficialRecord: 
DocumentStatus: 
FolderReferenceType: 
DOCUMENT ATTRIBUTES SECTION: DO NOT MODIFY TEXT ABOVE
STARTDOCUMENT:
The Attendance of non-Party States at Consultative Meetings: A proposed change to the Rules of Procedures of the ATCM.


Working Paper Submitted by the UK

The attendance of Malaysia “to observe” ATCM XXV in Warsaw was a novel, unique situation.  But the precedent raises a more fundamental issue – that of the procedures for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to invite non-Party States to Consultative Meetings.  The issue will re-emerge at ATCM XXVI with both Malaysia, and Iceland (in respect of Agenda Item 9) scheduled to attend.

Attendees at ATCMs are confined to four categories:

    • Consultative Parties;
    • non-Consultative Parties;
    • Observers, of which under Rule 2 there are only three recognised (SCAR, CCAMLR and COMNAP);

    • Invited Experts, which include inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations.

There is no formal mechanism either under the Antarctic Treaty, or under the current Rules of  Procedures of the ATCM (last amended by Decision 1 (1997)) which allows for the attendance of a non-Party State at a Consultative Meeting. In effect the attendance by Malaysia at ATCM XXV was determined by an ad-hoc, intersessional agreement amongst Consultative Parties. In this respect the situation in the ATCM contrasts with practice seen elsewhere in the Antarctic Treaty System.

CCAMLR’s Rules of Procedure provide explicitly for a non-Party State to be invited to a meeting of its Commission (providing there is consensus to do so).  
	
Rule 30 (c) states that the “Commission may…….”

“invite as appropriate, any other state to attend, in accordance with Rules 32, 33 and 34 below, as Observers in the meetings of the Commission unless a Member of the Commission objects”.

(Note: other state in this context means any state other than a signatory or acceding state referred to in Rule 30 (a) and (b)). 

This arrangement has worked well, and to the benefit of CCAMLR.  It has demonstrated transparency, and a willingness to co-operate with non-Party States.  This has indeed been advantageous to the CCAMLR Commission in its on-going fight against illegal, unregulated and unrecorded (IUU) fishing for Toothfish. Over the past three to four years the practice of inviting non-Party States has become more commonplace.  A number of the States involved have normally not been associated with the Antarctic Treaty system (e.g. Seychelles, Mauritius and Namibia).  Nevertheless, these States have indicated at the Commission Meetings of CCAMLR a strong desire to work collaboratively. Furthermore, certain of those non-Party States have demonstrated their commitment to tackling IUU fishing, to the extent that they have voluntarily and constructively implemented CCAMLR’s Catch Documentation Scheme in respect of Toothfish. One example of CCAMLR’s ability to engage actively with other States has seen Namibia in the space of three years, firstly accede to the CCAMLR Convention and then become a Member of its Commission.

The UK is of the view that a similar procedural mechanism ought now to be considered for the ATCM.  It would enable Treaty Parties to engage more directly with other States which have an interest in Antarctica.  It might for example also enable the engagement to extend to those States whose flag-vessels (e.g. as tourist vessels) frequent the waters south of 60°S (this is the principal presence by non-Treaty Parties within the Antarctic Treaty Area).

The UK believes that positive engagement with non-Party States could be beneficial.  We propose a procedural means of doing so through revision of the Rules of Procedure by a Decision of the ATCM.
 
A draft Decision, along with the proposed changes to the Rules, is attached as Annex I, along with an explanatory commentary (Annex II).


DRAFT DECISION (2003) 


Revised Rules of Procedure (2003)




The Representatives,

Desiring to amend the Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings;


Decide:

That the “Revised Rules of Procedure (2003)” attached to this Decision shall replace the existing Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings with immediate effect.




























PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE


    1. Either add to Rule 1,  or provide for a new Rule 1 (bis) as follows:-

“; other States which may have been invited to attend shall be referred to as “invited State observers”.

    2. Amend Rule 2  by inserting “permanent” before “observers” in line 5.   Likewise, insert “permanent” before “observers” in Rules 3 (line 12); 4 (line 4); 30 (line 1); 31 (line 1), 32 (line 2); 33 (line 1) and 34 (line 1), and amend the title to Rules 30 – 34 to read “Permanent Observers”.

    3. Insert in Rule 3 (line 8) after “Parties” the following:

“Each invited State observer which has been invited to attend a Consultative Meeting shall be represented by a delegation composed of a Representative and such other persons as it may deem necessary within such numerical limit as may from time to time be determined by the Host Government in consultation with the Consultative Parties”

    4. In Rule 4 (line 3), after “those of Consultative Parties, ” delete the rest of the sentence, and replace by the following: 
“all delegations of invited State observers following after non-Consultative Parties and all delegations of permanent observers following after invited State observers”.

    5. After Rule 29 insert four new rules, 29 (bis), 29 (ter), 29 (quater) and 29 (quinto) to read:-

“Invited State Observers
		29 (bis)
Representatives of invited State observers, if invited to attend a Consultative Meeting, may be present at:
    (a) all plenary sessions of the meeting; and
    (b) all formal Committees or Working Groups comprising all Consultative Parties, unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise in any particular case.
29 (ter)
The relevant Chairman may invite a Representative of an invited State observer to address the Meeting, Committee or Working Group which he is attending, unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise.  The Chairman shall at any time give priority to Representatives of Consultative Parties  and non-Consultative Parties who signify their desire to speak and may, in inviting Representatives of invited State observers to address the Meeting, limit the time to be allotted to each speaker and the number of times he may speak on any subject.


29 (quater)
Invited State observers are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

29 (quinto)

    (a) invited State Observers may submit documents to the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents.  Such documents shall be relevant to matters under consideration at the meeting.

    (b) Unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise such documents shall be available only in the language or languages in which they were submitted”.

    6. After Rule 37, insert the following new rules:

Rule 37 (bis)

		“Invited State observers

At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Meeting shall decide whether any State or States not party to the Antarctic Treaty but having an interest in Antarctica shall be invited to attend the forthcoming Meeting in order to observe its work”.

Rule 37 (ter)

Any Contracting Party may thereafter propose that an invitation be extended to any other State or States not party to the Antarctic Treaty but having an interest in Antarctica to observe the Meeting; each such proposal shall be submitted to the Host Government for that Meeting not later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting and shall be accompanied by a Memorandum setting out the basis for the proposal.

Rule 37 (quater)	As existing Rule 40.

Rule 37 (quinto)

Unless such an objection has been received, the Host Government shall extend invitations to any other State or States identified in accordance with Rules 37 (bis) and 37 (ter).



























Commentary on the Proposed Amendments



Title:
	It is recommended that non-Party states invited to an ATCM be known formally as “invited State observers”.  CCAMLR groups all participants that are either not acceding states or Members of the CCAMLR Commission as “observers”.  We do not believe it appropriate that the ATCM do likewise.  Rather, we believe a distinction needs to be made between non-Party States and the existing designated observers.  We would propose achieving this by changing the name of those currently referred to in Rule 2 as “observers” to “permanent observers”; to distinguish them from the new category of “invited State observers”.

Status:

	“Invited State Observers” should have a status between non-Consultative Parties and permanent observers.  This would be accommodated by the proposed changes in e.g. Rules 1, 3 and 29 (bis) and 29 (ter).

	To distinguish the separate status of invited non-Party states from non-Consultative Parties, we do not recommend amalgamating texts in e.g. Rules 3 and 26 – 29 by i.e. referring to “Each non-Consultative Party or invited State observer which has been invited to attend………”.  This would tend to lump these two categories together, which would not appear at all appropriate.

	An amendment to Rule 3 and a new series of Rules inserted as Rule 29 (bis) etc., and Rule 37 (bis) etc., which make separate references to the two categories, although more lengthy, are intended to draw a clear distinction between them.




Role:

	The role of invited State observers is proposed in new Rule 29 (bis) and 29 (ter).  This would enable such a State to participate in discussions at an ATCM (but not in the taking of decisions) and submit information papers i.e. their role would in effect be similar to that of non-Consultative Parties (see Rules 26-29).  However, since current Observers and invited experts are also given these rights it would not appear appropriate to do otherwise.  

	The crucial distinction between non-Consultative Parties and invited State observers is that the latter are there by invitation only, and that invitation carries no automaticity from year to year.  In addition, the Chairman would accord priority in debate to the former.




Procedures for Invitation

We recommend that the procedures for inviting State observers to an ATCM be the similar to those for invited experts i.e. that a decision whether to invite a non-Party State or States be taken at the preceding ATCM.

This is proposed by inserting new draft Rules 37 (bis), (ter), (quarter) and (quinto).  These in effect mirror existing Rules 38 – 41.  Current Rules 42-44 have not been reproduced in parallel for invited State observers since these provisions would be addressed by the proposed new Rules 29 (bis) and 29 (ter).

