
ATCM XXVI
Working Paper
Agenda Item: CEP 6
NEW ZEALAND/AUSTRALIA

Original: English





REPORT OF THE INTERSESSIONAL DISCUSSION GROUP ON STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORTING
Report of the Intersessional Discussion Group
on State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting

Summary 

State of the Antarctic environment reporting has been an outstanding issue for the Treaty since the Environmental Protocol was signed in 1991. The issue has been discussed at several ATCM and CEP meetings since, but no clear way forward has been agreed. 

At CEP V, it was agreed that New Zealand and Australia jointly lead informal intersessional work aimed at “providing clear suggestions on how to move forward on developing a continent-wide state of the Antarctic environment report for consideration at CEP VI.”  To meet the CEP’s requirements, the intersessional discussion group developed its Terms of Reference in the form of four questions, as follows:

    1. Why do we need to report on the state of the Antarctic environment?
    2. To whom are we reporting?
    3. What are we reporting on?
    4. How do we report? 

To further the work of the intersessional discussion group, a workshop was held in Sydney on March 10-11 2003, and was attended by representatives of Australia, New Zealand, Chile, Sweden, Norway, SCAR, IAATO, IUCN, ASOC, UNEP and WMO.

Following the workshop and intersessional work, the intersessional discussion group has concluded that a web-based reporting system that makes use of existing data sources and expertise would achieve the CEP’s function of advising of the state of the Antarctic environment.  The proposed system would add value by:

    • bringing together diverse sources of information from experts;

    • evaluating state of the environment information in a format which would be useful to the CEP, ATCM and Antarctic Treaty Parties; and 

    • allowing easy access to the information by CEP, ATCM and ATCPs as well as relevant expert and technical organizations.
  
Furthermore, the system would require very little additional resourcing and allow staged development, so that new information can be incorporated as it becomes available.

Recommendations

The intersessional discussion group recommends that:

    1. The CEP establish a mechanism for providing advice on the state of the Antarctic environment in order to fulfil its obligations under Article 12(1) of the Protocol.

    2. Such a mechanism should have the following features:

    • Be aimed at providing advice on the state of the Antarctic environment to the ATCM as the primary audience.

    • Utilise an indicator-based approach to environmental reporting.

    • Be established on the CEP Web site.

    • Use the model shown as Figure 1 as the basis for the reporting system.

    3. The CEP engages with observers and expert bodies as appropriate to assist in developing the system.

    4. An intersessional contact group be established and intersessional work continue, focusing on the following issues:

        ◦ Developing the state of the environment reporting website using monthly mean air temperature (a condition indicator) and quantity and volume of spills (a pressure indicator) as two example indicators.

        ◦ Engaging relevant expert bodies to assist.  

        ◦ In parallel, identifying a small set of indicators which are routinely measured and are robust parameters of either environmental condition or human pressures on the environment.

        ◦ Development of a framework for indicator classification and selection.

        ◦ Further developing the components to be included in the regular evaluation process.


1.	Background to SAER in the ATCM

The intersessional discussion group recognised the importance of building on earlier state of the Antarctic environment reporting (SAER) work within the ATCM and wider Treaty system.  The table below briefly summarizes key activities within the ATCM/CEP relating to SAER, between 1996 and 2002.

Date
Meeting
Summary
1996
XX ATCM
    • SCAR asked to examine the question of an SAER and provide proposal on how to prepare a report (Item 22) 
1997
XXI ATCM
    • SCAR WP outlined scope, consultation, preparation requirements, and a draft structure for the report. Noted one aim would be to  “identify key indicators”
    • New Zealand WP - the reasons for SAER, the role of the CEP, process, structure, geographic area, audience, timeframe and proposal for a way forward. Pressure/state/response framework suggested. SAER should be made available electronically to enable updates. Primary audience is the Treaty Parties (policy-makers and scientists).
1998
CEP I
    • ICG WP (New Zealand) – SAER goal and objectives, scope, audience, area, time and cost. One objective was “to identify a set of core environmental indicators”. Link made between SAER and environmental monitoring programs. Primary audience is national managers and decision-makers, the CEP. Secondary audience is the scientific community (may also have value for public) 
    • CEP expressed concerns on target audience, nature of the report and resource implications
    • New Zealand IP – objectives and outline of the Ross Sea Region SOER.
    • Norway IP – Arctic SOER experiences (content, process, timeframes and costs). A comprehensive report is >US$2 million.
1998-1999

ICG
    • ICG Discussion Paper 2 (Sweden) - There were advantages of a web-based system using GIS with paper summaries as required.
    • ICG Discussion Paper 3 (Sweden) - Consensus that SAER should be based on available data and Internet-based.
1999
CEP II
    • ICG WP (Sweden) considered goals, area, audience, procedure, role of SCAR and experts, resources, and timing. Disagreement about objectives of ICG, and goals and objectives of SAER but agreement on audience: primary being national managers/decision-makers and secondary being the public. General disagreement on how to develop SAER. Recommendation to discuss if CEP should continue to discuss SAER.
    • SCAR WP – SCAR supports continued discussion of SAER (“good scientific reasons for undertaking some form of synthesis of available data on the Antarctic continent and the Southern Ocean.”). Concurred with discussed objectives, audience and that “…an overview of a key range of indicators is a realistic proposition… ”. SCAR  is willing to assist in SAER and author a paper describing environmental variables, threats, and links to other SOE reports.
    • New Zealand IP – on progress of Ross Sea Region SOER.
    • EIA Guidelines adopted, referencing environmental indicators and monitoring programs. 
2000
CEP III
    • SCAR IP – Brief update on SAER progress and objectives
    • CEP requests a fuller scoping study
    • New Zealand IP – Update on progress on the Ross Sea Region SOER.
2002
CEP V
    • SCAR WP – Scoping the Data for a State of the Antarctic Environment Report, describing environmental variables, identifying past and future threats to the environment, and indicating links to SOE reports for other parts of the world.
    • New Zealand IP – on the key findings of the Ross Sea Region SOER.
    • New Zealand WP – discussion paper on the RSR reporting process, costs, follow-up, lessons learnt, and  options for future reporting. Principles noted for SOER are: “report for a reason “ (Q1), “identify who you are reporting for” (Q2), and “ensure integration of monitoring and reporting” (relates to Q3 and Q4)
    • Australia IP – Description of the System for Indicator Monitoring and Reporting (SIMR) as an efficient option for SAER.
    • CEP - “It was agreed that New Zealand and Australia jointly should lead informal intersessional work aimed at providing clear suggestions on how to move forward on developing a continent-wide state of the Antarctic environment report for consideration at CEP VI.” (Item 6, CEP V Final Report)

2.	The Work of the Intersessional Discussion Group

At CEP V, the issue of state of the Antarctic environment reporting (SAER) was discussed as a consequence of several papers presented at the meeting. SCAR presented its paper, Scoping the Data for a State of the Antarctic Environment Report [XXV ATCM WP31]. Information papers were presented by New Zealand on publication of a state of the environment report for the Ross Sea region [XXV ATCM IP7, WP12] and by Australia on the development of a web-based system for indicator monitoring and reporting [XXV ATCM IP54].  The CEP agreed that informal intersessional work should consider how state of the Antarctic environment reporting could be advanced.  The Final Report of CEP V states:

It was agreed that New Zealand and Australia jointly should lead informal intersessional work aimed at providing clear suggestions on how to move forward on developing a continent-wide state of the Antarctic environment report for consideration at CEP VI.

The terms of reference generated by the informal intersessional discussion group established at CEP V were as follows:

    1. Why do we need to report on the State of the Antarctic environment?
    2. To whom are we reporting?
    3. What are we reporting on?
    4. How do we report?

The intersessional discussion group also recognised that any solution should require minimal resources.  

TOR 1: Why do we need to report on the state of the Antarctic environment?

The intersessional discussion group noted that the primary basis for environmental reporting comes from the Protocol Article 12, 1(j) requirement that the CEP provide advice on “the state of the Antarctic environment.”  The intersessional discussion group recognised that a state of the Antarctic environment reporting system would also underpin the environmental principles of the Protocol outlined in Article 3. The intersessional discussion group agreed that an effective environmental reporting system would also provide a useful mechanism for the Committee to fulfil its wider functions under Articles 12 1(a), (b), (e), (f), (i) and (k).  Within this context, state of the environment reporting would, for example, provide information to support the planning of activities, an alerting mechanism for emerging environmental problems, and a means of evaluating the effectiveness of implementation of the Protocol.

Finally, the intersessional discussion group noted that state of the environment reporting is a standard environmental management tool used worldwide, and by many CEP members.  
TOR 2: To whom are we reporting?

Article 12 of the Protocol (outlining the functions of the CEP) requires the Committee to provide advice on the state of the Antarctic environment to the ATCM.  Other important stakeholders include Antarctic environmental managers, decision-makers, and the scientific community.  It was also recognized that the broader public should be considered as a secondary audience.  

TOR 3: What are we reporting on?

The concept of reporting on environmental condition through indicators has been recommended to the CEP previously. For example, in 1997, SCAR made early reference to the significance of an indicator-based approach (XXI ATCM / WP19).

Indicators are “signs or symptoms of changes, potentially due to numerous factors, in an environmental feature or features” or “signs or symptoms of changes in features not directly related to the environmental feature, but which potentially may impact the environmental features”, such as human activity outputs (e.g. emissions, fuel spills or noise)1.  The intersessional discussion group endorsed the use of environmental indicators as an effective means of conveying environmental information.

The intersessional discussion group noted that pressure indicators (i.e. measurements of activity levels or outputs which may affect environmental condition) relate to many of the requirements under the Protocol (e.g. waste management), and may have immediate management implications for Treaty Parties.  Condition indicators (i.e. measurements of the physical or biotic environment, such as air temperatures or sea ice extent) reflect significant aspects of the Antarctic environment but may have less immediate management implications. In the long term, however, information on trends in both known pressures and environmental condition are required for a comprehensive picture of the state of the environment which can inform management decisions. 

The concept of developing a framework for the selection of environmental indicators was discussed.  A matrix was suggested which includes pressure and condition indicators, as well as major aspects of the Antarctic environment, i.e. marine, terrestrial and aquatic, and atmospheric (as suggested in the SCAR Working Paper Scoping the Data for a State of the Antarctic Environment Report (XXV ATCM / WP-31) [2002]).  Such a framework should be further developed as a tool for selecting a comprehensive set of indicators for describing the state of the Antarctic environment.

It was agreed that indicators should be robust and already measured in some form on an on-going basis.  The intersessional discussion group noted that these requirements could be met using existing resources and expertise available within SCAR, COMNAP, CCAMLR and observers such as IAATO. The intersessional discussion group recommended that a set of 10-15 pilot indicators should be developed as the first in a step in developing a SAER system. 

However, the intersessional discussion group concluded that one pressure and one condition indicator should be used to demonstrate the proposed reporting system in advance of CEP VII:

    • Monthly mean air temperature (condition)
    • Type and volume of fuel spills (pressure)

These were chosen because the data is already being systematically collected by SCAR and COMNAP.  Expertise from SCAR and COMNAP should be enlisted for the development of reporting on these indicators.

TOR 4: How do we report?

It was agreed that Article 12 of the Protocol does not necessarily require a traditional (i.e. book form) state of the environment report. The Protocol does require a mechanism for providing “advice to the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment” [Article 12,1(j)].

The intersessional discussion group determined that in order to minimize the resource requirements an environment reporting system should be:
    • web-based;
    • as automatic as possible;
    • easily updated with new information; and
    • readily adaptable to new indicators or management requirements.

It was also considered that a system with devolved responsibilities (i.e. where experts in each indicator, rather than the CEP, handle data and generate regular report information) would be of great advantage.

The intersessional discussion group therefore developed a model reporting system which would capture environmental information from key scientific, environmental, and technical organisations. This information could then be presented to the CEP in a concise, relevant and standardized format.  The model is illustrated on the next page as Figure 1.

The proposed system would prompt identified expert bodies for annual, concise evaluations of selected indicators.  The data collection and the analysis associated with each indicator remains the responsibility of the expert body (termed the custodian). For instance, if WMO were willing to contribute a climate indicator, they would collate and analyse the data, and would provide an evaluation of the trends and significance of the indicator to the ‘clearing house’ for inclusion in the CEP state of the environment website.

Figure 1




The intersessional discussion group noted that this model avoids duplication of effort, yet provides the Treaty Parties with an annual summary (termed the evaluation) of aspects of the state of the Antarctic environment. The value added by this process would be centralisation of otherwise disparate information, which would assist environmental management decisions. The group recognised that for the evaluation to be concise and effective, clear guidelines would need to be developed. Elements of these guidelines should include analysis of the time series, practical  management implications of the results, and metadata (standardised description of the data source, quality, location etc).

The group recognised that a final step of overall synthesis and interpretation of the indicator evaluations would add further value, and would be required in order to provide concise advice to the ATCM.

The intersessional discussion group agreed that a state of the Antarctic environment reporting system should be hosted on the CEP website. The intersessional discussion group notes that, as the current chair of the CEP, Australia endorsed the model and agreed to establish the website if endorsed by the CEP. 
 
