
Approval of Measures Under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.

Working Paper submitted by
Argentina, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, and the United Kingdom


Introduction

    1. At ATCM XXV (Warsaw, September 2002) the UK submitted Working Paper (XXV ATCM/WP 20), which addressed the approval process of measures adopted under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  The Working Paper proposed a tacit approval mechanism for such measures in an attempt to accelerate their entry into force – a process which may, at present, be delayed by many years.  Working Paper 20 (ATCM XXV) is attached for ease of reference (Attachment A).
    2. The need to improve the rate at which measures are approved received support from a number of Parties in Warsaw.  Others however expressed some reservation (paras 16-20 of the Final Report of ATCM XXV refer).
    3. Recognising the importance of the issue, ATCM XXV agreed that the matter should be discussed informally during the intersessional period and considered further at ATCM XXVI.  On the basis of informal consultations during the intersessional period, options on how the issue might be further addressed are set out below.

Tacit Approval Process – Options

    4. Should Parties decide to adopt some form of fast-track process for the approval of Measures, three options would appear to be available.  Tacit approval could be applied:

    a. to all Measures without exception, or;
    b. to all Measures unless the Parties decided otherwise, or;
    c. only to specific Measures where Parties identify a  need for fast-tracking to meet some particular requirement.
    5. Option a, would introduce much needed rigour to the process of approval of Measures.  However, it is recognised that some Parties may continue to have difficulty with a blanket fast-track approval system; though here it is noted that this is the norm within other elements of the Antarctic Treaty System, e.g. Article IX(6) of CCAMLR.
    6. To cater for this perceived difficulty, options b and c provide a more flexible approach.  This could be tailored to the specific requirements of each Measure.
    7. Option b is largely that proposed by Working Paper 20 (ATCM XXV).  The draft Decision appended to that Working Paper recognised that Parties may not wish to apply a fast-track mechanism to all Measures adopted under Article IX.  The final sentence of operative para 2 of the draft Decision therefore provided Parties with an option not to apply the tacit approval mechanism should they so decide.  To clarify this, operative para 1 of the draft Decision could be made more explicit and could be amended to read, “That, unless the Measure specifies otherwise….etc”.
    8. Furthermore, the draft Decision annexed to Working Paper 20 (ATCM XXV) recognised that the process would not apply in cases where a tacit approval process already exists, i.e. in respect of Measures adopted in accordance with those Articles of the Protocol listed in operative para 2 of that draft Decision.  Here it is noted that Measure 1 (2002) was adopted under the fast-track approval process of Article 6(1) of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol, and has therefore already been approved in accordance with the tacit approval mechanism set out in that Article.
    9. Option c reverses the onus of decision-making of option b.  Instead of applying the tacit approval process to all Measures unless Parties decide not to do so, Parties could rather apply a fast-track mechanism on an ad hoc basis, i.e. only to particular Measures should there be a consensus to do so.
    10. Options b and c would thus introduce a two-stage approach to the adoption of Measures.  Parties would first need to decide whether or not to adopt the Measure in question.  Having so decided, Parties would then need to consider whether to opt out (option b) or opt in (option c) to a fast-track approval process for the Measure.  In either case the Measure would need to specify whether or not the fast-track approval process was being employed.
Consensus
    11. It is important to emphasise that the consensus process of decision-making under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty would be entirely preserved should a tacit approval mechanism be introduced.  In any of the options discussed above, each Party would retain the right, in all cases, to notify the Depositary either that it wishes an extension of the specified period for approval, or that it is unable to approve a Measure.   In any case where a Party has notified its desire for an extension, or its inability to approve the Measure, that Measure will not enter into force for any Party.
    12. In the case where a Party notifies its wish for an extension, the same extension period would apply to all Parties.  Thus the Measure would not become effective until the end of the extended period: With a sufficiently generous approval period set in the first place, it should be possible to avoid such situations in the majority of cases (see para 15 below).
Accountability
    13. One of the concerns expressed at ATCM XXV relates to the issue of accountability.  The existing “explicit” approval process requires all Parties formally to notify the Depositary Government that they have taken action within their own administrative and legal systems in respect of Measures adopted under Article IX of the Treaty.
    14. In moving towards a tacit approval process, two issues therefore merit consideration:
    • the period of time that might be set for Parties to implement the Measure within their own legal systems; and
    • whether or not to retain the formal notification element.
    15. On the issue of deadlines Working Paper 20 (ATCM XXV) deliberately left open the question of timetabling.  The deadline by which a Measure is deemed to have been approved, and thus has become effective, is open for discussion.  Even if this were set at five years, thus providing Parties with ample time to take the necessary domestic legal action, the approval process would still have been accelerated by a factor of two or even more over the current situation.
    16. On the second issue, there would appear to be no reason to forgo the formal notification process even within a tacit approval mechanism.  Clearly, the tacit approval process provides a means whereby Measures are approved (and thus enter into force) at a fixed date after the closure of the meeting, on the basis that no government raises an objection to the approval of the Measure.  The assumption must be that within the specified period Parties will have been able to give effect to the Measure within their own legal systems.  But by retaining a formal notification process (coupled with a regular review on progress at each ATCM), it would be clear which Parties were having difficulty in approving any particular Measure.
    17. The clear advantage of the tacit approval process in such cases is that the Measure in question would still enter into force on the agreed deadline and would thus be binding on all Parties. 
Decision vs Measure
    18. During the discussions at ATCM XXV some Parties questioned whether the introduction of a tacit approval mechanism should be by means of a Measure rather than a Decision.
    19. Given that all Measures are in effect ad referendum to Governments, Parties may gain a degree of comfort by requiring that such a significant change to the Treaty’s decision-making process is dealt with in this way.  However, the downside to this is that such a Measure could in itself take many years to come into force.  Thus the process would be rather self-defeating.
    20. Further, as pointed out in Working Paper 20 (ATCM XXV), the precedent has already been set by means of Decision 1, taken in 1995.  This provided for substantive changes to the ATCM’s regulatory making process, but by means of a Decision, rather than a Measure.

Conclusion
    21. In conclusion, there appears to be considerable virtue in improving the approval procedures of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  Under these procedures the current approval rate of Measures is poor and associated with considerable delay that does not contribute to effective regulatory powers under the Treaty.  It is suggested that a fast-tracking mechanism would address this problem and that the preferable way to introduce this would be by means of  a Decision.
Attachment A.

Approval of measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:
A Proposal to improve the system

Working Paper
Submitted by the United Kingdom to ATCM XXV (Warsaw)


Background

    1. The international governance of Antarctica is provided by measures adopted by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) under the procedures of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
    2. Article IX(1) provides for Parties to meet together for the purpose of, among other reasons, “recommending to their Governments, measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty”.
    3. Further Article IX(4) of the Treaty provides that “the measures referred to in paragraph 1 …shall become effective when approved by all Contracting Parties whose representatives were entitled to participate in the meetings to consider those measures.”
    4. Thus two fundamental principles of the Treaty are established.  Firstly that measures adopted at ATCMs are ad referendum to governments, and secondly that all relevant Consultative Parties must approve measures before they become effective; i.e. consensus is required both at adoption and approval.
    5. In practice the approval process requires Consultative Parties to take the necessary action within their national legal and administrative systems and then to notify the Depositary Government that they have approved the measure(s).
    6. Measures under Article IX took the form of Recommendations until 1995.  However, Recommendations adopted by the 18 ATCMs between 1961 and 1994 covered a broad range of matters, and no distinction was made between mandatory and exhortatory measures, i.e. those intended to be legally binding and those that were not.  
    7. In order to clarify the decision-making process of the ATCM, the ATCPs adopted Decision 1 (1995) at their XIXth meeting.  By means of this Decision measures were categorised into Measures, Decisions and Resolutions.  Resolutions cover all exhortatory texts; Decisions deal with internal organisational and procedural matters and become operative at adoption; Measures address provisions intended to become legally binding once approved by all ATCPs under the procedures of Article IX.   Since 1995, therefore, only Measures have needed to follow the Article IX process.
Effectiveness of the Article IX Process
    8. Since the Antarctic Treaty entered into force in 1961, 204 Recommendations and 20 Measures have been adopted by the ATCPs.  A total of 224 measures have therefore required approval under the Article IX procedure.  However, of these, only 131 have been approved.  93 have not, i.e. only 58% have become effective and entered into force.
    9. Further, the most recent meeting for which all Recommendations have become effective (i.e. all ATCPs entitled to attend the ATCM have approved the Recommendations) was ATCM XI, held in Buenos Aires in 1981.
    10. Since then, only one Recommendation has become effective, that being Recommendation XVI-10 (Annex V of the Environmental Protocol) that entered into force on 24 May 2002 – 11 years after it was adopted.
    11. But to what extent is this slow approval rate a problem?  As stated above the vast majority of earlier Recommendations were never intended to be legally binding.  So the fact that they may take many years to “become effective” makes little difference in practice.
    12. However, the rate of approval does matter for those texts that are intended to be legally binding. This would include, for example, Recommendation III – VIII covering the 1964 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Fauna and Flora; Recommendation XIV-2 dealing with the requirements for EIA; and Recommendations XV-3 and XV-4 dealing with waste disposal and prevention of marine pollution matters respectively.  The 11-year wait for Recommendation XVI-10 (Annex V) to enter into force created a number of procedural and administrative problems.  ATCPs were in effect running two parallel systems as they attempted to meet the requirements of Annex V ahead of its entry into force whilst the protected areas themselves were still held under a number of earlier Recommendations, including the 1964 Agreed Measures.
    13. A further example of the problems created by a lengthy approval period relates to Protected Area Management Plans.  Such Plans are intended to be legally binding.  Yet in a number of cases expiry dates for management plans have been extended, and management plans revised, without the original designating Recommendation ever entering into force (Appendix 1 provides an example).
    14. Looking to the future further problems can be foreseen.  Any Measures adopted in respect of, for example, the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, or further Annexes to the Protocol (e.g. a liability Annex) may take an appreciable amount of time to enter into force.
    15. So what conclusions might we draw?  Firstly, it is clear that the Article IX approval process remains extremely slow.  Indeed, as the number of ATCPs has grown the speed with which Recommendations and Measures have been approved has declined.  Secondly, a problem clearly lies with Governments unable to take the necessary action to approve the measures within their own legal and administrative systems in a timely way.
    16. In the light of this, it seems wholly appropriate for the ATCPs to consider whether the process might be improved and if so how.
Possible alternative procedures
    i. CCAMLR (a more recent treaty) has adopted a different approach in terms of the entry into force of its measures.  The formal decisions of CCAMLR are known as Conservation Measures (CMs).  CMs are adopted by the Commission under the provisions of Article IX of the Convention.
Once adopted, the Commission notifies the CMs to all its Members.  However, the key element of Article IX of the Convention is its tacit approval mechanism.  Article IX(6)(b) states that “conservation measures shall become binding upon all Members of the Commission 180 days after..[notification]...”  However, Article IX(6)(c) allows any Member a period of 90 days to notify the Commission if it is unable to accept the CM in whole or in part, in which case the CM shall not, to the extent stated, be binding upon that Member of the Commission (though it will be so for all other Members).
    ii. Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (which entered into force on 24 May 2002) encompasses a slightly different tacit approval process.  Articles 6(1) and 8(2) of Annex V provide for the approval of Measures for the adoption of ASMA management plans and new Historic Sites and Monuments respectively.  These Articles state that such measures, “shall be deemed to have been approved 90 days after the close of the ATCM at which [the Measure] was adopted, unless one or more Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to approve the measure.”
    iii. The amendment Articles of each of the Protocol’s Annexes also include a tacit approval mechanism.  These provide for each Annex to be amended by means of a measure adopted under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  These amendment clauses further state that amendments of the Annexes “shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the ATCM at which [the measure] was adopted, unless one or more ATCPs notifies the Depositary within that time period that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.”
    17. As such, these examples within the Antarctic Treaty System offer more streamlined or “fast-track” procedures for ensuring that mandatory measures become effective more rapidly.
Proposal
    18. Against this background, can a solution be found to accelerate the approval process of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty?
    19. It would be inappropriate to consider any modification to the Treaty itself on this matter.  Instead, it would be far preferable simply to modify the procedures and practices that relate to the approval of measures under Article IX.
    20. Indeed the precedent for such an approach has already been set.  By means of Decision 1 (1995) ATCPs decided that the measures to be recommended to their Governments under Article IX would be limited to those intended to be legally binding.  Decision 1 (1995) was therefore in the nature of a remedial measure - Article IX having been “misunderstood” and misapplied for many years.
    21. In that regard Decision 1 (1995) has been successful in improving the efficiency of the Antarctic Treaty’s decision-making procedures, and of clarifying the Article IX approval process.  Using Decision 1 (1995) as the precedent, it seems appropriate therefore for the ATCPs to consider whether additional procedural changes might further improve the decision-making system. 
    22. Decision 1 (1995) was explained by its proposers as an application of the rule in Article 31(3)(a) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969.  This provides that in interpreting a treaty account also must be taken of “any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions” (emphasis added).  Thus the agreement on how a treaty will be applied does not in itself have to be a treaty, it could be a document that merely expresses the “understandings” of the parties.
    23. Accordingly, further improvements to the procedures by which Measures become effective under Article IX of the Treaty could be achieved either by means of a Measure, or a Decision, or even by an interpretative understanding encompassed within the language of the Final Report of the ATCM.  The UK’s preference, however, would be to follow the precedent of Decision 1 (1995).
    24. It is therefore proposed that a more streamlined or “fast-track” mechanism should be introduced to approve measures adopted under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  The UK proposes that this can most appropriately be achieved through a further Decision.  This would introduce a tacit approval process for such measures.  A draft of such a Decision is attached at Appendix 2 for the Parties’ consideration.
Appendix 1.

Example of the difficulties generated by the slow rate of approval of Recommendations and Measures.

Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) adopted the management plan for SSSI 1, Cape Royds.
Recommendation XII-5 (1983) extended the expiry date for SSSI 1 to 31 December 1985.
Recommendation XIII-9 (1985) amended the management plan and extended the expiry date for SSSI 1 to 31 December 1995
Resolution 7 (1995) extended the expiry date for SSSI 1 to 31 December 2000.
Measure 2 (2000) extended the expiry date for SSSI 1 to 31 December 2005.
Cape Royds management plan is currently under review – the amended plan (revised in accordance with Annex V) may be adopted at ATCM XXV. 

The only one of the above Recommendations that has become effective under the procedures of Article IX of the Treaty is Recommendation VIII-4 (1975).  None of the others have so far been approved by all relevant Consultative Parties.
Appendix 2.

Approval of Measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
Draft Decision nn (2002).
The Representatives,
Conscious of the length of time that may occur between adoption and approval of Recommendations and Measures under the procedures of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty;
Aware that this rate of approval, and thus entry into force of Recommendations and Measures, may have a significant impact on the effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty;
Recalling Decision 1 (1995) on Measures, Decisions and Resolutions, which provided the basis for more effective decision-making under the Antarctic Treaty;
Desiring to accelerate the approval process whilst retaining the fundamental principle of consensus decision-making;
Decide:
    1. That all Measures adopted henceforth in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty, shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, [one year] after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary Government, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period, or is unable to approve the Measure;
    2. That paragraph 1 above shall not apply to Measures adopted in accordance with the following Articles of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty:

Article 8(1) of Annex I;
Article 9(1) of Annex II;
Article 13(1) of Annex III;
Article 15(1) of Annex IV;
Article 6(1), 8(2) and 12(1) of Annex V;

or to any other Measure which specifies otherwise.

