
ATCM XXVI
Working Paper 
Agenda Item: CEP 4g
New Zealand

Original: English














Review of the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft Management Plans for Protected Areas

Review of the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft Management Plans for Protected Areas




Background:

    1. Article 6(2) of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol requires that “no marine area shall be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area without the prior approval of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources”.
    2. For the purposes of implementing this requirement the ATCM and CCAMLR agreed, in 1998, the criteria to determine when draft management plans for protected areas containing a marine component should be forwarded to CCAMLR for its approval.  Decision 4 (1998) sets out these criteria.
    3. At CEP V the Committee agreed that it would be appropriate for the proponent to send relevant draft management plans directly to CCAMLR (through the Executive Secretary) for review.  Accordingly, New Zealand offered to revise the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft Management Plans for Protected Areas (Para 70 of the Final Report of CEP V refers).
    4. These guidelines were agreed by the CEP at its third meeting in 2000 and are appended in original form as Annex 4 to the Final Report of CEP III.
    5. To account for the requirement to engage CCAMLR in respect of management plans (for both ASPAs and ASMAs) containing a marine component, a revised version of the guidelines is attached to this Working Paper.  
    6. In addition to these changes, some minor re-drafting has been undertaken to improve the readability and clarity of the guidelines.  In particular, the guidelines explicitly note that CEP consideration of draft management plans for ASMAs should follow the same process as for ASPAs and that proponents should also forward draft management plans to SCAR.
    7. Proposed deletions (strikethrough) and additions (underlined) to the text of the guidelines are clearly marked.  The Committee is invited to review the proposed changes to the guidelines.

Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft ASPA and ASMA Management Plans for Protected Areas.


    1. Draft management plans (new or revised) shall should be submitted by the proponent to the CEP meeting for consideration at its next meeting.
    2. Draft management plans for proposed ASPAs or ASMAs should also be forwarded by the proponent to SCAR for its consideration.  For those areas that include a marine component, and which meet the criteria set out in Decision 4 (1998), draft management plans should be forwarded by the proponent to CCAMLR for its consideration.
    3. Proponents should submit draft management plans to the CCAMLR Secretariat by [mid-June] to ensure that CCAMLR has adequate time to review the draft plans and provide comments within the timetable of the CEP’s own review.  Draft management plan(s) may be submitted to CCAMLR ahead of submission to the CEP depending on the timing of the CEP meeting in any one year.
    4. At its meeting, the CEP shall should establish, as needed and in accordance with Rule 9 of its Rules of procedure, an open ended intersessional contact group to consider each draft management plan received.
    5. A coordinator for each contact group shall should be appointed by the CEP and should normally be from the Party proposing the draft management plan.
    6. The contact group(s) shall should operate in accordance with the guidelines noted in paragraph 9 of the Final Report of CEP I.
    7. In considering a draft management plan, contact groups shall should examine the content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness of the draft management plan and for draft ASPA plans should take into account the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2 (1998)).
    8. The outcome of each group’s deliberations, including any recommendations, and any comments provided by SCAR and CCAMLR shall should be reported to the next meeting of the CEP meeting by the coordinator.

