
SITE RECOMMENDED FOR INCLUSION IN THE LIST OF
HISTORICAL SITES AND MONUMENTS IN ANTARCTICA


Proposed site:     INDIA POINT, Humboldt Mountains, Wohlthat Massif, central  Dronning Maud Land.

Location:               7145' 08"S Latitude and 1112' 30"E Longitude

Description:     Memorial plaque erected in memory of three scientist of Geological Survey of India and a communication technician from Indian Navy - all members of ninth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, who died in this mountain camp in an accident on 8th January 1990.

Background        
         
               In pursuance of the scientific goals set for the Ninth Indian Antarctic Expedition to Antarctica, a mountain camp was established on 6th January 1990 to facilitate geological mapping of Humboldt Mountains and related studies. The following expeditioners inhabited the camp:
                         
                                  1.  V. K. Srivastava             33 Years        Geologist
                                  2.  B. L. Sharma                  46 Years        Geologist
                                  3.  A. K. Bedi                       42 Years        Geophysicist
                                  4.  N. C. Joshi                     27 Years        Naval Technician 

It was in the remote parts of the mountains in Central Dronning Maud Land, that camp inmates lost their lives on 8th January 1990 in a tragic incident of gas poisoning. Their bodies were discovered next day during a routine visit by the leader of the expedition and flown home after about a moth for necessary rituals. A black dolerite plaque engraved with the names of the departed was erected at the campsite in the memory of the dead in February 1991. The polar community and entire nation mourned their sacrifice in the cause and pursuance of science.

Aims and Objectives

Declaration of the site as historical aims at

    • Ensuring that the site of the tragic death is kept inviolate and preventing unnecessary human disturbance in the area.

    • Avoiding degradation of or substantial risk to the values of the area.

    • Allowing visits to the site for purposes in support of maintenance of the site and related work.
    • Allowing visits to the site for purposes in support of maintenance of the site and related work.

Management of the site

    • A detailed map showing the exact location of the mountain camp and the site of the commemorative plaque is prominently displayed at the Indian station "Maitri".

    • A sign displaying the historical importance of the area shall be properly placed and maintained near the site.

    • Periodical visits shall be made as necessary (at least once every three years) to assess the conditions of the plaque and the surrounding area.

Period of designation

      For an indefinite period.

Maps and photographs

    1. Topographic map (CI = 100m) of part of southern Humboldt Mountains near the site with inset showing approximate location index. The map is on 1:250000 scale published by Norwegian Polar Institute, Oslo, 1968. [Sheet No. L5 HUMBOLDTFJELLA]

    2. Enlarged portion of the area showing details of the site memorial plaque.

    3. Photograph of the plaque erected in the memory of the dead.

    4. Photograph of the persons who met the tragic ending at the campsite.

Description of the area

     The memorial plaque is constructed on the foothills of northwestern side of Flanuten peak in the southern Humboldt Mountains. The peak lies east of Somovken glacier in central Dronning Maud Land. The site is situated at an altitude of 1900m at 7145' 08"S Latitude and 1112' 30"E Longitude within the error limits of the manual observation. The accuracy of the exact location of the plaque remains pending till confirmation by GPS observations.

     The area is marked by high rising jagged peaks exhibiting typical Alpine topography. The hills that lie towards northeast, east and south of the site, rise to the altitudes varying between 2725 and 2855m above mean sea level. The maximum elevation (2855m) being east of Vindigghallet glacier. A number of mountain glaciers originate from these hills and descend towards west to join the Somovken glacier. Some of the prominent glaciers are Storeidet, Kvomskvervet, Skarskvervet, Livdebotmen and Vindigghallet glaciers. A prominent ice field with flat to very gentle slopes exists north of the site. Perched and erratic boulders and the moraine trails are evidence of the retreat of the mountain glaciers since last glacial maxima.


Geologically, the area around the site exposes Proterozoic metamorphic rocks bearing the imprints of Grenvillain and Pan-African orogenies. Gneissic rocks including Quartzofeldspthcic gneiss, quartz-biotite gneiss, garnet-sillimanite gneiss and sillimanite-cordierite gneiss dominates the area. Foliation parallel bands of 2-pyroxene granulites and calc-silicates run occur within the country gneiss. Late stage intrusives of pegmatite, quartz veins and basic dykes are frequently observed. The paragneisses exhibit khondalitic affinity. The rocks exhibit a polydeformational and polymetamorphic history with at least 3 major phases of folding with associated metamorphism.

Restrictions and permissions for activities conducted within the area

    • Entry into the area using vehicles will be restricted.

    • Introduction of any foreign material endangering the native flora and fauna will not be permitted.

    • All visits to the area for any purpose shall be made recognizing the values to be protected in the area.

    • Visits may be made to the area for necessary inspection, maintenance of the campsite, research and monitoring activities.













	

				
				
            































