
XXVI ATCM
Working Paper WP – 
Agenda Item 4 (a)
Netherlands, Australia
Original: English


Review of Measures Adopted by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings XIX to XXIV.

At ATCM XXV it was agreed (Decision 3 - 2002) to continue the informal review of measures adopted at ATCM I to ATCM XXIV, so that further consideration could be given to measures that may be considered spent, superseded or otherwise obsolete.  

To assist this process a review has been undertaken of measures, decisions and resolutions adopted by ATCM XIX to ATCM XXIV. The results of this assessment are provided in a separate Information Paper.  This means that all Recommendations, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions adopted from ATCM I to ATCM XXIV, as well as relevant instruments such as the Madrid Protocol, have now been examined.  In doing this the following terminology has been used for assessing the possible status of the measures: 
    • spent - where action required in the measure had to occur by a particular meeting or date, and this has been passed; 
    • superseded - where the purpose or intent of the measure has been dealt with in a subsequent recommendation or instrument; 
    • obsolete - where the purpose or intent of the measure no longer exists; and 
    • ongoing - where the measure is still valid.  
It should be noted that measures that have been classed as ongoing have not been included in the Information Paper except in those instances where a measure is partly spent or superseded, and partly ongoing.
 
In relation to measures concerning area protection and management, it will be recalled that with the approval of Annex V all Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are, in accordance with Article 3.3 of Annex V of the Protocol automatically designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.  In effect this means that the initial recommendation/measure establishing the protected area has become superseded and it may only be necessary to retain the latest management plan for each protected area.  
 
To aid the decision-making process, The Netherlands has established a database containing the full text of all ATCM Recommendations, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions from ATCM I to XXIV, together with information on topics and status of approval.  Reports from this database will be available at ATCM XXVI to assist consideration this issue.  

As the review of measures from ATCM I – XVIII was not completed at ATCM XXV it is proposed that the review of these measures be continued, together with those measures approved from ATCM XIX – XXIV.  It is proposed that a similar approach is taken to that used at ATCM XXV, where Consultative Parties convened informally to work out a specific list of measures that are clearly obsolete.  

As noted at ATCM XXV there is no intent that this review result in any change in the legal force of past ATCM measures — the intention is only to clarify where action may no longer be required by the Parties on specific measures.  

Attached to this Working Paper is a draft Decision which, if adopted, will recognise the current status of measures adopted by ATCM I to XXIV.



Draft Decision ?  (2003)

Status of measures adopted by the ATCM 



The Representatives,

Conscious of the significant number of measures, including Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and Decisions adopted by previous Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings;

Recognising that some of these measures are spent as a result of the passing of a specific event, or of time; or have become superseded, or otherwise replaced by subsequent recommendations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings; or have become obsolete as the purpose for which they were passed no longer exists; 

Considering that it is prudent from time to time to identify measures that may not require further action by the Parties; and

Considering also that it is it desirable to make it easy for new Parties to the Treaty to understand their obligations;
	
Decide that,

    • the measures listed in Annex A can be considered to be spent, superseded or obsolete and, as such, these measures will require no further action by the Parties. 




*Note: measures previously adopted under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty were described as recommendations up to ATCM XIX (1995).





