

ATCM XXVI 
Working Paper WP-?
Agenda Item 4(b)
Argentina/Australia

Original:  English





















Draft Staff Regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
























Submitted by Argentina /Australia





Draft Staff Regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

At the first informal consultations on the Secretariat, held in Buenos Aires in June 2002, consideration was given to draft staff regulations based on those in use by the CCAMLR Secretariat.

An amended paper, which included comments received from Parties during the intersessional period, was subsequently submitted as a working paper to ATCM XXV.  

A number of Parties provided comments on the draft regulations and these were annotated as footnotes to the paper which was submitted for consideration at the second informal consultations on the Secretariat, held in Buenos Aires from 1-4 April this year. 

A version with further amendments reflecting those discussions appeared as Annex 5 to the Chairman’s report of those consultations.

Parties were invited to provide further comments on the draft regulations prior to 16 April 2003 to allow further consideration of this issue at ATCM XXVI.  

The attached paper reflects the outcome of the discussions held at the Second Informal Consultations as well as the additional comments subsequently provided by a number of Parties.  These comments have been annotated as underlined footnotes in the attached document.
 
It should be noted that the attached document has been compiled to assist consideration of this issue at ATCM XXVI.  It does not necessarily represent the final views of either Argentina or Australia.

   





STAFF REGULATIONS
Explanatory Note: 
The following document contains text agreed to at the second informal meeting held in Buenos Aires 1-4 April 2003, text that was included in the Chairman’s Report from the second  informal meeting, as well as comments received from New Zealand, Norway, South Africa and the USA following the informal meeting, which have been annotated as footnotes. All additional text emanating from and subsequent to the second informal meeting is shown as underlined text in this document.
Bold text in footnotes: indicates additional text that Parties have suggested be included
Italics in footnotes: these are comments added by Australia when compiling Parties’ comments  

The Chairman’s Report of the Second Informal Meeting on the Establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat contained the following text which is relevant to discussion of these regulations:
The Legal Contact Group met and analysed articles 1 and 2 of the Staff Regulations.  The discussion focused specially on the definition of “dependant.”  Consensus was reached on a partial redrafting of Regulation 2.2. Minor changes relating to gender equality were made throughout the text.  Some parties elaborated a new proposal on Regulation 2 based on the deletion of the reference to the Secretariat Staff as “international civil servants.”  Although broad consensus emerged as to the need to eliminate such reference, due to lack of time to discuss the proposal in detail, the Chair decided, with the agreement of the members of the group, to include the following proposal in this Report: 
“REGULATION 2
DUTIES, OBLIGATIONS AND PRIVILEGES
2.1 Staff members, upon accepting their appointments, shall pledge themselves to discharge their duties faithfully and to conduct themselves with the interests of the ATCM in mind.
2.2 Staff members shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner in keeping with the Antarctic Treaty. They shall always bear in mind the loyalty, discretion and tact imposed on them by their responsibilities in the performance of their duties. They shall avoid all actions, statements or public activities which might be detrimental to the ATCM and its aims.
2.3 Staff members are not required to renounce either their national feelings or their political or religious convictions.
2.4 In the performance of their duties, staff members may neither seek nor accept instructions from any government or authority other than the ATCM123.
2.5 Staff members shall observe maximum discretion regarding official matters and shall abstain from making private use of information they possess by reason of their position. Authorisation for the release of information for official purposes shall lie with the ATCM or the Executive Secretary, as the case may require.
2.6 4Staff members shall, in general, have no employment other than with the Secretariat. In special cases, staff members may accept other employment, provided that it does not interfere with their duties in the Secretariat, and that prior authorisation by the Executive Secretary has been obtained. The ATCM’s prior authorisation shall be obtained5 in respect of the Executive Secretary.
2.7 No staff member may be associated in the management of a business, industry or other enterprise, or have a financial interest therein if, as a result of the official position held in the Secretariat, he/she may benefit from such association or interest.
2.8 Ownership of non-controlling stock in a company shall not be considered to constitute a financial interest within the meaning of Regulation 2.7.
2.9 Staff members 6shall enjoy the privileges and immunities to which they are entitled under the Headquarters Agreement7 between the Argentine Republic and the Secretariat8, (pursuant to Article ____ of Measure ____ (2002)).”


REGULATION 1
PREAMBLE
1.1 These Staff Regulations establish the fundamental principles of employment, regulate the working relationships and establish the rights and dutiesresponsibilities of members of the staff of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, and the Executive Secretary (thehereinafter called  S‘staff members’) who render their services in and receive remuneration from 9the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (hereinafter called ‘the Secretariat’). 
(1.2 These Regulations should be applied giving due regard to the geographical distribution of the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.) 10
REGULATION 211
DUTIES, OBLIGATIONS AND PRIVILEGES
2.1 Staff members  are international civil servants12. Upon accepting their appointments they shall pledge themselves to discharge their duties faithfully and to conduct themselves with the interests of the ATCM in mind.13 14
2.2 15For the purposes of these regulations the term ‘dependant’ shall include only16:17 18 19
(a) any unsalaried child, who is born of, or adopted by, a staff member, hishis/her spouse, or their children, who is below the age of eighteen years and who is dependent on a staff member or hishis/her20 spouse for main and continuing support;
(b) any child fulfilling the conditions laid down in paragraph (a) above, but who is between eighteen and twenty-five years of age and is receiving school or university education or vocational training;
(c) any handicapped child who is dependent on a staff member or hishis/her spouse for main and continuing support;
(d) any other child who is given a home by and is dependent on a staff member or hishis/her spouse for main and continuing support;
(e) any person related by blood or marriage, [or any spouse or partner], for whose main and continuing support a staff member or hishis/her spouse [or partner] is legally responsible. 2122 23
2.3 Staff members shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner in keeping with the24 international nature of the ATCM. They shall always bear in mind the loyalty, discretion and tact imposed on them by their international25 responsibilities in the performance of their duties. They shall avoid all actions, statements or public activities which might be detrimental to the ATCM26 and its aims27.
2.4 Staff members are not required to renounce either their national feelings28 or their political or religious convictions29.
2.5 In the performance of their duties, staff members may neither seek nor accept instructions from any government or authority other than the ATCM303132 33.
2.6 Staff members shall observe maximum discretion regarding official matters and shall abstain from making private use of information they possess by reason of their position. Authorisation for the release of information for official purposes shall lie with the ATCM or the Executive Secretary, as the case may require34.
2.7 35 36Staff members shall, in general, have no employment other than with the Secretariat. In special cases, staff members may accept other employment, provided that it does not interfere with their duties in the Secretariat, and that prior authorisation by the Executive Secretary has been obtained. The ATCM’s prior authorisation shall be obtained37 in respect of the Executive Secretary.
2.8 No staff member may be associated in the management of a business, industry or other enterprise, or have a financial interest therein if, as a result of the official38 position held in the Secretariat, hehe/she39 may benefit from such association or interest40.
2.9 Ownership of non-controlling stock41 in a company shall not be considered to constitute a financial interest within the meaning of Regulation 2.8.
2.10 Staff members 42shall enjoy the privileges and immunities to which they are entitled under the Headquarters Agreement43 between the Argentine Republic and the Secretariat44 45, (pursuant to Article ? of Measure? (2002)).
REGULATION 346
HOURS OF WORK
3.1 The normal working day shall be eight hours, Monday to Friday, for a total of forty hours per week.
3.2 The Executive Secretary shall establish the working hours, and may alter them for the benefit of the  ATCM47, as circumstances may require.
REGULATION 4
CLASSIFICATION OF STAFF48
4.1 Staff members shall be classified in either of the two following categories:
(a) Executive Category
Positions of high responsibility of an executive nature. These posts will be filled by appropriately qualified professionals, preferably with University49 qualifications or the equivalent. Staff members in this category will be recruited internationally but only among citizens of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCP)50.
(b) General Staff Category
All other staff, including translators, technical, 51administrative and auxiliary positions. Such staff members shall be recruited in Argentina from among citizens of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCP).  
4.2 Persons employed under Regulation 11 shall not be classified as staff members.
REGULATION 552
SALARIES AND OTHER REMUNERATION53
545.1 The scale of salaries for staff members in the executive category shall be established in US dollars according to the corresponding scales of salaries which would apply to officials of the United Nations Secretariat55 56 employed in Argentina and shall be paid in Argentine currency57  58.
5.2 Staff members in the general category shall, in principle59, be paid according to an appropriate level of the United Nations Development Program60 salaries scales in Argentina,
5.3 The type of allowances available to staff members in the executive category shall, in principle61, be those allowances in force in the United Nations62. The scale of allowances shall be established in US dollars according to the corresponding scales of allowances which would apply to officials of the United Nations Secretariat in Argentina and shall be paid in Argentine currency. However, education allowances for each dependent child shall not be paid:
(a) in respect of children of Argentine staff members; 
(b) in respect of attendance at an Argentine public (State) school; 
(c) for attendance at a University in Argentina; 
(d) for correspondence courses or private tuition; 
(e) when schooling does not require regular attendance at an education institution; 
(f) in respect of education expenses covered from scholarship grants or subsidies from other sources.
5.463 Except for the maximum figure for education allowance, changes in salaries and allowances applied in the United Nations Secretariat64 shall be applied to the salaries and allowances of staff members in the executive category. The ATCM shall review the system of applying these changes to salaries and allowances periodically.
5.5 65The promotion of the Executive Secretary from one salary scale66 to another requires the prior approval of the ATCM.  Promotion of all other executive staff will be approved by the Executive Secretary67.
5.6 The salaries of staff members in the executive category shall begin at Step 1 of the United Nations classification at which they are appointed. They shall remain at that level for at least the first year of employment.
5.76869 The Secretariat shall levy from the salaries of staff members in the executive category an amount for Staff Assessment. Staff Assessment rates shall be those in force in the United Nations.70
5.8 The Executive Secretary shall make arrangements to ensure that any staff member in the executive category who is subject to national income tax is reimbursed tax paid on hishis/her71 salary. Such arrangements shall be made only on the basis that the direct costs of reimbursement are paid by the staff member’s home country.
Staff members in the general category will be responsible for the payment of national income tax on their salaries.
5.972 Staff members in the executive category shall receive annual increments, subject to satisfactory performance of their duties73. Increments shall cease once the staff member has reached the highest step in the grade in which hehe/she74 is serving.
Staff members in the general category shall receive annual increments in accordance with the conditions of their contract.
5.10 Only in very special cases, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary and with the approval of the ATCM, may a staff member in the Executive category be appointed at a salary higher than Step 1 of the relevant category.
5.11 Staff members in the executive category are not entitled to overtime pay or compensatory leave.
5.12 Staff members in the general category required to work more than 40 hours during one week will be compensated:
(a) with compensatory leave equivalent to hours of overtime performed; or
(b) by remuneration per overtime hour, to be estimated75 at the rate of time and a half, or if the additional time is worked on a Sunday, or on holidays listed in Regulation 7.8, at the rate of double time.
5.13 The ATCM shall pay duly justified representation expenses incurred by the Executive Secretary in the performance of hishis/her76 duties within the limits prescribed annually in the budget.




REGULATION 6
RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT77
6.1 In accordance with Article ? of Measure ? (2002), the ATCM shall appoint78 an Executive Secretary and shall establish the remuneration and such other entitlements as it deems appropriate. The Executive Secretary’s term of office shall be for four years and the Executive Secretary shall be eligible for reappointment for one additional term. The total length of employment may not exceed eight years79  80.
6.2 In accordance with Article, ______? of Measure_____ ? (2002) the Executive Secretary shall appoint, direct, and supervise staff members81. The paramount consideration in the appointment, transfer or promotion of staff members shall be the necessity for securing82 the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity.  Due consideration should be given to recruiting staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible among Parties83.
6.3 Offers of appointment to the Secretariat are subject to the persons selected undergoing a medical examination and presenting a certificate stating that they have no medical condition which might prevent them from performing their duties, or which might endanger the health of others.
6.4 Upon selection, each staff member shall receive an offer of appointment stating:
(a) that the appointment is subject to the staff regulations applicable to the category of appointment in question, and to changes which may be duly made in such regulations from time to time;
(b) the nature of the appointment;
(c) the date on which the staff member is required to commence duty;
(d) the period of appointment, the notice required to terminate it and the period of probation;
(e) for executive staff, the category, level, commencing rate of salary and the scale of increments and the maximum salary attainable; and for general staff the category at which they will be employed and the salary to be paid;
(f) the allowances attached to the appointment;
(g) any special terms and conditions which may be applicable.
6.5 Together with the offer of appointment, staff members shall be provided with a copy of these Regulations. Upon acceptance of the offer staff members shall state in writing that they are familiar with and accept the conditions set out in these Regulations.
6.6 Staff members in the executive category may be required to undergo further medical examination from time to time as determined by the Executive Secretary or the ATCM as the case may require. The medical examinations shall be at the expense of the Secretariat.
REGULATION 7
LEAVE
7.1 Staff members shall be entitled to annual leave at the rate of two workdays for each completed month of service. Annual leave is cumulative, but at the end of each calendar year, not more than 3084 workdays may be carried over to the following year85.
7.2 The taking of leave shall not cause undue disruption to normal Secretariat operations. In accordance with this principle, leave dates shall be subject to the needs of the ATCM. Leave dates shall be approved by the Executive Secretary who shall, as far as possible, bear in mind the personal circumstances, needs and preferences of staff members.
7.3 Annual leave may be taken in one or more periods.
7.4 Any absence not approved within the terms of these Regulations shall be deducted from annual leave.
7.5 Staff members who, upon termination of their appointment, have accumulated annual leave which has not been taken shall receive the cash equivalent estimated on the basis of the last salary received to a limit of 30 days.
7.6 After 18 months of service the Secretariat shall, in accordance with Regulations 9.3 and 9.4, pay travel expenses to the staff member’s home country on annual leave for internationally recruited staff members and their dependants. Following this, home leave shall be granted at two-year intervals provided that:
(a) dependants who benefit from this grant have resided at Buenos Aires for at least 6 months prior to travel;
(b) it is expected that staff members will return to the Secretariat to continue rendering their services for a minimum additional period of 6 months.
7.7 The possibility of combining travel to home country on leave with official travel in Secretariat service may also be considered provided the functions of the Secretariat are not disadvantaged.
7.8 Staff shall be entitled to the holidays celebrated traditionally in Buenos Aires, i.e.: 
Fixed Holidays

1 January	New Year’s Day
	Good Friday
	Easter Sunday
01 May	National Holiday
25 May	National Holiday
9 July	National Holiday
8 December	Immaculate Conception
25 December	Christmas Day

Moveable Holidays

02 April	National Holiday
20 June	National Holiday
17 August	National Holiday
12 October	National Holiday

No Workable Immovable Holiday

	Holy Thursday


7.9 If under special circumstances members of the staff are required to work on one of the aforementioned days, or if any one of the above holidays falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the holiday shall be observed on another day to be set by the Executive Secretary, who shall take into account the efficient functioning of the Secretariat.
REGULATION 8
SOCIAL SECURITY
8.186 It is a condition of employment that each staff member will contribute to a recognised retirement fund and have adequate medical, hospital, life and disability insurance cover to the satisfaction of the Executive Secretary. Such insurance cover shall include adequate provision for dependants. 
For staff in the Executive category the Secretariat shall pay two-thirds of the total contribution to the retirement fund and of the insurance premiums, up to the maximum percentage currently applied in the United Nations Secretariat87 to the total of the staff member’s salary and salary related allowances88 89. Such payment shall be by way of reimbursement upon the production of receipts, or shall be paid direct together with the employee’s contribution.  Staff members in the general category shall be responsible for the full payment of contributions to their retirement fund and insurance premiums90.  
8.2 [Reserved]
8.3 Staff members shall not be granted sick leave for a period of more than three consecutive days and more than a total of seven working days in any calendar year without producing a medical certificate.
8.4 Staff members shall be granted certified sick leave not exceeding 12 months in any four consecutive years. The first six months shall be on full salary and the second six months on half salary, except that no more than four months on full salary shall normally be granted in any period of 12 consecutive months. 91 92
8.5 After one year of employment in the Secretariat staff members shall be entitled to maternity93 leave. On the basis of medical advice that the confinement will probably take place within six weeks, staff members shall be entitled to be absent from duty until eight weeks after confinement94. During this period staff members shall receive full pay and corresponding allowances.
[INSERT NEW PARAGRAPH]95
8.6 In the event of death of a staff member following illness or surgery not resulting from an accident covered by the appropriate insurance, the right to salary, allowances and other corresponding benefits shall cease on the day on which death occurs, unless the deceased leaves dependants, in which case these shall be entitled to mortality allowances96 97 and return travel and removal expenses to country of origin or former residence at the expense of the Secretariat.
8.7 Eligibility of the98 dependants of a deceased staff member for the payment of return travel and removal expenses shall lapse if the travel is not undertaken within six months of the date of the staff member’s death.
8.8 The above mortality allowance for death shall be calculated in accordance with the following scale: 99

Months of Net Base Pay
Years of Service
Salary Following Death
Less than 3 years
3 months
3 years and more, but less than 7 years
4 months
7 years and more, but less than 9 years
5 months
9 years and more
6 months
8.9 The Secretariat shall pay100 for shipment of the staff member’s body from the place of death to the place designated by the next of kin.





REGULATION 9
TRAVEL
9.1 101All official travel shall be authorised by the Executive Secretary in advance within the limits of the budget, and the itinerary and travelling conditions shall be those best suited for102 maximum effectiveness in the fulfilment of duties assigned.
9.2103 With regard to official travel, a travel allowance shall be paid in advance for fares104, accommodation, and daily living expenses.  , For staff members in the executive category it will be generally consistent with United Nations105 practice, and for staff members in the general category it will be generally consistent with UNDP practice in Argentina106 107.  
9.3 Economy class shall be utilised, wherever feasible, for air travel. 108 109
9.4 First class may be utilised for land travel110, but not for travel by sea or air.
9.5 Following completion of a duty journey, staff members shall repay any travel allowances to which, in the event, they were not entitled. Where staff members have incurred expenses above and beyond those for which travel allowances have been paid, they shall be reimbursed, against receipts and vouchers, as long as such expenses were necessarily incurred in pursuit of their official duties.
9.6 On taking up an appointment in the Executive Category staff members shall be eligible for:
(a) payment of economy class air fares (or equivalent) and travel allowance111  for themselves, their spouses and dependants to Buenos Aires;
(b) an Installation Grant112 calculated113 on the basis of the prevailing United Nations rate114;
(c) payment of removal costs, including the shipment of personal effects and household goods from place of residence to Buenos Aires, subject to a maximum volume of 30 cubic metres or one international standard shipping container;
[NEW PARAGRAPH]115 116
(d) payment or reimbursement of sundry other expenses related to relocation, including insurance of goods in transit and excess baggage charges subject to the prevailing relevant United Nations rules. Such payments shall be subject to prior approval by the Executive Secretary.
9.7 Staff members who, in the course of their duty, are required to use private motor vehicles for official travel purposes shall, with the prior authorisation of the Executive Secretary, be entitled to receive a reimbursement of the reasonable costs involved as determined by the Executive Secretary117 118.  The costs associated with normal daily travel to and from the place of work shall not be reimbursed.
REGULATION 10
SEPARATION FROM SERVICE
10.1 Staff members may resign at any time upon giving three months notice or such lesser period as may be approved by the Executive Secretary (in the case of staff other than the Executive Secretary) or the ATCM in the case of the Executive Secretary.
10.2 In the event of a staff member resigning without giving the required notice the Executive Secretary (in the case of staff members other than the Executive Secretary) or the ATCM in the case of the Executive Secretary reserves the right to decide whether repatriation expenses or any other allowance shall be paid.
10.3 Appointment of staff members may be terminated upon prior written notice at least three months in advance, by the Executive Secretary when hehe/she119 deems this to be for the benefit of the efficient functioning of the Secretariat due to restructuring of the Secretariat or if hehe/she120  considers that the staff member does not give satisfactory service, fails to comply with the duties and obligations set out in these Regulations, or is incapacitated for service121.
10.4 In the event of separation from service with the Secretariat122, executive staff members shall be compensated at a rate of one month base pay for each year of service123 124, beginning the second year, unless the cause of termination has been gross dereliction of duties imposed in Regulation 2. 
In the event of involuntary termination of the appointment of a general staff member, he/she shall be paid the outstanding amount of his/her contract except when the Executive Secretary considers that the staff member has not given satisfactory service, fails to comply with the duties and obligations set out in these Regulations, or is incapacitated for service. 

10.5 On separation from service, an executive staff member shall, subject to Regulation 10.6 below, be entitled to the following:
(a) payment of economy class air fares (or equivalent) to the staff member’s country of origin or former residence, for the staff member and dependent members of hishis/her125 family;
(b) payment of removal costs, including the shipment of personal effects and household goods from place of residence in Buenos Aires to the country of origin or former residence, subject to a maximum volume of 30 cubic metres or one international shipping container;
(c) a repatriation allowance generally consistent with United Nations practice126, 127 128.
10.6 At the discretion of the Executive Secretary, the right to the repatriation expenses provided for in Regulation 10.5 may be cancelled or reduced appropriately if:
(a) less than one129 year has elapsed between the date of taking up the appointment and the date of separation from service130;
(b) the reason for separation from service was termination of employment due to gross dereliction of duty;
(c) more than six months has elapsed between the staff member’s separation from service and hishis/her131 return to hishis/her132 country of origin or former residence;
(d) less than six months has elapsed since the staff member last visited hishis/her133 country of origin or former residence on home leave at the expense of the Secretariat; or
(e) the staff member has applied for or received status as a permanent resident of Argentina.
REGULATION 11
TEMPORARY PERSONNEL UNDER CONTRACT134
11.1 The Executive Secretary may contract temporary personnel necessary to discharge special duties of a short term nature in the service of the Secretariat. Short term shall be defined as a contract lasting less than six months.  Such personnel shall be classified as additional help and may be paid on an hourly basis.
11.2 Persons in this category may include additional135 translators, interpreters, typists, and other persons contracted for meetings, as well as those whom the Executive Secretary contracts for a specific task. Whenever possible, persons resident in Argentina shall be utilised in such cases136.
REGULATION 12
APPLICATION AND AMENDMENT REGULATIONS
12.1 Any doubts arising from application of these Regulations shall be resolved by the Executive Secretary following consultation with the ATCM.
12.2 All matters not foreseen in these Staff Regulations shall be brought to the attention of the ATCM by the Executive Secretary.
12.3 Subject to the provisions of the Convention137 138, these Regulations may be amended by the ATCM in accordance with its Rules of Procedure.



