
ATCM XXVI
Working Paper WP-?
Agenda Item 4(b)
Argentina/Australia

Original:  English





















Draft Financial Regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
























Submitted by Argentina /Australia


Draft Financial Regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

At the first informal consultations on the Secretariat held in Buenos Aires in June 2002 consideration was given to draft financial regulations based on those in use by the CCAMLR Secretariat.  

An amended paper, which included comments received from Parties during the intersessional period, was subsequently submitted as a working paper to ATCM XXV.  It was agreed that Australia and Argentina would coordinate intersessional consultations on this paper with other Parties in advance of a second informal consultations.

A number of Parties provided comments on the draft financial regulations and these were annotated as footnotes to the paper which was submitted for consideration at the second informal consultations on the Secretariat, held in Buenos Aires from 1-4 April this year. 

A version with further amendments reflecting those discussions appeared as Annex 4 to the Chairman’s report of those consultations.

Parties were invited to provide further comments on the draft financial regulations, as presented in Annex 4, to Argentina and Australia prior to 16 April 2003 to allow further consideration of this issue at ATCM XXVI.  

The attached paper reflects the outcome of discussions held at the Second Informal Meeting as well as the additional comments subsequently provided by a number of Parties following the meeting.  These comments have been annotated as underlined footnotes in the attached document.
 
It should be noted that the attached document has been compiled to assist consideration of this issue at ATCM XXVI.  It does not necessarily represent the final views of either Argentina or Australia.

   















Draft Financial Regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat


Explanatory Notes:
The following document contains text agreed to at the second informal meeting held in Buenos Aires 1-4 April 2003, as well as comments received from Norway and the USA following the informal meeting, which have been annotated as footnotes.   All additional text emanating from and subsequent to the second informal meeting is shown as underlined text in this document.
Underlined text in the body of the document also indicates text that Australia included when amending the CCAMLR regulations for use by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.  The comments in boxes to the right of the document have been provided by Australia to assist consideration of this document.  These boxes also show where text was deleted at the second Informal Meeting.
Bold text in footnotes: indicates additional text that Parties have suggested be included.



General Comments Provided by Spain
  
Basically, the Draft reproduces the Financial regulations adopted by CCAMLR when this Organization was established in the eighties; only relatively  minor modifications have been introduced to the text.

In order to evaluate this Draft and better understand the difficulties some ATCM Parties may have when dealing with the financial issue, it is useful to recall that CCAMLR Financial Regulations were designed taking into account that a “Standing Committee on Administration and Finance” would be set up. Both are mentioned in the CCAMLR Convention text.  This text also fixes the procedure for approval of the different matters dealt with by CCAMLR.

On the other hand, the most important chapter in the annual CCAMLR budget is the one which corresponds to the Scientific Committee.  This Committee takes up more than 50 % of the total budget of the Organisation. In this context, the setting up of special funds is important for the financing of activities which are not foreseen in the ordinary yearly budget.

This is a different situation from that of the Antarctic Treaty, whose text carries no mention to financial matters.  The Treaty only defines the procedure for approval of the measures which it listes, among which no financing measures can  be identified.

It also has to be taken into account that the budget which is to be governed by the Draft Financial Regulations deals mainly whith the ordinary functioning of the Treaty Secretariat, and therefore the establishment of special funds is not relevant here.
In this framework, and due to the nature itself of ATCM, some Parties may not wholly understand the need, for example, of establishing a permanent Finance Committee, or otherwise the general complexity of the financial system of a Secretariat of this nature.

Consequently, it would be useful to consider the Draft “Financial Regulations” in accordance with the kind of Finance Committee we are looking to establish and therefore, to clarify and simplify as much as possible the articles of its text, incorporating into them those aspects which do  not appear in the Antarctic Treaty text, such as  a reference to the approval procedures of a budget.

The model which is most  adjusted to the described requirements would be that of a set of Financial Regulations which would  include the establishment of a Committee of finance and administration of a non permanent nature. The Regulations could then have either one of the following titles: “Rules for a Finance and Administration Committee” or: “Finance and Administration Regulations”. Some international organisations have adapted their financial operations to a  simpler scheme, like the one we have attempted to explain.

 General Comments Provided by Japan

(1) Japan considers the adoption of the budget by consensus in ATCM is of utmost importance.  While this principle should be provided in the legal instrument establishing the Secretariat, we strongly support the provision in draft Regulation 3.7.

(2) While Japan understands that this draft Regulations is based on that of CCAMLR, the reference to “members” or “non-members” (e.g. draft Regulations 5.1, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 6.1, 6.2, 7.2, 10.2, 11.1, 11.6) should be deleted and replaced by “Consultative Parties,” “non-Consultative Parties,” or “Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty,” depending on the context.

(3) Japan considers that the content of the Financial Regulations should be consistent with the content and the form of the legal instrument establishing the Secretariat.  Since the latter instrument is still under negotiation, Japan confirms that the following comments and the pursuing discussion will not prejudice the content and/or the form of the legal instrument establishing the Secretariat.

General Comments Provided by Norway

In general Norway cautions against the automatic import of provisions from other treaty based financial regulations such as CCAMLR Financial Regulations.  Lacking such a treaty base for the setting up of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat requires the careful modelling of specific and simple solutions adapted to the status, functions and needs of this particular secretariat.

FINANCIAL REGULATIONS
REGULATION 1
APPLICABILITY
1.1 These Regulations shall govern the financial administration of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (hereinafter referred to as 1‘the Secretariat2’) established under Measure ______? (2003) of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (hereinafter referred to as ‘the ATCM’).
REGULATION 2
FINANCIAL YEAR
2.1 The financial year shall be for 12 months commencing 1 JanuaryApril and ending 31 March December, both dates inclusive.
REGULATION 3
THE BUDGET
3.1 A draft budget comprising estimates of receipts by the Secretariat and of expenditures by the Secretariat shall be prepared by the Executive Secretary for the ensuing financial year.
3.2 The draft budget shall include a statement of the significant financial implications for subsequent financial years in respect of any proposed work programs presented3 in terms of administrative, recurrent and capital expenditure.
3.3 The draft budget shall be divided by functions into items and, where necessary or appropriate, into sub-items.4
3.4 The draft budget shall be accompanied by details both of the appropriations made for the previous year and estimated expenditure against those appropriations, together with such information annexures as may be required by Parties Members of the ATCM or deemed necessary or desirable by the Executive Secretary. The precise form in which the draft budget is to be presented shall be prescribed by the ATCM.
3.5 The Executive Secretary shall submit the draft budget to all Members Parties of the ATCM at least 60 days prior to the annual meeting of the ATCM, as provided for in Measure _____? (2003). 5At the same time, and in the same form as the draft budget, hethe Executive Secretary shall prepare and submit to all MembersParties  of the ATCM a forecast budget for the subsequent financial year.
3.6 The draft budget and the forecast budget shall be presented in [Argentine peso]67.
3.7 8At each annual meeting, the ATCM shall adopt by consensus tthe budget for the Secretariat9.10  The budget shall be treated as a matter of substance and decisions shall be taken by consensus.  In determining the size of the budget, the ATCM shall adhere to the principle of cost-effectiveness.11

REGULATION 4
APPROPRIATIONS
4.1 The appropriations adopted by the ATCM shall constitute an authorisation for the Executive Secretary to incur obligations and make payments for the purposes for which the appropriations were adopted12.
4.2 13Unless the ATCM decides otherwise, the Executive Secretary may also incur obligations against future years before appropriations are adopted when such obligations are necessary for the continued effective functioning of the Secretariat, provided such obligations are restricted to administrative requirements of a continuing nature not exceeding the scale of such requirements as authorised in the budget of the current financial year. In other circumstances the Executive Secretary may incur obligations against future years only as authorised by the ATCM.  All forward commitments to be identified in annual budgets presented to the ATCM.
4.3 Appropriations shall be available for the financial year to which they relate. At the end of the financial year all appropriations shall lapse. Commitments remaining undischarged against previous appropriations at the end of a financial year shall be carried over and be included in the budget for the next financial year, unless the ATCM otherwise decides.
4.414   15The Chairman* of the ATCM may authorise the Executive Secretary to make transfers of up to 10 per cent of appropriations between items. 16The Chairman of the Standing Committee on Administration and Finance17 may authorise the Executive Secretary to make transfers of up to 10 per cent of appropriations between categories within sub items and/or indivisible items. The Executive Secretary may authorise the transfer of up to 10 per cent of appropriations between sub items of an item. All transfers must be reported by the Executive Secretary to the next annual meeting of the ATCM. The Executive Secretary may make transfers within each of the main appropriation lines of the approved budget.  The Executive Secretary may also make transfers between such appropriation lines [up to limits, which the ATCM may set as appropriate] [up to [10] [20] % of the appropriation lines] 18.  The transfers authorised under this regulation shall not result in overall increase in the budget above that approved by the ATCM, nor will they result in an increased expenditure in future years.
(Suggested replacement for para 4.4) The Executive Secretary may transfer funds between items in accordance with guidelines agreed by the ATCM from time to time.
* Refers to the Chairman of the most recent ATCM meeting
4.5 The ATCM shall prescribe the conditions under which unforeseen and extraordinary expenses may be incurred.
REGULATION 5
PROVISION OF FUNDS
5.1 Each Member (including Consultative Partyies and Non-consultative Parties) of the ATCM shall contribute to the budget in accordance with the scale determined in Decision Article ?________ of Measure ? (2003)1920  21.
5.2 Staff Assessment Levy paid by a staff member of the Secretariat shall be regarded by the ATCM as payment towards the annual budget contribution for the year.
5.3 2 On approval of the budget for a financial year, the Executive Secretary shall send a copy thereof to all Parties Members of the ATCM notifying them of their contributions and requesting them to remit their contributions due. A Consultative Party (CP) Member of the ATCM that fails to pay its contributions for two consecutive years shall not, during the period of its default, have the right to participate in the taking of decisions in the ATCM (this includes Measures, Decisions and Resolutions of the ATCM)22  2324 25.
5.43 All contributions shall be made in [Argentine peso or the equivalent amount in United States dollars]26.
5.4 27 Contributions from States that become Consultative Parties after the beginning of the financial period shall be made pro rata temporis for the balance of the financial period.
(a) A new Consultative Party Member of the ATCM whose accession membership becomes effective during the first six months of the financial year shall be liable to pay the full amount of the annual contribution . A new Consultative Party whose accession membership becomes effective during the last six months of the financial year, shall be liable to pay half of the amount of the annual contribution referred to above. In the first financial year of the establishment of the Secretariat all Parties whose membership becomes effective during the first nine months of the year shall be liable to pay the full amount of the annual contributions. A Member whose membership becomes effective during the last three months of the first financial year shall be liable to pay half the amount of the first annual contribution;
(b) Where contributions are received from new Members the contributions of existing Members shall be adjusted in accordance with Regulation 6.1(d).
5.5628 Except in the first financial year when contributions shall be paid within 90 days of the end of the first ATCM meeting, contributions shall be due for payment on the first day of the financial year (i.e. the due date) and shall be paid not later than 60 days after that date. The ATCM has the authority to permit extensions to the due date of up to 90 days for individual PartiesMembers who are unable to comply with this regulation due to the timing of the financial years of their governments29. However, in the case referred to in Regulation 5.5(a), contributions by a new Party Member shall be made within 90 days following the date on which its accessionmembership becomes effective. If payment is made after the due date in United States dollars30, the net payment received by the Secretariat shall be equivalent to the amount of Argentine pesos payable on the due date.
5.67 The Executive Secretary shall acknowledge pledges and contributions immediately upon receipt.  The Executive Secretary shall report to each meeting of the ATCM on the receipt of contributions and the position of arrears. shall report to each meeting of the ATCM on the receipt of the contributions and the position of arrears.31
REGULATION 6
FUNDS
6.1 32 33(a) There shall be established a General Fund for the purpose of accounting for the income and expenditure of the Secretariat;
(b) Contributions paid by MembersParties under Regulation 5.1 and miscellaneous income to finance general expenditure shall be credited to the General Fund; 
(c) Advances made by Parties Members shall be carried to the credit of the PartiesMembers which have made such advances.
6.2 (a) 34 35There shall be established a Contingency Fund for the purpose of receiving funds and making payments for purposes not foreseen in the regular budget of the Secretariat. 
(b) Any cash surplus in the General Fund at the close of a financial year that is not required to meet undischarged commitments in terms of Regulation 4.3 shall be forwarded to the Contingency Fund.  This provision shall not apply at the end of the first financial year when surplus funds other than those resulting from contributions by new PartiesMembers may be carried over into the following financial year;
(c) Where contributions are received from new PartiesMembers after the commencement of the financial year and such funds have not been taken into account in formulating the budget these shall also be placed in the Contingency Fund.  
6.3 Trust and Special Funds may be established by the Secretariat at the direction of the ATCM for the purpose of receiving funds and making payments for purposes not covered by the General or Contingency funds of the Secretariat36.
REGULATION 7
OTHER INCOME
7.1 37 38All income other than contributions to the budget under Regulation 5 and that referred to in Regulation 7.3 below, shall be classified as Miscellaneous Income and credited to the Contingency Fund39. The use of Miscellaneous Income shall be subject to the same financial controls as activities financed from regular budget appropriations.
7.2 Voluntary contributions above and beyond PartiesMembers’ budget contributions may be accepted by the Executive Secretary provided that the purposes for which the contributions are made are consistent with the policies, aims and activities of the ATCM40. Voluntary contributions offered by non-PartiesMembers may be accepted, subject to agreement by the  ATCM that the purposes of the contribution are consistent with the policies, aims and activities of the ATCM.
7.3 Voluntary contributions shall be treated as Contingency41 Funds under Regulation 6.2.

REGULATION 8
CUSTODY OF FUNDS
8.1 The Executive Secretary shall designate a bank or banks in which the funds of the Secretariat shall be kept and shall report the identity of the bank or banks so designated to the ATCM.
8.2 (a) The Executive Secretary may make short-term investments of moneys not needed for the immediate requirements of the Secretariat. Such investments shall be restricted to securities and other investments issued by institutions or Government bodies with current ratings, provided by a rating body approved by the Secretariat’s auditor, indicating a strong capacity to pay. The details of investment transactions and income derived shall be reported in the documents supporting the budget;
(b) With regard to moneys held in Contingency42, Trust or Special Funds for which use is not required for at least 12 months, longer-term investments may be authorised by the ATCM provided such action is consistent with the terms under which the moneys were lodged with the Secretariat. Such investments shall be restricted to securities and other investments issued by institutions or Government bodies with current ratings, provided by a rating body approved by the Secretariat’s auditor, indicating a strong capacity to pay.
8.3 Income derived from investments shall be credited to the Fund from which the investment was made.
REGULATION 9
INTERNAL CONTROL
9.1 The Executive Secretary shall:
(a) establish detailed financial rules and procedures after consultation with the external auditor to ensure effective financial administration and the exercise of economy in the use of funds43;
(b) cause all payments to be made on the basis of supporting vouchers and other documents which ensure that the goods or services have been received and that payment has not previously been made;
(c) designate officers who may receive moneys, incur obligations and make payments on behalf of the Secretariat; and
(d) maintain and be responsible for internal financial control to ensure:
(i) the regularity of the receipt, custody and disposal of all funds and other financial resources of the Secretariat;
(ii) the conformity of obligations and expenditures with the appropriations adopted by the annual meeting; and
(iii) the economic use of the resources of the Secretariat.
9.2 No obligations shall be incurred until allotments or other appropriate authorisations have been made in writing under the authority of the Executive Secretary.
9.3 The Executive Secretary may propose to the ATCM, after full investigation by him/her, the writing off of losses of assets, provided that the external auditor so recommends. Such losses shall be included in the annual accounts.
9.4 Tenders in writing for equipment, supplies and other requirements shall be invited by advertisement, or by direct requests for quotation from at least three persons or firms able to supply the equipment, supplies, or other requirements, if such exist, in connection with all purchases or contracts, the amounts of which exceed $2,000 (Argentine pesos). For amounts exceeding $500 (Argentine pesos), but less than $2,000 (Argentine pesos), competition shall be obtained either by the above means or by telephone or personal enquiry. The foregoing rules, shall, however, not apply in the following cases:
(a) where it has been ascertained that only a single supplier exists and that fact is so certified by the Executive Secretary;
(b) in case of emergency, or where, for any other reason, these rules would not be in the best financial interests of the Secretariat, and that fact is so certified by the Executive Secretary.
REGULATION 10
THE ACCOUNTS
10.1 The Executive Secretary shall ensure that appropriate records and accounts are kept of the transactions and affairs of the Secretariat and shall do all things necessary to ensure that all payments out of the Secretariat’s moneys are correctly made and properly authorised and that adequate control is maintained over the assets of, or in the custody of, the Secretariat and over the incurring of liabilities by the Secretariat.
10.2 The Executive Secretary shall submit to the PartiesMembers of the ATCM, not later than 31 March immediately following the end of the financial year, annual financial statements showing, for the financial year to which they relate:
(a) the income and expenditure relating to all funds and accounts;
(b) the situation with regard to budget provisions, including:
(i) the original budget provisions;
(ii) the approved expenditure in excess of the original budget provisions;
(iii) any other income;
(iv) the amounts charged against these provisions and other income;
(c) the financial assets and liabilities of the Secretariat;
(d) details of investments44;
(e) losses of assets proposed in accordance with Regulation 9.3.
The Executive Secretary shall also give such other information as may be appropriate to indicate the financial position of the Secretariat. These financial statements shall be prepared in a form approved by the ATCM after consultation with the external auditor.
10.3 The accounting transactions of the Secretariat shall be recorded in the currency in which they took place but the annual financial statements shall record all transactions in Argentine pesos.
10.4 Appropriate separate accounts shall be kept for all Contingency45, Special and Trust Funds.
10.5 The annual financial statements shall be submitted by the Executive Secretary to the external auditor in accordance with Article ? of ATCM Measure ? (2003) at the same time as they are submitted to PartiesMembers of the ATCM under paragraph 2 of this Regulation46.
REGULATION 11
EXTERNAL AUDIT
11.1 The ATCM shall appoint an external auditor who shall be the Auditor-General or equivalent statutory authority from a Member of the ATCM and shall serve for a term of two years with the possibility of re-appointment. The ATCM will ensure respect for the external auditor’s independence of the Secretariat, and the Secretariat’s staff, fix the terms of office, appropriate funds to the external auditor and may consult him/her on the introduction or amendment of any financial regulations or detailed accounting methods as well as on all matters affecting auditing procedures and methodology.
11.2 The external auditor or a person or persons authorised by him/her shall be entitled at all reasonable times to full and free access to all accounts and records of the Secretariat relating directly or indirectly to the receipt or payment of moneys by the Secretariat or to the acquisition, receipt, custody or disposal of assets by the Secretariat. The external auditor or a person or persons authorised by him/her may make copies of or take extracts from any such accounts or records.
11.3 If required by the ATCM to perform a full audit, the external auditor shall conduct his/her examination of the statements in conformity with generally accepted auditing standards and shall report to the ATCM on all relevant matters, including:
(a) whether, in his/her opinion, the statements are based on proper accounts and records;
(b) whether the statements are in agreement with the accounts and records;
(c) whether, in his/her opinion, the income, expenditure and investment of moneys and the acquisition and disposal of assets by the Secretariat during the year have been in accordance with these Regulations; and
(d) observations with respect to the efficiency and economy of the financial procedures and the conduct of business, the accounting system, internal financial controls and the administration and management of the Secretariat.
11.4 If required by the ATCM to perform a review audit, the external auditor shall review the statements and accounting controls in operation. HeThe Executive Secretary shall report to the ATCM whether anything has come to his/her attention which would cause him/her to doubt whether:
(a) the statements are based on proper accounts and records;
(b) the statements are in agreement with the accounts and records; or
(c) the income, expenditure and investment of moneys and the acquisition and disposal of assets by the Secretariat during the year have been in accordance with these Regulations.
11.5 The Executive Secretary shall provide the external auditor with the facilities he/she may require in the performance of the audit.
11.6 The Executive Secretary shall provide to the PartiesMembers of the ATCM a copy of the audit report and the audited financial statements within 30 days of their receipt.
11.7 The ATCM shall, if necessary, invite the external auditor to attend discussions on any item under scrutiny and consider recommendations arising out of his/her findings.
REGULATION 12
ACCEPTANCE OF ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
12.1 The ATCM shall, following consideration of the audited annual financial statements and audit report submitted to its PartiesMembers under Regulation 11.5 of these Regulations, signify its acceptance of the audited annual financial statements or take such other action as it may consider appropriate.
REGULATION 13
INSURANCE
13.1 The Secretariat may47 take out suitable insurances with a reputable financial institution against normal risks to its assets.
REGULATION 14
GENERAL PROVISION
14.1 Subject to the provisions of the Convention48, tThese Regulations may be amended by a Decision of the ATCM in accordance with its Rules of Procedure.
14.2 Where the ATCM is considering matters which may lead to a decision which has financial or administrative implications, it shall have before it an evaluation of those implications from the Executive Secretary.

49 50

