
Committee for Environmental Protection

Intersessional Contact Group to consider the draft CEE for the ANDRILL Program (New Zealand)

Convenor’s Report

1.	Background

In March 2003 an intersessional contact group was established at the request of New Zealand and in accordance with the CEP’s operational procedures, to consider the draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the ANDRILL Program. The draft CEE was foreshadowed at CEP V (para 34 of the CEP V Final Report refers).

The CEP Chairman notified Contact Points of the availability on the CEP website of the draft CEE in Circular XX/2003, and of the ICG formation in Circulars XX and XX.

The ICG was convened by Dr Ian Goodwin of the University of Newcastle, Australia.  Dr Goodwin’s credentials include convening the Global Change in Antarctica program (GLOCHANT).   New Zealand, Australia, and SCAR took part in the ICG.

This report sets out the terms of reference, a summary of comments received, and the ICG conclusions.  Participants’ comments are attached in full at Appendices A and B.


2.	Terms of Reference

The ICG adopted the terms of reference (TOR) set suggested by the CEP operational procedures, namely:

    • The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.

    • Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.

    • The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.

and at the suggestion of New Zealand, the following additional terms:

    • The extent and manner in which cumulative impacts have been considered especially given the multi-site nature of the project and the time period over which activities will be carried out.  

    • The consideration of sewage disposal options in the draft CEE.

    • The likelihood of unforeseen impacts occurring in the future and procedures to address these (especially given the length of the project (10 years) and the nature of the uncertainties identified).

No further terms of reference or modifications were suggested by ICG participants.


3.	Comments received	from the two ICG participants.

3.1	The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.

One participant notes that the draft CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Madrid Protocol.  They suggest the inclusion of a contingency plan to deal with the risk of a sea-ice break-out, and that the document could assess alternative sites that might need to be used should the ice prove inadequate to support the drill rig.  

One participant did not address this TOR.


3.2	Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.

One participant considers that the impacts were well identified, but does not comment as to whether their analysis is substantiated by the information contained in the document.

One participant does not address this TOR specifically, but offers an expert technical opinion to the effect that the potential environmental impacts of the drilling process are adequately identified and addressed, and the conclusions sustainable.


3.3	The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.

One participant notes that the draft CEE provides a clearly presented and comprehensive evaluation of the proposed activity.

One participant did not address this TOR.


3.4	The extent and manner in which cumulative impacts have been considered especially given the multi-site nature of the project and the time period over which activities will be carried out.  

One participant observes that several potential causes of cumulative impacts have been identified, and that it would be prudent to include more information on the proposed environmental inspection/auditing program in the final CEE.  They specifically support the suggested independent audit report to the CEP.

One participant did not address this TOR.


3.5	The consideration of sewage disposal options in the draft CEE.

One participant suggests that it would be preferable for all human waste, including grey water from support and drill camps to be suitably filtered or treated before disposal to the ocean.

One participant did not address this TOR.


3.6		The likelihood of unforeseen impacts occurring in the future and procedures to address these (especially given the length of the project (10 years) and the nature of the uncertainties identified).

One participant notes the desirability of minimising the environmental impacts by monitoring and incorporating technological advances that may occur during the life of the activity.

One participant did not address this TOR.


3.7	Additional comments.

The comments received from SCAR are of a technical nature directed principally at drilling aspects of the activity which the draft CEE identifies as potential sources of environmental impact.  Those comments suggest, as is noted at TOR 2 above, that the drilling impacts are dealt with satisfactorily in the document, and further suggest the use of an airgun to reduce the impacts of the vertical seismic profiling (VSP) process.


4.	Conclusions

The draft CEE for the ANDRILL program meets the requirements of the Madrid Protocol.

Particular aspects of the program might be modified to improve the environmental outcome, in particular the primary treatment of sewage and the use of an air gun for the VSP.


Appendix A
 SCAR comments.


COMMENTS ON ANDRILL CEE

Philip O’Brien, Chief Office, SCAR Geoscience SSG

ANDRILL is an important initiative for the Geoscience community and will provide a major focus for research into past climates and environmental change. The ANDRILL CEE is a wide ranging documentation of possible impacts and mitigation measures for the ANDRILL Project. These comments are mainly directed to possible impacts of drilling and noise in the marine environment. The extensive experienced gained from the Cape Roberts and Dry Valley Drilling Projects means that the proponents are well qualified to manage risks associated with the project. Other potential impacts such as those involving waste management seem likely to be more significant than those involved in drilling but are not in my field of expertise and should be assessed by others.

Drilling Impacts

Pressured formation fluids – The escape of high pressure formation fluids including hydrocarbons has always been a focus of drilling safety technology. ANDRILL plans to make use of more than adequate measures to prevent any problems with suitable site survey, monitoring and remedial measures on stand by. Experience with the Ocean Drilling Program has shown that site surveying and monitoring are sufficient to avoid problem. ANDRILL has a further level of safeguards in place.

Drilling mud contamination – The ANDRILL mud system is a closed one that aims to recycle and recover drilling mud. Some will be lost during spudding but the area affected will be small (~3 m2). Biodegradable mud additives have been selected so spudding and accidental spills would have minimal and short term effects.

Cuttings disposal – The method for disposal of cuttings involves progressive release of finely ground rock into the water column. This will produce short term increases in suspended sediment concentrations around the drill site but should produce no measurable effect on the environment. 

Noise issues

Measurements of underwater noise produced by drilling show that the noise levels vary depending on the platform used with drill ships being the louder than semi submersibles or jack up rigs. Even then, drilling noise is, at most, comparable or less than ship noise. Some avoidance of drilling noise by some whales has been observed (Richardson et al., 1995). Drilling on the ice shelf should impart very little noise to the marine environment whereas drilling on sea ice seems likely to be louder. However, the rig to be used in ANDRILL is much smaller than the petroleum rigs that have been monitored so noise levels are likely to be very low during ANDRILL operations. The CEE authors observed Weddell Seals close to the Cape Roberts operations, probably because of breathing holes made available by operations. Likelihood of any disturbance to marine mammals is very low.

Explosives for cutting casing and for Vertical Seismic Profiling (VSPs) have potential to injure mammals in the immediate area. These explosives will be used only once or twice during each drilling program so the problem is probably manageable with the measures set out in the CEE and used at Cape Roberts i.e. provision of alternative breathing holes to lure Weddell seals away from the site and a mammal watch before firing. Some consideration could be give to using an airgun for the VSP as airguns have lower source levels and longer rise time than explosives and are thus less damaging.

Conclusion

The ANDRILL project is a very important. The impact management and mitigation measures proposed for drilling and noise are adequate to ensure negligible environmental impact from those aspects of the operations. 

Philip O’Brien

Reference
Richardson, W.J., Greene, C.R.Jr., Malme, C.I. and Thomson, D.H., 1995. Marine mammals and noise. Academic Press, San Diego, 576 pages






Appendix B
Australian comments

Comments by Australia on the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for:
ANDRILL-McMurdo Sound Portfolio


1.	The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex 1 of the Environmental Protocol

Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on the draft CEE.  The draft CEE conforms very well with the requirements of Article 3 of Annex 1 of the Environmental Protocol.  The following few comments relate to some of the information that we suggest could make further improvements to the CEE.

Because the drilling is to take place on fast sea-ice, it might be prudent to establish contingency plans in case there is break-up of the ice near the rig, and for retrieval of associated gear if it needs to be moved from the sea-ice in a hurry.  It might also be useful to advise the audience whether there are alternative sites if the sea-ice at the two sites (NH and MSV) does not prove to be thick enough.

Most of our environmental management expectations have been addressed in this very thorough evaluation, and can be dealt with by vetting procedures similar to those followed by the Ocean Drilling Program's Pollution Prevention and Safety Panel. These include the deployment and recovery of casings and risers, drilling muds, and handling of radionuclide sources in downhole logging tools.  These risks have been thought out and anticipated as well as possible.  We suggest that the proponent consider including an automatic shut off system as a safety feature for the drilling system (page 67).

Other risks and impacts relate to camp operations and are generic to any support camp operation in the Antarctic (fuel transport and storage, human waste handling).  These are well treated in the CEE.

2.	Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document

We consider that the main environmental impacts and potential risks associated with the proposed drilling activity and associated logistic support have been identified in the draft CEE.  The suggested management measures should enable the environmental impacts of the activity to be maintained at a minor and short term level and should enable the potential for more major impacts to be avoided or mitigated, as is the conclusion reached by the draft CEE.

3.	The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE

The draft CEE provides a clearly presented and comprehensive evaluation of the proposed activity.

4.	The extent and manner in which cumulative impacts have been considered especially given the multi-site nature of the project and the time period over which activities will be carried out.  

We note the several potential causes of cumulative impacts resulting from the activity have been identified (page 127).  It would be helpful to include more information on the proposed environmental inspection/auditing program in the final CEE (page 136), and monitoring for cumulative impacts may be considered as part of this process.  We encourage the idea of an independent auditor visiting the activity and reporting to the CEP.

5.	The consideration of sewage disposal options in the draft CEE.

The discussion of alternative options for human waste disposal (page 81-83) shows a well researched attempt to find ways to minimise environmental impacts.  However, we consider that it would be preferable for all human waste, including grey water, from support and drill camps to be suitably filtered or treated before disposal to the ocean or to station.

6.	The likelihood of unforeseen impacts occurring in the future and procedures to address these, especially given the length of the project (10 years) and the nature of the uncertainties identified.

Where environmental management approaches remain technically uncertain, contingency plans should be put in place to deal with the likely predicted environmental impacts from the activity.  As identified in the CEE, a major concern is the damage to the marine environment that may occur from disposal of drill cuttings and drill ‘mud’ to the sea floor, and discharge of grey water into the marine environment.  All efforts should be made to minimise these impacts, particularly if technological advances over the next ten years make possible the disposal of this waste in a more environmentally acceptable manner. 



