
DRAFT wWorking paperPaper: Whalers Bay Historic Site No. 71
Submitted by: Chile, Norway and the UK


Summary
Chile, Norway and the UK propose, in accordance with Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, to modify the extent and description of HSM No. 71 to include all pre-1970 remains and historical values at Whalers Bay. This will comprise the remains of the early whaling period initiated by the Norwegian Captain Adolfus Amandus Andresen, founder of the Chilean Sociedad Ballenera de Magallanes (1906-1912), the period of operation of the Norwegian whaling station Hektor (1912-1931), the period of pioneering Antarctic aviation (1929-35) and the period of British scientific and mapping activity (1944-1969).   

It is is  also proposed that:

    • - HSM No.’s 31 and 58 be removed from the List of Historic Sites and Monuments as they no longer exist;


    • - the values represented by these sites be included in a revised description of HSM No. 71. 


Background
Currently there are three sites/monuments at Whalers Bay included in the “List of Historic Monuments Identified and described by the Proposing Government or Governments” annexed to Recommendation VII-9 (List of Historic Sites and Monuments). 

These sites/monuments are described in the list as: 

31. Memorial plaque marking the position of a cemetery on Deception Island (Lat 62°59'S, Long 60°34'W) where some 40 Norwegian whalers were buried in the first half of the twentieth century. The cemetery was swept away by a volcanic eruption in February 1969.

58. Cairn with memorial plaque erected at Whalers’ Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands in the vicinity of the whalers’ cemetery (Historic Monument No. 31) 62°59'S, 60°34'W, to honour Captain Adolfus Amandus Andresen, Antarctic pioneer who was first to establish a whaling operation at Deception Island in 1906.

71. Whalers Bay Whaling Station, Whalers Bay, Deception Island. Established in 1906 by Captain Adolfo Andresen. Of historical importance as an example of an Antarctic whaling station. 

Brief overview of historic activity and associated remains at Whalers Bay  
During the 1906-07 austral summer, the Norwegian Captain Adolfus Amandus Andresen, founder of the Sociedad Ballenera de Magallanes, Chile, initiated whaling operations at Deception Island. Whalers Bay served as a sheltered anchorage for factory ships that processed whale blubber. In 1908 a cemetery was established. When the cemetery was destroyed by a volcanic eruption in 1969, it comprised 35 burials and a memorial to nine ten men whose bodies were not recovered. In 1912, a Norwegian company established a shore-based whaling station at Whalers Bay. Hektor whaling station was operational until 1931.

During the 1943-44 austral summer, a small British base (Base B) was established in part of the abandoned whaling station. This scientific station operated until 1969, when it was severely damaged by a mud and ash flow caused by a volcanic eruption, at which time it was abandoned. 

At Whalers Bay, there are a number of remaining structures and artifacts from the whaling activity that took place in the area between 1906-1931, including a floating dock, fuel and whale oil tanks, steam boiler tanks and cookers, winches, foundations of the blacksmith and carpentry workshop and the piggery; the accommodation barracks (subsequently renamed Biscoe House), the Magistrate’s villa, and a hospital building, later used as a store. Remains of wells, coal stacks, wooden and corrugated iron huts, water barges and rowing boats, wooden barrels and ‘spacers’ for cooking whale meat are found around the buildings and along the shoreline.

Little is visible of the whalers’ cemetery except for one coffin, which has come to the surface, and the cross of a Norwegian carpenter, Peder Knapstad, who was buried in the cemetery in 1931. This cross was recovered and re-erected in 2002. A further cross, which was arbitrarily erected to the west of the cemetery at the request of the family of the Norwegian Hans Albert Gulliksen, one of those buried in the cemetery, will be relocated to the site of the cemetery. 

Additional historic structures from the period of British scientific and mapping activity at the site include a wooden building constructed by Hunting Aerosurveys Ltd. in 1955/56, an extension to Biscoe House that serves as a generator shed, and an aircraft hangar constructed in 1960/61. The fuselage of a single-engined De Havilland Otter, and a Massey Fuergeuson Tractor, are also among the remains of this period. 

The buildings, structures and artifacts associated with the whaling period (1906-1931) represent the most significant whaling remains in the Antarctic and are legally protected as HSM No. 71 under the Antarctic Treaty. 

Base B was the first base established by the secret British World War II expedition, Operation Tabarin. Its historic importance was recognized by a conservation survey of abandoned British bases on the Antarctic Peninsula undertaken in 1995 by the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust. 

Proposal
Chile, Norway and the UK propose, in accordance with Resolution IV (1996)1 and Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, that the scope of HSM 71 is revised to include all pre-1970 historic remains and values on the shore of Whalers Bay. 

Concurrently, it is proposed that HSMs No. 31 and 58 be removed from the List of Historic Sites and Monuments. The values that these monuments represented are retained in the revised description of HSM No. 71, and may be further commemorated by the installation of appropriate plaques at Whalers Bay. 

A draft Measure to that effect is attached to a further Working Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection entitled Review of the List of Historic Sites and Monuments. The revised description of HSM No. 71 contained therein, put forth jointly by Chile, Norway and the UK, readsThe revised description of HSM No. 71 reads: 

71. Whalers Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands (62°59'S, 60°34'W). The site comprises  allcomprises all pre-1970 remains on the shore of Whalers Bay, including those from the early whaling period (1906-12) initiated by Captain Adolfus Andresen of the Sociedad Ballenera de Magallanes, Chile; the remains of the Norwegian Hektor Whaling Station established in 1912 and all artefacts associated with its operation until 1931; the site of a cemetery with 35 burials and a memorial to nine ten men lost at sea; and the remains from the period of British scientific and mapping activity (1944-1969). The site also acknowledges and commemorates the historic value of other events which occurred there, from which nothing remains. 



