
ATCM XXVI
Working Paper
Agenda Item: 7 
NEW ZEALAND

Original: English












CHAIRMAN’S DRAFT OF ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

“LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES”












Chairman’s Draft Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

“Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies”


Working Paper
New Zealand



30 April 2003 


Dear Colleague


At the conclusion of our discussions in Warsaw I said that I would update my personal Chairman’s text of a Draft Annex on Environmental Liability and would circulate it prior to the Madrid meeting.   An advance copy of this is now enclosed for your consideration.   The text is also being provided to the Spanish authorities for translation and issuing as a formal conference document for the forthcoming ATCM.

For planning purposes I should also let you know that the discussion on Liability will take place during the second week of the ATCM.   This is to accommodate the wishes of some colleagues to discuss matters relating to the Secretariat during the first week.   It also avoids a clash with the meeting of Law of the Sea States Parties, which could have been problematic for some colleagues.   I hope though that those colleagues who are also present during the first week of the ATCM will be able to use that opportunity for informal contact on liability issues in the corridors.

Meeting during the second week does however increase the pressure on us to make real progress in the time available, and I would ask colleagues to come to the Madrid meeting well prepared to discuss and make substantial progress on the relatively few key issues which remain outstanding.   

As regards the enclosed text, changes have been identified in bold typescript so as to facilitate your consideration of them in advance of the meeting.

I would draw to your attention the following aspects of the enclosed text:

    • Article 1 on scope is revised to incorporate the language discussed in the informal contact group on this during the Warsaw meeting.   As reflected in the text, there is an outstanding issue regarding the possible coverage of accidents involving fishing vessels, which we need to resolve at the Madrid meeting.
    • In Article 2 containing definitions, “operator” has been revised to incorporate the language discussed in the informal contact group on that issue at Warsaw.   The broadened application of the definition of “reasonable” reflects the fact that the term is used in other parts of the text as well, not just in Article 2(d).
    • In Article 6(2) on liability, the revised language makes a better linkage with the language in the latter part of the paragraph, and also avoids an unproductive argument over what is “possible”. 
    • Article 7 on actions for compensation is revised to reflect the discussion in the informal contact group on that issue at Warsaw, including several options in respect of paragraph 2, and a possible additional subparagraph to paragraph 5.   Further discussion will be required to finalise this article at Madrid, and in this respect I would draw to your attention the footnotes to it which are found in WP50 from the Warsaw Meeting (which annexes the informal contact groups’ texts).
    • Article 11 on insurance has been revised to make clearer that governments may self-insure.
You will recall that, at the conclusion of our discussions in Warsaw, Mr Francois Alabrune, the convenor of the informal contact group on Article 7, had agreed to receive comments and suggestions by email during the intersessional period.   His email contact details are francois.alabrune@diplomatie.gouv.fr   Mr Rene Lefeber also agreed to maintain email contact with delegations regarding a number of practical issues arising out of the draft Annex (paragraph 95 of the Final Report refers).   You should have received an email from Mr Lefeber (rene.lefeber@minbuza.nl) on 16 April raising specific issues and inviting comments and suggestions.   

For my part, I have been in touch with the P&I Club, and hope that a representative will be able to join us for a discussion on insurance issues, which is of course one of the practical questions at the heart of the draft Annex.

As regards preparation for the Madrid ATCM, I would ask that colleagues come to the meeting well prepared to discuss – and resolve – the following outstanding issues in particular:

    • Scope (Article 1), i.e. whether the Annex should apply to environmental emergencies involving fishing vessels 
    • Actions for Compensation (Article 7)
    • More broadly, the practical issues identified by Rene Lefeber
    • Limits on Compensation (Article 9)
    • Insurance (Article 11)
    • Environmental Protection Fund (Article 12)
    • Amendment or Modification (Article 13)
Moreover, while I am aware that there are fundamental difficulties of principle for some delegations regarding paragraph 3 of Article 6 on Liability, I should be grateful if all delegations would consider how such an approach might work in practice, and whether it or a variation could be constructed in such a way as to overcome those difficulties.   As I see it this would, amongst other things, require us to quantify in advance the amount of liability which would be incurred in any given situation.

Should you want to get in touch with me before the Madrid meeting, or to give me any feedback, my email address is:

don.mackay@mfat.govt.nz

I look forward to seeing you in Madrid.

Kind regards





Don MacKay


				

Revised Draft
30 April 2003 

Chairman’s personal draft

DRAFT ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL     PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES

	The States Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
	Recognising the importance of preventing, minimising and containing damage to the Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems;
	Further recognising the desirability of establishing a legal regime to deter States and operators from causing such damage;
	Recalling Article 16 of the Protocol under which the Parties undertook to elaborate, in one or more Annexes to the Protocol, rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol;
	Further recalling the priority accorded to scientific research and to preserving the value of the Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research in (…) the Protocol
	Noting the desire of the Parties to take action to promote environmental protection in the Antarctic Treaty area by mandating certain steps concerning prevention of damage, contingency planning and liability, with a view to further steps being taken in these areas in the future by the Parties,
	Have agreed as follows:

Article 1
Scope

	This Annex shall apply to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty Area which relate to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities, and to measures and plans for preventing and responding to such emergencies.  

Optional additional sentence:   It shall also apply to environmental emergencies which arise from activities covered by the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals or the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, where the accidental event is not itself regulated by those Conventions. 

Article 2
Definitions

For the purposes of this Annex:

(a)	“Agreed Measures” means measures adopted pursuant to Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty;

(b)	“Environmental Emergency” means any accidental event that results in, or imminently threatens to result in, any significant and harmful impact on the Antarctic environment;

(c)	“Operator” means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non -governmental, which organises or carries out activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area (…).   “Operator” does not include a natural person unless that person is the organiser of the activity.   When the term “operator” is used in conjunction with “Party”, it means an operator which is subject to the laws and regulations of that Party, including the laws and regulations implementing the Protocol.

(d)	“Response action” means reasonable measures to prevent, minimise or contain the impact of an environmental emergency, which may include clean-up in appropriate circumstances, and including determining the extent of that emergency;

(e)	“Reasonable” (…) includes objective criteria such as the risk to the Antarctic environment (…), the rate of its natural recovery, any risk to human life and safety, technological and economic feasibility, practicality and proportionality.

Article 3
Preventative Measures

1.	Parties shall require operators to undertake reasonable preventative measures that are designed to reduce the likelihood of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.

2.	Preventative measures may include:

a.	specialised structures or equipment incorporated into the design and construction of facilities and means of transportation;
b.	specialised procedures incorporated into the operation or maintenance of facilities and means of transportation; and
c.	specialised training of personnel.

Article 4
Contingency Plans

1.	Parties shall require operators to 

a.	establish contingency plans for responses to incidents with potential adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems; and
b. 	cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such contingency plans.

2.	Contingency plans shall include, as appropriate, the following components:

a.	procedures for conducting an assessment of the nature of the incident;
b.	notification procedures;
c.	identification and mobilisation of resources;
d.	response plans;
e.	training;
f.	record keeping;
g.	demobilisation.

3.	Parties shall establish and implement procedures for immediate notification of, and cooperative response to, environmental emergencies, and shall promote the use of notification procedures and cooperative response procedures by operators which cause environmental emergencies.

Article 5
Response Action

1.	Parties shall require their operators to take prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies arising from their activities.

2.	In the event that prompt and effective response action is not taken, the Party of that operator and other Parties shall endeavour to take such action, including through their agents and operators acting under their control.

3.	Other Parties taking response action shall consult the Party of the operator beforehand, unless threat to the environment is imminent and it would be unreasonable in all the circumstances not to take immediate action.

4.	Parties taking response action shall consult and coordinate their action with all other affected Parties to the extent feasible, and shall take into account relevant guidance provided by expert groups including observer delegations to the Antarctic Treaty consultative Meeting, such as COMNAP and SCAR.

Article 6
Liability

1.	An operator shall be liable to pay the costs of response action taken by other Parties pursuant to Article 5(2).

2.	When prompt and effective response action should have been taken but was not, the operator shall be liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken, into the Environmental Protection Fund established in Article 12.

3.	Where prompt and effective response action was not possible, and the resultant harmful impact on the Antarctic environment is significant and lasting, the operator shall be liable to make payment to the Environmental Protection Fund in accordance with Agreed Measures to be developed and adopted.   The amount of such payment shall take into account:

i	the nature and significance of the harmful impact, as assessed by expert groups such as SCAR;

ii	the extent to which the activity was in furtherance of the conduct of scientific research in accordance with the priority given it by Article 3(3) of the Protocol;

iii	the extent to which fault on the part of the operator contributed to the environmental emergency;

4.	Liability under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be strict.

5.	When an environmental emergency arises from the activities of two or more operators they shall be jointly and severally liable, provided that an operator which establishes that only part of the environmental emergency results from its activities shall be liable in respect of that part only.

6.	Notwithstanding that a Party is liable under this article for its failure to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships or aircraft owned or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service, those vessels and aircraft of the Parties shall be immune in accordance with the provisions of Article 11(1) to (3) of Annex IV to the Protocol.

Article 7
Actions for Compensation

1.	Actions against a non-State operator for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) may be brought in the courts of the Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence.   Such actions for compensation shall be brought within three years of the commencement of the response action.

2.	

First Option

A Party in its discretion may provide that actions against that Party for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) may be brought in the courts of that Party, and if so it will inform the Depository.  No Party shall be without its consent subject to jurisdiction in the Courts of another Party with respect to liability under this Annex.


Second Option

Actions against a State operator for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) may be brought in the courts of that State.   No Party shall be without its consent subject to jurisdiction in the Courts of another Party with respect to liability under this Annex.

Third Option

Deletion of paragraph 2.

3.	Each Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain actions under paragraph 1 and, where applicable, paragraph 2.

4.	Except as provided for in paragraph 2, the liability of a Party as a State operator pursuant to Article 6(1) shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Article 20(1) of the Protocol and the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.

5.	(a)	Each Party shall also provide under its domestic law for enforcement of Article 6(2) and 6(3) with respect to any non State operator that is incorporated or has as its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in that Party.

Possible additional subparagraph:

(b)	The liability of a Party as a State operator under Article 6(2) and 6(3) shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Article 20 of the Protocol and the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.
 

Article 8
Exemptions from Liability

1.	An operator shall not be liable pursuant to Article 6 if the environmental emergency was caused by:

a.    	An act necessary to protect human life or safety; or

b.	An event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character, which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either generally or in the particular case, provided all reasonable measures were taken to prevent harmful impacts.

2.	A Party or operator shall not be liable for an environmental emergency resulting from response action taken by it pursuant to Article 5(2) to the extent that such response action was reasonable in all the circumstances.

Article 9
Limits on Compensation

The amount of compensation for which each operator shall be liable, in respect of each environmental emergency, shall be limited to $........under Article 6(1) and (2) and to $........ under Article 6(3).   

Article 10
State Liability

A Party shall not be liable for the failure of an operator (other than a governmental operator) to take response action to the extent that that Party fulfilled its obligations under this Annex in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Protocol.

Article 11
Insurance

1.	Each Party shall require its operators to maintain adequate insurance or other financial security, such as the guarantee of a bank or similar financial institution, to cover liability up to the limits specified in Article 9.

2.	A Party may maintain self-insurance in respect of its Government operators including those carrying out activities in the furtherance of scientific research.

Article 12
Environmental Protection Fund

1.	An Environmental Protection Fund is hereby established.

2	The purposes of the Fund shall be:

a.	To provide for the reimbursement of the reasonable costs incurred by a Party in taking response action in accordance with Article 5(2), if:

i	the identity of the operator cannot be established; or
ii	the costs exceed the limit fixed in accordance with article 9.

b.	Environmental clean-up in Antarctica or dependent and associated ecosystems;

c.	for any other purpose in furtherance of the Protocol.

2.	The Fund shall be administered by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty in accordance with terms of reference and decisions to be adopted by the Parties by consensus.

3.	Any Party may make proposals to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting for reimbursement or projects to be paid from the Fund.   The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may seek the advice of the Committee of Environmental Protection on such proposals as appropriate.

4.	Any State or person may make voluntary contributions to the Fund.

Article 13
Amendment or Modification

1.	This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.   Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes and extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2.	Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.

