
ITEM 12 Science issues, particularly coopération and facilitation










Intersessional Contact Group





Final report concerning the draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) presented by the Russian Federation on water sampling the subglacial Lake Vostok

1 – Background: 

At the CEP V meeting, the Russian Federation presented a Working Paper (XXV ATCM/WP19) dealing with water sampling the subglacial Lake Vostok. This was qualified by the Russian Federation as a draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE), but not submitted in accordance with Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol. The Committee agreed that the draft CEE would be formally considered at CEP VI

Several delegations at CEP V expressed their concern about the possibility of accidental penetration and contamination of Lake Vostok as a consequence of deeper drilling by the Russian Federation expedition.

The Russian Federation emphasized the potential benefits of further drilling activities for scientific research.

    • Following the discussion the Russian Federation advised that it now intends to do the first additional 50 m drilling in the 2003/2004 season, and that it will produce an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) for this drilling. It further advised that it will submit a revised draft CEE concerning the drilling from 3673 m to 3753 m (the ice-interface), which is intended to start in 2004/2005 and that drilling will continue until contact the lake surface in the season of 2006/2007.

    • The CEP established an intersessional contact group to consider and advise on the draft CEE at CEP VI with the following terms of reference:

    • The intersessional contact group will address the generic terms of reference set out in Annex 3 of the CEP III final report, viz; 

    • The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
    • Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.
    • The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.

CEP V also decided that the ICG should examine the extent to which the draft CEE addresses the following issues:

    • The likelihood of accidental contamination of the Lake (for example due to rapid diffusion of the drill fluid through the ice, failure of the ice below the drill bit, uncertainties such as ice properties or thickness below 3673 m or transfer of non in-situ micro-organisms down to the drill hole)

    • The ability to manage emergency situations such as accidental penetration of the Lake or sudden change in drill-hole fluid pressure when the ice-lake interface is being approached.

    • The likelihood and consequences of deformation of the drill hole when it encounters the east edge of the lake basin, and methods of preventing consequent possible contamination of the lake by drilling fluid.


2 – Working methods:

The Russian Federation submitted the revised draft CEE on February 6, 2003, that is to say in the time limit in accordance with Annex I Article 3-4 of Madrid’s Protocol. On February 12, 2003, CEP Circular 1/2003 was issued, advising all CEP contact points that a revised draft CEE for water sampling of the subglacial Lake Vostok had been submitted by the Russian Federation and that an intersessionnal contact group, operating under Terms of reference agreed to at CEP V was considering this revised draft. Those wishing to participate were advised to contact Jean-Jacques REYSER as the convener of the contact group.

The intersessional contact group has essentially based its work on the requirements of Annex 4 of the CEP III: “ Guidelines for CEP consideration of new and revised draft management plans for protected areas.” Annex 3 of CEP III: “Operational procedures for establishing intersessional contact groups for consideration of the draft CEEs” has also been contacted. Accordingly, all contact points of the CEP Committee have been contacted by the convener and invited to indicate the person who will be their representative.

Comments were received from: Australia, The United States, France (coordination and discussion), Norway, New Zealand and the Antarctic Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC).

The group would like to acknowledge the effort that the Russian Federation have made to prepare, in time limit, the revised draft CEE that aims at answering to the requirements of the protocol.

3 – Discussion:

3-1 The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the protocol concerning environment:

The intersessional group considers the revised draft CEE to conform only partially to the requirements above mentioned. Though the document provides responses to a certain number of paragraphs of Article 3, these are often partially or too generically discussed to allow an adequate evaluation of the proposed activities.

The ICG considers the answers to Article 3(2)(a) to be notably deficient on several points:
 
    • Objective: the ICG considered the draft CEE to focus only on justifying the proposed activities; the group would have liked a more detailed discussion showing the scientific interests of the activity considering the consequences of the potential impacts.
    • Description of the activity: the document provides too little information on the proposed drilling method – notably on the drilling method down to the lake surface – while the drilling liquid is under pressurized to allow the lake water to come back up to the borehole. The description of the drilling methods must be more comprehensive for reviewers to make a precise assessment of the feasibility. 

    • Intensity of the activity: The group considers this point too partially and generically discussed. Only few details are given with regard to the amount of drilling fluid that will be used, also of the properties of the special PMS fluid called “ecological”. The document could usefully include the physical, chemical and microbiological properties of this fluid, as well as data that support the conclusion concerning the “ecological neutrality of this fluid”. The document could also provide information that allows the reader to determine the density of the fluid or the stability of the liquid in the borehole.

    • Alternative solutions: The contact group considers the discussion regarding alternative solutions to be inadequately addressed and marginally studied. No consideration has been given to the “postponing” solution consisting in delaying the activity until the development and thorough testing of new technologies or other processes. The ICG considers that testing of the drilling system would be extremely valuable in giving confidence to the environmental safety of the drilling technology

Concerning paragraph (c) regarding the description of methods and data used to forecast the impacts of the proposed activity, the ICG believes that there is not enough information in the document to allow an adequate assessment of the limits of possible errors regarding data and the validity of forecasts of the impacts on the environment. The document focuses more on the description of technology and of environment rather than on the analysis of the possible impacts.

The estimation of the nature, extent, duration and intensity of the likely direct impacts of the proposed activity, paragraph (d), is considered as partially discussed. The ICG would like to see consideration given to the possibility of an accident and the acceptable level of contamination should the drilling fluid penetrate the lake. Without this consideration it is difficult to see how the conclusion that “O-risk” or “less than minor or transitory” has been reached. This part of the document should be developed.

The ICG considers that the project does not adequately address the requirements of paragraph (f) of Article 3(2) regarding the assessment of cumulative impacts. The draft CEE acknowledges that the activity will add to the cumulative impact but does not deal further with the subject. Instead it considers the impact of additional 130 m drilling as being minor and notes that the drilling is situated in an area that is some places called a “NON RECOVERABLE AREA” (NRA) in others a  “RECOVERABLE AREA” (RA) and others a  “CONVENTIONALLY INTACT AREA” (CIA). This evaluation seems to be the result of what happens when a global activity is divided in small sub-activities and considered separately.

The ICG believes that further consideration should be given to the consequences of past, present and future activities whatever the rating of the area. The possibility and consequences of a potential contamination of subglacial lakes likely to be connected to Lake Vostok should also be considered.

The considerations regarding the identification of measures, paragraph (g) are marginally addressed. Some measures to minimize impacts are mentioned but remain weak. No decontamination techniques are mentioned, and neither are monitoring programmes proposed (for the drilling gear, hole wall, ice core, lake water). Finally, there is no mention of procedures for handling unplanned event or accident, notably in the case of the introduction of drilling fluid into the lake.

The ICG believes too that consideration regarding gaps in knowledge is too brief. In particular there are gaps in knowledge of fluid behaviour and ice behaviour under pressures found near the ice-water interface, as well as the time it will take the water to freeze, and the coring properties of such frozen water. The proposed method to avoid water penetration remains theoretical and would be strengthened by practical experience.


3-2 Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document

The draft CEE concludes that the proposed activity aims to obtain additional scientific knowledge on the lake statement. Methods and technologies are based on the knowledge of the physical laws as well as on the long experience of deep drilling at Vostok station. On the basis of this experience the draft CEE concludes that “the risks of contamination accompanying this activity that are primarily related to the presence of the drilling fluid in the borehole can be practically excluded during preparation and conduct of work; Conduct of the proposed activity will require additional logistics support, which will insignificantly increase the current impact of the station activity on the glacial surface environment”

The ICG considers that the conclusions are not sufficiently supported by information within the document. Evaluation methods for the importance of impacts could be more consistent and complete, and the issue of cumulative impacts should be more comprehensively addressed. Contamination of the Lake waters using the proposed technologies and methodologies remains a possibility for the ICG. Finally, the draft CEE does not address the risk of an accidental and uncontrolled penetration of drilling fluid in the lake though on another hand the cumulative impact notion should be examined on a higher level. 


3-3 Clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE

The ICG notes that the draft is well presented and structured. Nevertheless several parts present internal inconsistencies and the formulation lacks of clarity.


3-4 the likelihood of accidental contamination of the lake ( for example due to rapid diffusion of drill fluid through the ice, failure of the ice below the drill bit, uncertainties such as ice properties oe thickness below 3673m or transfer of non in-situ micro-organisms down to the drill hole)

The ICG considers that, in view of the information and descriptions provided by the document, and should the project carried out according to plan, risk of accidental contamination of the lake cannot be ruled out. Specially, the project does not take into account the possibility of an accidental and uncontrolled penetration of the drilling fluid into the lake because of the confidence the proposers have in the technology they describe. The same confidence would be more widely shared if the proposed technologies were tested in comparable situations as suggested earlier. An additional point of concern is that the properties of behaviour of deep ice are not well known and if much different from expected this could lead to lake water contamination from drilling fluid. This aspect of the question should be strengthened.

The potential biological consequences of the lake water contamination are not analysed in any detail. The possibility of a microbiological contamination should be discussed in a more critical way. 


3-5 the ability to manage emergency situations such as accidental penetration of the lake or sudden change in drill-hole fluid pressure when the ice-lake interface is being approached

The ICG found no discussion about this matter in the draft CEE and nor were emergency procedures proposed for handling this situation. Although it is clear that the proposers consider such a situation impossible, some members of the ICG considered that the possibility should be addressed.


3-6 the likelihood and consequences of deformation of the drill hole when it encounters the east edge of the lake basin, and methods of preventing consequent possible contamination of the lake by drilling fluid

This matter is only briefly discussed in the document and the ICG considers that such a risk remain possible notably regarding the important left amount (60 m3) of drilling fluid in the borehole.
In other respects, the document makes allusions to a possible removal of the drilling fluid, but in no way precise when, how and whether it will actually be carried out. 


4 - Conclusions:

The ICG considers that the draft CEE only partially conforms the requirements of article 3 of annex 1 of the protocol. 

    • The description of the proposed activities, technologies and methods is considered insufficient to allow an adequate assessment of the environmental risks associated with sampling the waters of Lake Vostok.

    • Alternative solutions, including testing the technology in similar but less critical situations deserve further consideration.

    • The direct impact assessment, notably in the case of accidental penetration as well as for the cumulative impact, has not been adequately addressed, indicating that this evaluation should be reviewed and strengthened to better meet the intent of paragraph (d) and (f) of article III.

As far as more specific mandates are concerned, the ICG has identified a number of concerns set out in earlier sections of this report. It believes these needs to be adequately addressed before the proposed penetration of the Lake is attempted.

The group notes that some methodologies and technologies described in the Draft CEE are based on theoretical considerations. Validation in advance by modelling and practical tests would give more confidence in the environmental soundness of the proposed technologies.

