


Definitive Texts of ATCM decisions

Proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedures of the ATCM

Submitted by the United Kingdom


Background

The definitive texts of decisions adopted at a Consultative Meeting (Measures, Decisions and Resolutions) are normally not available until the Final Report of an ATCM is published.  This is usually some months after the close of a Meeting.

Measure 1 (2002) adopted at ATCM XXV (Warsaw), introduced in effect a new precedent into the work of the ATCM – that of a fast-tracking mechanism for adoption of a Measure by means of the procedure of Article 6 of Annex V on Area Protection and Management.  This specifies that a Management Plan held under a Measure shall be deemed to have been approved 90 days after the close of the ATCM at which it was adopted.  However, for the purpose of approval and domestic law making, it is important that Parties have access to the definitive texts of decisions as adopted in the respective Treaty language.

To meet this requirement CCAMLR provides for definitive texts to be circulated to its Member States immediately after the close of a Commission meeting.  Both the Convention and the CCAMLR Rules of Procedure respectively indicate:
	Article IX (6) (a) of the Convention:
“Conservation measures adopted by the Commission in accordance with this Convention shall be implemented by Members of the Commission in the following manner:
    (a) The Commission shall notify conservation measures to all Members of the Commission…………”
Whilst Rule 38 of the Rules of Procedure specifies that:
	“The Executive Secretary shall:
Notify each member of the Commission immediately after each meeting of all decisions, measures and recommendations made or adopted by the Commission”.
The United Kingdom sees virtue in such a mechanism being also adopted by the ATCM.  This would provide a useful procedure.  It is proposed that this could be achieved by inserting a new rule after Rule 24 of the Rules of Procedure as follows: 
“The host Government shall notify all Consultative Parties immediately following an ATCM of all Measures, Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the Meeting, and shall transmit copies of the definitive texts adopted in an appropriate language of the Treaty”.



