



XXVI ATCM
Working Paper
Agenda Item: 	ATCM 10
   VI CEP 4f
United Kingdom
Original: English



ADVICE TO MARINERS AND VESSEL OPERATORS ON THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL’S OBLIGATIONS

Working Paper
submitted by the United Kingdom

Background

    1. Following the exchanges at ATCM XXV on the desirability of providing information relating to the Environmental Protocol to vessel and yacht operators, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) and the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) have submitted Information Papers on this issue to ATCM XXVI (see Information Papers 039 and 064, respectively).

    2. Both these papers imply that only one Party has produced a relevant navigational note for use by mariners and vessel operators.  However, the United Kingdom would also like to bring to the attention of Parties, the UK Hydrographic Office’s Admiralty Sailing Directions (Antarctic Pilot) Fifth Edition 1997.  This includes references to:
    • the Antarctic Treaty;
    • the IMO Antarctic Special Area provisions of MARPOL 73/78 relating to the sea area south of 600 South; and
    • the Environmental Protocol – including the provisions of Annex IV (Prevention of Marine Pollution).
Relevant sections of the UK’s Antarctic Pilot are attached at Annex 1.

Proposal

    3. Given the importance of improving awareness of, and compliance with, the obligations set out under the Environmental Protocol by mariners and vessel operators, the United Kingdom proposes that a Resolution to this effect be adopted by ATCM XXVI.  A draft of such a Resolution is attached below for the consideration of Parties:
Draft Resolution XX (2003)

The Representatives,

Conscious of the importance of ensuring that mariners and vessel operators are aware of, and comply with, the obligations set out in the Environmental Protocol – and in particular its Annex IV (Prevention of Marine Pollution);

Desiring to provide clear and easily understood advice to those operating vessels and yachts in the Antarctic Treaty Area; and

Recalling discussions at ATCM XXV that a means to improve compliance with the Protocol’s obligations by vessel and yacht operators would be to include details of the Protocol and its Annexes, as appropriate, in the Antarctic navigational guides or pilots published by Parties1;

Recommend that:

    • Those Parties that publish advice to mariners in the form of, for example, Antarctic ‘Notices to Mariners’ or ‘Pilots’, should ensure that appropriate details of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998) and in particular details of its Annex IV, are included in such publications.





Annex 1

Extracts from Admiralty Sailing Directions (Antarctic Pilot) Fifth Edition 1997 (United Kingdom Hydrographic Office)


    1. EXTRACT FROM: CHAPTER 1 (1.16–1.22, PAGE 3) NAVIGATION AND REGULATIONS:

REGULATIONS

Antarctic Treaty
1.16
	The scientific and administrative co-operation established during the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957-58, and the success then achieved in separating scientific work from political problems, pointed a way to a possible future regime for the Antarctic area and proved a powerful stimulus to negotiations for an Antarctic Treaty.  After 15 months of preparatory discussions, representatives of the 12 nations participating in the IGY operations in the Antarctic, met in Washington on 15 October, 1959.  A treaty was signed on 1 December 1959; it entered into force on 23 June, 1961, after ratification by all the signatory states.  The full text of the Antarctic Treaty is reproduced in Appendix 1.

	The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 1991, with Annexes, is a supplement to the Antarctic Treaty, further broadening the environmental protection of the environment; the protocol has yet to be adopted (1997).	

Pollution
1.18
	In 1990, IMO designated the sea areas of S of 60ºS as a Special Area under Annexes I, II and V of MARPOL 73/78.  This prohibits the discharge into the sea of noxious liquid substances carried in bulk, oil and oily wastes (except in cases permitted by Annex I), all plastics and all other garbage.

The provisions of the Special Area require that oil and oily wastes, all plastics and all other garbage should be discharged at port reception facilities outside of the Antarctic Treaty area.  The Special Area provisions came into force in March 1992.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, with Annexes, is a supplement to the Antarctic Treaty.  Annex IV is to the protocol details prevention of marine pollution: see Appendix 1.

Ship Reporting System
1.19
	The Australian Ship Reporting System (AUSREP) operates in part of the sea area covered by this volume; see the relevant Admiralty List of Radio Signals for details.

Specially Protected Areas
1.20
	The purpose of Specially Protected Areas is to preserve both unique and representative examples of the natural ecological systems of areas in Antarctica which are of outstanding scientific interest.  Entry to a Specially Protected Area is prohibited without a permit.  For a list of Specially Protected Areas as correct at April 1997, see Appendix IV.

Sites of Special Scientific Interest
1.21
The purpose of Sites of Special Scientific Interest is to protect sites where scientific investigations are being carried out or are planned, and there is a demonstrable risk of interference which would jeopardise those investigations, or to protect sites of exceptional scientific interest.  For a list of Sites of Special Scientific Interest as correct at April 1997, see Appendix V.

Historic Sites and Monuments
1.22
	The purpose of each Historic Site and Monument is to preserve and protect from damage and destruction individual historic sites and monuments within the Antarctic Treaty area.  For a list of Historic Sites and Monuments as correct as April 1997, see Appendix VI.


    2. EXTRACT FROM: APPENDIX 1, ARTICLE XIV (PAGE 223):

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties agreed the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  The Protocol designates Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science, introduces a set of environmental principles, and establishes regulations to provide comprehensive protection for the Antarctic environment and related and dependent ecosystems.  An important provision is that all activities in Antarctica should undergo an assessment of their environmental impact before they are allowed to proceed.

Annex IV of the Protocol (Prevention of Marine Pollution) deals specifically with the control of marine pollution and follows closely MARPOL provisions.

The following text is based upon Annex IV of the Protocol:

    1. Hazardous chemicals
The disposal of hazardous or polluting chemicals or substances, (e.g.. battery acid, antifreeze) into the sea in quantities or concentrations that are harmful to the marine environment if prohibited.  Such substances should be kept securely on board for disposal at port reception facilities outside of the Antarctic Treaty area.

    2. Oil and oily mixtures
Oil and oily mixtures, sludge, dirty ballast and tank washing waters must be kept on board for disposal at port reception facilities outside of the Antarctic Treaty area.  Arrangements to dispose of such wastes must be made before entering the area.  Vessels must be fitted with tanks of sufficient capacity to retain on board all such oily residues during Antarctic operations.  

The discharge of any oil or oily mixture into waters south of 60º S is prohibited, except as permitted under Annex 1 of MARPOL 73/78.

Regulation 26 of Annex 1 of MARPOL 73/78 requires ships to carry a shipboard oil pollution emergency plan, excepting vessels not covered by IMO regulations.  This requires every oil tanker of 150 grt and above or a vessel, other than an oil tanker, of 400 grt and above to carry on board an oil pollution emergency plan approved by the administration.  Regulation 26 came into force for all vessels in 1995.

    3. Litter and garbage
All garbage including plastics, paper products, rags, glass, metal, bottles, crockery, incineration ash, dunnage, lining and packing materials, must be kept on board for disposal at port reception facilities outside of the Antarctic Treaty area.  Arrangements to dispose of such wastes must be made before entering the area.  Vessels must have sufficient capacity on board for the retention of all garbage during Antarctic operations.  Garbage should be compacted or shredded and stowed carefully.

When garbage is mixed with other substances having different disposal requirements, the most stringent disposal requirements apply.

    4. Food wastes
The disposal of food waste into the sea is permitted if it has been passed through a comminuter and is discharged not less than 12 miles from the coast.  All comminuted food waste must be capable of passing through a screen with a mesh size of less than 25 mm.  Food waste that is difficult to comminute should be either burnt in a shipboard incinerator, or frozen and disposed of at port reception facilitities outside of the Antarctic Treaty area.

    5. Sewage
The discharge of untreated sewage within 12 miles of the coast is prohibited.  Sewage should not be discharged in the vicinity of research stations as this might affect scientific investigations.

Sewage should be passed through a treatment plant which should meet the standards and tests laid down by IMO, and be inspected regularly.

Vessels and small craft certified to carry not more than 10 people can discharge untreated sewage within 12 miles of the coast.  However, such vessels should discharge sewage in deep water, as far as possible from the coast, to aid rapid dispersal.

    6. Incineration
The onboard incineration of ship generated waste is permitted.  Shipboard incinerators should be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with IMO standards.  Except in an emergency, no open burning of waste should be carried out.	

