

Working Paper WP-XX

Agenda Item (CEP) XX
Australia

Original:  English



















Antarctic Protected Areas System:

Proposed Management Plan for
CAPE DENISON, COMMONWEALTH BAY
GEORGE V LAND, east Antarctica:

HISTORIC SITE AND MONUMENT NO. XXX

 Antarctic Specially MANAGED Area No. xxx



















 Submitted by Australia
Proposed Management Plan for Historic Site and Monument XXX and
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. XXX 

CAPE DENISON, COMMONWEALTH BAY, 
GEORGE V LAND, EAST ANTARCTICA

Latitude 67° 00’ 13” S — 67° 00’ 50” S
Longitude 142° 40’ 00.1” E — 142° 41’ 27” E 

Introduction			
Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay is one of the principal sites of early human activity in Antarctica. It is the location of the base of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition of 1911‑14 organised and led by Dr (later Sir) Douglas Mawson. An important symbol of the ‘heroic age’ of Antarctic exploration, it is one of only six sites remaining from this time. Cape Denison hosted some of the earliest and most comprehensive studies of Antarctic geology, geography, terrestrial magnetism, astronomy, meteorology, glaciology, oceanography, biology, zoology and botany. It was also the base of numerous explorations inland and features artefacts associated with these sledging parties, including food caches and equipment. Due to the considerable historical, cultural and scientific significance of Cape Denison, the entire area is protected as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) consistent with Articles 2, 4, 5 and 6 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. It is also listed as a Historic Site and Monument in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 8(2) of Annex V of the Protocol. 

Cape Denison is characterised by four valleys aligned northwest/southeast. The majority of Australasian Antarctic Expedition artefacts, including buildings (‘Mawson’s Huts’) and other structures, are concentrated in the westernmost valley and on the ridges on either side of the valley. The historic huts and their immediate surrounds constitute Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. XXX.


1.0 Description of Values to be Protected
1.1 Primary values
This ASMA is proposed on the grounds that Cape Denison is a site of historic, archaeological, social and aesthetic values.

    • Historic value
Antarctica’s ‘heroic age’ was a period of great human adventure and discovery. Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay provides the setting for the buildings, structures and relics of the Main Base of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) of 1911–14, led by Dr Douglas Mawson.

Mawson’s expedition is set apart from other ‘heroic age’ expeditions by its prime focus on scientific research. Nevertheless, the expedition also had an exploratory agenda, with the aim of charting the entire Antarctic coastline immediately south of Australia. For this purpose at least five sledging expeditions were undertaken from Cape Denison from spring 1912, including the infamous Far-Eastern Sledging Party during which expeditioners Belgrave Ninnis and Xavier Mertz perished and Mawson himself barely survived. Overall, more than 6,500 km of coastline and hinterland was explored by sledging parties of the Expedition.

    • Archaeological value
Cape Denison contains numerous relics relating to the work of Mawson’s expedition, including Mawson’s Huts and other significant and relatively untouched artefacts from the ‘heroic age’. While the majority is concentrated in the westernmost valley and its immediate surrounds, the historical boundaries of the Main Base are much broader. Artefacts and other evidence of occupation, such as food caches, extend across the entire Cape, forming a rich resource of material available for research and interpretation, and potentially yielding information about aspects of expeditioner life not included in official written accounts.

    • Social and aesthetic values
This ASMA is designated to preserve not only the artefacts remaining in situ but also the cultural landscape of Cape Denison in which Mawson and his men lived and worked. Cape Denison is characterised by its almost incessant blizzard conditions, which severely limit access to the region and activities at the site. System and katabatic winds pour down the plateau and funnel through the Cape’s valleys; blasting the hut with gusts that in May 1912 reached 322 km/h. (The average wind speed for the month was 98 km/h). Cape Denison is not only the windiest place in Antarctica, but also the windiest place on Earth at sea level. The site thus provides the physical and symbolic context of the extreme isolation and harsh conditions endured by the expedition members and, by association, all other ‘heroic age’ researchers and explorers. In designating the entire area as an ASMA, Cape Denison’s unique ‘sense of place’ is protected, with Mawson’s Huts and Boat Harbour as the focus of the visual catchment.  Mawson’s Huts themselves are provided with additional protection in ASPA (XXX).

        1.2 Other values
    • Environmental values
The paucity of relatively ice-free areas in the immediate region means that Cape Denison represents an important assemblage of life forms (Appendices A and C). The closest ice-free area of equal or greater size to Cape Denison is approximately 20 km to the east of Cape Denison (from the centroid of the ASMA), and approximately 60 km to the west. A haul-out site for Weddell, leopard and elephant seals, the Cape is also an important breeding area for Adélie penguins, Wilson’s storm-petrels, snow petrels and south polar skuas. 

Flora at Cape Denison is represented by 13 lichen species distributed on boulders and other moraine throughout the peninsula. These species are listed at Appendix C. No bryophytes are evident. The lichens’ distribution on rocks, which are subject to different patterns of snow ablation, makes them vulnerable to trampling and other interference by visitors, however infrequent visitation may be.

Cape Denison additionally features 13 small lakes. These are associated with glacial action, are a permanent fixture, and are frozen over for most of the year. Since such lakes are also susceptible to physical, chemical and biological modification within their catchment boundaries, and a catchment-based approach to the management of human activities is required.

    • Scientific values
Mawson, a geologist, planned his expedition in order to examine the theories about continental connection and the processes of glaciation and climate. He also sought to study the Magnetic Pole and magnetic charting for navigational purposes; to conduct biological studies, including the identification of new species; and to establish a weather station.

Cape Denison provides opportunities to repeat Mawson’s experiments and conduct further research into magnetism, meteorology, biology, and other sciences. For example, although Antarctic lakes are generally recognised as valuable due to their relatively simple natural ecosystems, the lakes at Cape Denison have not been sampled and their biota not studied. There are also numerous non-marine algae present; however, no surveys have been undertaken. 
The records from Mawson’s expedition provide a dataset against which the results of modern research may be compared, and the site’s isolation lends it considerable value for future use as 
a reference site for other areas that experience a greater level of human activities. 

    • Tourism values
Cape Denison’s wildlife and undisturbed artefacts, framed against the dramatic backdrop of the Antarctic Plateau, represents significant ecotourism and cultural tourism values.  The Area’s isolation and extreme weather provide visitors with a unique insight into the conditions endured by ‘heroic age’ researchers and explorers, and a chance to form a deeper appreciation of their achievements. 


2.0 Aims and Objectives
Management of the Area aims to assist in planning and co-ordinating current and future activities in the Area, to avoid possible conflicts, and to improve co-operation between Parties in order to avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area. Management objectives are:

    • to prevent degradation of the Area, its features, artefacts, and values;
    • to maintain the heritage values of the Area through a planned conservation work program; and
    • to provide for management activities which support the protection of the values and features of the Area.


3.0 Management Activities
The following management activities may be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:

    • research and other activities essential or desirable for understanding, protecting and maintaining the values of the Area;

    • the removal of objects not related to the Australasian Antarctic Expedition and/or the British Australian New Zealand Antarctic Research Expeditions (BANZARE) and that compromise the historic and aesthetic values of the Area, provided that removal does 
not adversely impact on the values of the Area, and that the objects are appropriately documented prior to removal. Priority should be given to the removal of field infrastructure from the Visual Protection Zone, giving consideration to the needs (including those of safety) of conservation workers and the program of conservation works; 

    • essential maintenance of other objects and infrastructure, including the Automatic Weather Station; 

    • installation of signage to indicate the boundaries of the HSM and ASMA; 

    • visitation of the Area as necessary to assess whether it continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure that management activities are adequate; and

    • consultation with other national Antarctic programs operating in the region, or those with an interest or experience in Antarctic historic site management, with a view to ensuring the above provisions are implemented effectively.

4.0 Period of designation
This ASMA is designated for an indefinite period. 


5.0 Description of the Area
5.1 Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Cape Denison (67° 00’ 13” S—67° 00’ 050” S; 142° 39’ 02” E—142° 41’ 28” E) is located in the centre of Commonwealth Bay, a 60 km-wide stretch of coast in George V Land some 3,000 km south of Hobart, Australia. The Cape itself is a rugged, 1.5 km-wide tongue of ice, snow, rock and moraine projecting into Commonwealth Bay from the steeply rising wall of the ice cap of continental Antarctica. On the western side of the Cape is Boat Harbour, a 400m-long indent in the coast. 

The designated ASMA (Map A) extends from Land’s End (67° 00’ 46” S, 142° 39’ 24” E) in the west, along the coastline to the northern tip of the western shore of Boat Harbour (67° 00’ 24” S, 142° 39’ 28” E), across the mouth of Boat Harbour (in a straight north-easterly diagonal) to the northern tip of Penguin Knob (67° 00’ 17” S, 142° 39’ 31” E) on the eastern shore of Boat Harbour, and then along the coastline in a south-easterly direction down to John O’Groats 
(67° 00’ 47” S, 142° 41’ 27” E). The southern boundary extends in a straight line from Land’s End to John O’Groats along latitude 67° 00’ 47” S. With the exception of the boundary across the mouth of Boat Harbour, the northern coastal boundary extends to that land above the lowest tide. 

The ice cliffs at either end of the Cape (Land’s End and John O’Groats) and the sea hemming the northern shore form a natural sense of enclosure; no boundary markers have been installed because the coast is a clearly defined boundary. Signs will be installed at the eastern (John O’Groats) and western (Land’s End) limits of the southern boundary.

Natural features: Topography and geomorphology
The topography of Cape Denison is defined by a series of four rocky ridges, running south-southeast to north-northwest, and three valleys. The largest, most westerly of these valleys contains the AAE buildings, which are protected within ASPA XXX. The basement of the Cape Denison area consists of partially migmatised, massive felsic orthogneiss intruded about 2350 million years ago (Ma) into an older metamorphosed sequence. Above the basement the area features a lower zone of relatively polished rock and a higher zone of relatively unpolished rock; the former being especially prominent below 12 metres above sea level and indicative of more recent uplift and exposure than the upper zone. An upper and lower moraine are apparent, with the upper moraine, closer to the edge of plateau, containing a diversity of angular boulders. The lower moraine is dominated by local rocks sorted into bands, perhaps the result of an ‘ice push’ from the sea rather than being genuine glacial moraine.

Water bodies
Cape Denison contains 13 small glacial lakes, which are generally oriented parallel to the foliation of the basement rocks. At the height of summer Cape Denison also features numerous melt streams which flow into Commonwealth Bay. It is not known whether the streams flow down established courses, or whether the streams are a feature of the regular freeze/thaw cycle. 

Biological features
Cape Denison is the summer habitat for breeding Adélie penguins, Wilson’s storm-petrels, snow petrels and the south polar skua (Map Z). Other species sighted in the area include the Cape petrel, Antarctic petrel, southern giant petrel and emperor penguin. A full list of species and number of breeding pairs (where available) is attached as Appendix A.
Weddell seals, southern elephant seals and leopard seals have been recorded as hauling out and, in the case of elephant seals, moulting at Cape Denison. However, the sporadic nature of visits to the Area means monitoring has been inconsistent and the exact extent of the seal population uncertain. Some data is presented in Appendix Bii.

The only flora evident at Cape Denison is lichens, for which a list of species is included at Appendix C, and non-marine algae, which have yet to be studied.

5.2 Access to the Area
Sea, land and air access to Cape Denison is difficult due to the rugged topography and climate of the area. Sea ice extent and uncharted bathymetry may constrain ship access to approximately 3nm from the coastline. Access is then gained either by small watercraft or by helicopter, although attempts to land are frequently hampered by heavy seas and prevailing north-westerly or katabatic winds. Boat landings may be made at Boat Harbour and due north of Sørensen Hut. The helicopter landing site and approach and departure flight paths are indicated on Map B. 

There are no roads or other transport infrastructure on shore. Land vehicles should be used in accordance with the Code of Conduct (see Section 8.0).

Pedestrian access within the Area is unrestricted except in places where artefacts or bird or lichen colonies are present, and should be conducted in accordance with the Code of Conduct (see Section 8.0). 

5.3 Location of structures and other anthropogenic objects within and near to the Area
Cape Denison is notable for being the location of four historic buildings and a Memorial Cross constructed by the AAE of 1911-1914. The buildings and their immediate precinct are protected by ASPA XXX.

Within the ASMA there are several AAE structures, including survey markers and the mast atop Anemometer Hill, about 150 m east of Mawson’s Main Hut. On 5 January 1931 members of the BANZARE party (including Douglas Mawson) visited Cape Denison to claim formal possession of George V Land on behalf of Britain, and used the mast to support the proclamation flag and canister containing the proclamation itself. A small timber plaque and proclamation, still attached to the mast, are the only ‘formal’ artefacts of that visit remaining in situ today. 

Cape Denison additionally features six other structures: an automatic weather station (AWS); a field shelter known as Sørensen Hut; a red fibreglass ‘Apple’ hut; a wooden platform on which tents may be pitched; a field shelter known as Granholm Hut, and a plaque near Mawson’s Main Hut indicating that the hut is a Historic Monument. 

The AWS is located at 67° 00’ 33” S; 142° 39’ 51” E on a rise near Round Lake and approximately 150 m southeast of Mawson’s Main Hut. It has been operating since 1990 as part of the Antarctic Automatic Weather Project of the University of Wisconsin—Madison, and is the property of that institution.

Sørensen Hut is located about 400m east of Mawson’s Main Hut at 67° 00’ 29” S; 142° 40’ 12” E. It was constructed by the Australian national program in 1986 to provide temporary shelter for parties conducting conservation works on Mawson’s Huts and contains some provisions and field equipment. Numerous items are also stored underneath and immediately adjacent to Sørensen Hut, and in the adjacent Apple hut.

Granholm Hut is situated at 67° 00’ 29” S; 142° 39’ 26” E, some 160 m northwest of Mawson’s Main Hut. It was constructed in 1978 to provide a temporary shelter and workshop for parties working on Mawson’s Huts. It contains numerous building materials, some field equipment and limited provisions. Additional building materials are stored beneath the hut. 

To the east of Granholm Hut is a stack of Oregon and Baltic pine timbers for use in conservation work on the Main Hut. This stack is secured with galvanised cables attached to rock bolts. A similar timber stack is located on rocks some 100 m southeast of Main Hut and 10 m east of the designated helicopter landing site.

The HSM marker currently situated adjacent to the Main Hut will be replaced by appropriate signage to indicate that the whole of Cape Denison has been designated as a Historic Site. The signage will be in the English, French, Spanish and Russian languages, and will indicate the protection status of the site and its contents under the Antarctic Treaty.  

Objects left by Mawson’s expedition are scattered throughout the Area, and appear from year to year depending on snow cover. These include cairns; cached seal and penguin carcasses; timbers; and a large collection of disassembled penguin skeletons. It is believed that a significant number of artefacts exist under the snow and have yet to be uncovered. It is additionally possible that artefacts from the ice cave known as ‘Aladdin’s Cave’, a sledging depot excavated by Mawson’s expedition in 1912, may also be present in the vicinity of the ASMA, if not within the ASMA itself. The cave was originally located on the plateau at 67° 05’ S, 142° 38’ E, some 8 km south of Mawson’s Main Hut, but it may have been relocated (via the movement of ice) up to 4.5 km down-slope from the original 1912 location.  Its exact location has yet to be determined.

5.4 Location of other protected areas in or near to the Area
ASPA XXX , encompassing the four AAE huts, is located within the Cape Denison ASMA, and exists to protect their historic and social values. 

The Cape Denison ASMA is to be simultaneously listed as Historic Site No. XXX under the Antarctic Treaty. 

There are no other ASPAs or ASMAs within 50 km of Cape Denison.


6.0 Zones within the Area
All activities within the Area are to comply with the provisions of the Madrid Protocol and the Code of Conduct contained in this management plan (see Section 8.0). In addition to these general guidelines, three zones are defined in which restrictions on certain activities are deemed necessary in order to meet the management objectives for the Area.

6.1 ASPA XXX
ASPA XXX (Mawson’s Huts) is located within the ASMA. This ASPA encompasses the four Australasian Antarctic Expedition huts in order to protect their historic and social values. Entry to the ASPA and activities within it require a permit and must be carried out in accordance with the ASPA management plan.

6.2 Visual Protection Zone
The visual catchment of Mawson’s Huts and the Memorial Cross is of particular importance within the Cape Denison cultural landscape. In order to protect the landscape setting and ‘sense of place’ of Mawson’s Huts, a Visual Protection Zone is defined within the proposed ASMA. To preserve these values, no new structures should be built within the Visual Protection Zone.
The Visual Protection Zone is illustrated on Maps A and B and is generally defined as the area enclosed by the western and eastern ridge lines of the valley containing the historic structures. The boundary extends from the coastline (67º 00’ 24.9” S, 142º 39’ 14.3” E) and runs southeast along the western side of the westernmost ridge to the ice plateau (67º 00’ 46.8” S, 142º 39’ 37.2” E); northeast along the edge of the ice plateau to 67º 00’ 43.9” S, 142º 40’ 5.6” E; north-northwest between Round Lake and Long Lake to 67º 00’ 33.7” S, 142º 39’ 59.8” E; then as far as Magnetograph House (67º 00’ 20.3” S, 142º 39’ 46.6” E); and then northwest along the eastern side of the eastern ridge line to the sea (67º 00’ 15.7” S, 142º 39’ 28.2” E). 

6.3 Helicopter Zone
Helicopter operations have the potential to disturb breeding and moulting wildlife. To minimise disturbance to seals and nesting birds at Cape Denison during the summer months, it is preferable that helicopters land at the site indicated on Map C and approach and depart in accordance with the flight paths indicated on the map. Departure paths have been selected to avoid wildlife concentrations as much as possible. Use of a single-engined helicopter is preferable; however  twin-engined helicopters may be used with due regard for the potentially greater disturbance to wildlife. The presence of seals and the breeding cycle of birds nesting in the Area are charted at Appendices Bi and Bii; twin-engine helicopter operations should be avoided during weeks that birds are hatching eggs or raising chicks.


7.0 Maps of the Area
Map A: Cape Denison Management Zones. This map shows the boundaries of the ASMA, the Historic Site, the Visual Protection Zone, ASPA No. XXX, and significant topographic features of the Area. The inset map indicates the location in relation to the Antarctic continent.

Map B: Cape Denison Visual Protection Zone. This map shows the boundaries of the Visual Protection Zone and indicates the position of significant historic artefacts, including the four Australasian Antarctic Expedition huts, the Memorial Cross, and Anemometer Hill, the site of the BANZARE Proclamation Pole.

Map C: Cape Denison Flight Paths and Bird Colonies. This map indicates the approaches, departures and landing site for helicopters, as well as the location of bird colonies in the vicinity.


8.0 Code of Conduct
The actions of individuals contribute significantly to protecting the Antarctic environment. This Code of Conduct is intended to provide general guidelines to help minimise environmental impacts at Cape Denison, but it cannot be expected to cover every situation. All visitors, including national program personnel and tourists, should consider their responsibilities and seek to minimise their impact on all aspects of the environment and most particularly the values described.
8.1 Access to and movement within or over the Area 
    • All land vehicles are prohibited within the Area, with the exception of small all-terrain vehicles which, due to the colonisation of rocky areas by lichens and seabirds, should be used on snow and ice surfaces only and with due consideration of the location of historic artefacts. 
    • Pedestrian access within the Area is unrestricted but artefacts, bird or lichen colonies, and penguin ‘highways’ (the established route of birds moving between their nest and the sea) should be avoided. 


8.2 Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area
    • Historic conservation and archaeological work.
    • Visitation for the purposes of tourism.
    • Essential maintenance of non-historic infrastructure, including the Automatic Weather Station, and removal of non-historic objects that compromise the historic and aesthetic 
values of the Area.
    • Research, including scientific research. 

8.3 The installation, modification, or removal of structures
    • To preserve the historic, archaeological, social, aesthetic and environmental values of the ASMA, no new structures should be constructed, nor additional scientific equipment installed in the Area, except for the conservation, research or maintenance activities specified in Section 3.0 above. 
    • All equipment and infrastructure left in the Area should be periodically reviewed for maintenance and potential removal. 

8.4 The location of field camps
    • Existing non-historic infrastructure should be used by Parties undertaking activities in accordance with this management plan, in preference to establishing new infrastructure.
    • Tents should be pitched on the wooden platform adjacent to Sørensen Hut. Use of the huts and any supplies should be reported to the Australian national program as soon as practicable to ensure the safety of other people who may be reliant upon known stores. 
    • Due to the significance and vulnerability of the site, longer-term tourist visitation and overnight camping by tourists is not advisable.

8.5 The taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
    • Approach distances to wildlife should be consistent with those agreed within the Committee for Environmental Protection.  Until guidelines are adopted by the Committee, Table 1 below provides guidance.
    • Visitors should not wash, swim or dive in the lakes. These activities could contaminate the water body and disturb the water column, microbial communities, and sediments.

Table 1:  Minimum distances to maintain when approaching wildlife on foot
Species
Phase of life
On foot (m)
snow petrels
Nesting
15
Wilson’s storm-petrels
Nesting
15
south polar skuas
Nesting
15
Adélie penguins
Summer: on ice or away from colony
5

Summer: breeding birds in colonies
15
Breeding Weddell seals and pups (includes weaners)
All times
15
Mature seals on their own (all species)
All times
5

8.6 The collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the visitor
    • Cape Denison is listed as a Historic Site under the Antarctic Treaty. In accordance with Annex V, Article 8 (4) of the Protocol, no historic structure or other artefact at Cape Denison should be damaged, destroyed or removed, unless removal of an artefact is essential for conservation purposes. The repatriation of the artefact to its original location at Cape Denison is generally preferable unless further damage or deterioration may result from repatriation. 
    • If an artefact is to be removed, the Australian national program should be informed so that documentation regarding that program’s archaeological research at Cape Denison may be amended accordingly. 

8.7 The disposal of waste
    • All wastes, including human solid wastes, should be removed from the Area to the maximum extent practicable. 
    • Refuelling of vehicles, generators and other essential equipment should be conducted with due care for the surrounding environment. Refuelling activities should not be conducted in the catchment of lakes or melt streams, at the ice edge, or in other sensitive areas. 

8.8 Reports to be made to the appropriate authority regarding visits to the Area
To enhance cooperation and the coordination of activities in the Area, to allow for effective site monitoring and management, to facilitate the consideration of cumulative impacts, and to fulfil the aims and objectives of this Management Plan:

    • National program personnel, tourists and other non-government personnel proposing to visit, land, and/or conduct activities in the Area should inform the Australian national program of their intentions  as soon as practicable. 
    • The details of all field activities should be accurately recorded for transfer to the management database of the Australian national program. See Section 9.0 below.


9.0 Information exchange
Parties with active programs in the Area and non-government operators should exchange information obtained during visits to the Area that may have a bearing on the operation of this Management Plan. For example, the expedition or tour leader should submit to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken in the Area. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form contained in Appendix 4 of Resolution 2 (1998)(CEP 1). Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of this Management Plan.

Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies in a publicly accessible archive (such as the dedicated Mawson’s Huts website at http://www.aad.gov.au/mawsons_huts) to maintain a record of visitation or usage of the site, to be used both in any review of this Management Plan and in organising the use of the Area. 


10.0 Supporting Documentation 
Dr Ian Allison, glaciologist, Australian Antarctic Division, pers. comm. 28 March 2003.

Ayres, P. 1999. Mawson: a Life. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press/Miegunyah Press: 
68–69 passim.

Dodge, C.W. 1948. BANZARE Reports, Series B, Vol. VII. British Australia New Zealand Antarctic Expedition.

Foreign & Commonwealth Office London/British Antarctic Survey 1997. List of Protected Areas in Antarctica. London, Cambridge: Foreign & Commonwealth Office/BAS: 9 22, 24, 25. 

Godden Mackay Logan 2001. Mawson’s Huts Historic Site, Cape Denison Commonwealth Bay Antarctica: Conservation Management Plan 2001. Sydney: Godden Mackay Logan: 26, 27, 35, 89–96, passim.

Hall, L. 2000. Douglas Mawson: The Life of an Explorer. Sydney: New Holland: 100, 109.

Hayes, J. Gordon 1928. Antarctica: a treatise on the southern continent. London: The Richards Press Ltd.: 210–215.

Hughes, J. and B. Davis. “The Management of Tourism at Historic Sites and Monuments.” 
In: Hall, C. M. and M.E. Johnston. 1995. Polar Tourism: Tourism in the Arctic and Antarctic Regions. London: John Wiley & Sons Ltd: 242, 245, 246.

Dr Jo Jacka, glaciologist, Australian Antarctic Division, pers. comm. 27 March 2003; 
28 March 2003.

Lazer, E. “Recommendations for Future Archaeological and Conservation Work at the Site Associated with Mawson's Hut Commonwealth Bay Antarctica.” October 1985: 1, 9, 10, 
Map 3.

McGregor, A. 1998. Mawson’s Huts: an Antarctic Expedition Journal. Sydney: Hale and Iremonger: 7–15.

McIntyre, D, and M. McIntyre 1996. “Weddell seal survey in Boat Harbour”. In: Australian Antarctic Division 1997. Initial Environmental Evaluation: AAP Mawson’s Huts Foundation Conservation Program 1997–98: Attachment D.

Mawson, D. 1996 (reprint). The Home of the Blizzard. Adelaide: Wakefield Press: 121­–122, 
133, 200, 328.

Patterson, D. 2003. Mawson’s Huts Conservation Expedition 2002: Field Leader’s Report.

Quilty, P. 1997. “Geology”. In: Australian Antarctic Division 1997. Initial Environmental Evaluation: AAP Mawson’s Huts Foundation Conservation Program 1997–98: 10–11.

Professor Rod Seppelt, botanist, Australian Antarctic Division, pers. comm. 19 February 2003.

David Smith, mapping officer, Australian Antarctic Division, pers. comm. 15 April 2003.

Stillwell, F.L. 1918. The metamorphic rocks of Adélie Land. Australasian Antarctic Expedition, Scientific Reports, Series A, Vol. III part 1:15–22.

Dr Eric J. Woehler, ornithologist, Australian Antarctic Division, pers. comm. September 2002; 31 March 2003. 





Appendix A

Fauna recorded at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay

Breeding populations (pairs) of seabirds at Cape Denison

Species							No. pairs, December 2002
Adélie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae					18,737
Wilson’s storm-petrel Oceanites oceanicus				       38  
snow petrel Pagodroma nivea					       30
south polar skua Catharacta maccormicki				         8

? Antarctic prion Pachyptila desolata (indeterminate breeding status)
? Cape petrel Dapton capense (indeterminate breeding status)


Other seabirds sighted at Cape Denison

Species
Antarctic petrel Thalassoica antarctica
southern giant petrel Macronectes giganteus
king penguin Aptenodytes patagonica
royal penguin (carcase) Eudyptes schlegeli
chinstrap penguin Pygoscelis Antarctica
emperor penguin Aptenodytes forsteri



Seals recorded at Cape Denison

Species

Weddell seal Leptonychotes weddellii
leopard seal Hydrurga leptonyx
southern elephant seal Mirounga leonina

















Appendix Bi

Helicopter operations:
Breeding cycles of nesting seabirds at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay

Species breeding at Cape Denison
Number
Summer breeding cycle

Wilson’s storm-petrel (Oceanites oceanicus)


snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea)


Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) 


south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki)



Exact number not known; three small colonies 


Exact number not known; one small colony 


Exact number not known, numerous colonies 


Exact number not known, scattered nests on fringes of penguin colonies



Before mid-December: adults; after mid-December: adults, eggs and chicks


Before late November: adults; after late November: adults, eggs and chicks


Before November: adults; after November: adults, eggs and chicks


Before mid-December: adults; after mid-December: adults and eggs; after late December: adults and chicks



Appendix Bii

Helicopter operations:
Seals at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay

Species
Number
Summer breeding cycle
Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddellii) 




Exact number not known, no established colonies

Before November: no seals; between mid-November to end December, approx. 24 adults per day

Southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina)

Exact number not known, no established colonies
Approx. 2 or adults per day in December
Appendix C

Flora recorded at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay

The following taxa were recorded at Cape Denison by the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) of 1911–14 and the British Australian New Zealand Antarctic Research Expedition (BANZARE) in 1929–31 and published by Carroll W. Dodge in BANZARE Reports, Series B, Vol. VII, July 1948.

LICHENS

Lecideaceae
Lecidea cancriformis Dodge & Baker        
Toninia Johnstoni Dodge                            

Umbilicaiaceae
Umbilicaria decussata (Vill.) Zahlbr.            

Lecanoraceae
Rhizoplaca melanophthalma (Ram.) Leuck. & Poelt        
Lecanora expectans Darb.
Pleopsidium chlorophanum (Wahlenb.) Zopf

Parmeliaceae
Physcia caesia (Hoffm.) Th. Fr.                         
 
Usnaeceae
Pseudephebe minuscula (Nyl. ex Arnold) Brodo & D. Hawksw.            
Usnea antarctica  Du Rietz 
 
 Blasteniaceae
Candelariella flava (C.W. Dodge & Baker) Castello & Nimis                 
Xanthoria elegans (Link) Th. Fr.                    
Xanthoria Mawsoni Dodge

Buelliaceae
Buellia frigida Darb.          
 

BRYOPHYTES
No bryophytes evident at Cape Denison.
 
 
There are numerous non-marine algae; however, no surveys have been undertaken.








ATCM XXVI 
Working Paper WP-X

Agenda Item (CEP) XX
Australia

Original:  English



















Antarctic Protected Areas System:

Proposed Management Plan for
MAWSON’S HUTS, CAPE DENISON, COMMONWEALTH BAY
GEORGE V LAND, east Antarctica:

Antarctic Specially PROTECTED Area No. xxx




















 Submitted by Australia
Proposed Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XXX

MAWSON’S HUTS
CAPE DENISON, COMMONWEALTH BAY, 
GEORGE V LAND, EAST ANTARCTICA

Latitude 67º 00’ 30” S, Longitude 142º 39’ 40” E

Mawson’s Huts are four timber huts that served as the winter base of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition of 1911–14 organised and led by geologist Dr Douglas Mawson. An important symbol of the so-called ‘heroic age’ of Antarctic exploration, the huts at Cape Denison are the least disturbed and altered of those structures remaining from the era. The achievements of the Mawson expedition include some of the earliest and most comprehensive studies of Antarctic geology, glaciology, oceanography, geography, terrestrial magnetism, astronomy, meteorology, biology, zoology and botany. 

In recognition of the rarity and richness of this social, cultural and scientific resource, including the great technical, architectural and aesthetic value of the huts, all four Australasian Antarctic Expedition huts are designated as an ASPA, embedded within the Cape Denison ASMA XXX.


1.0 Description of Values to be Protected
This ASPA is proposed on the grounds that Mawson’s Huts are a site of historic, archaeological, technical, social and aesthetic values.

    • Historic value
Mawson’s Huts at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay was the main base of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) of 1911–14, led by Dr Douglas Mawson. It is one of only six sites remaining from the ‘heroic age’. 

    • Archaeological value
Mawson’s Huts contain numerous significant and relatively untouched artefacts from the ‘heroic age’, which form a rich resource of material available for research and interpretation, and potentially yielding information about aspects of expeditioner life not included in official written accounts.

    • Technical value
Mawson’s Huts is one of a group of ‘heroic age’ huts where pragmatic consideration of the need to provide permanent shelter in the Antarctic environment resulted in an expedition hut form suitable for polar regions. 

Mawson’s Huts were built in January, February and March 1912 and May 1913. In their surviving form and setting the huts illustrate the isolation and harsh environment of Cape Denison. They also demonstrate the cramped internal conditions encountered by expedition members: The living quarters in the Main Hut, for example, is a single space measuring 7.3 m x 7.3 m and provided sleeping and kitchen facilities for 18 men. 

The external form and internal structure of the largest hut, the Main Hut, are a simple but 
strong architectural concept: a square base topped by a pyramid roof (so that no direct hit 
can be registered by blizzards), with skylights to provide natural lighting.  Following the 
decision to combine two expedition bases into one, a hip-roofed accommodation hut measuring 5.5 m x 4.9 m was adjoined to the living quarters and equipped as a workshop. A 1.5 m verandah surrounded the structure on three sides, under the same roof. The verandah was used as a storage space but additionally assisted in insulating the hut from the weather. 

The two huts that form the Main Hut were built of Oregon frames clad with Baltic pine tongue-and-groove boards. They were prefabricated in Australia, and on-site construction was assisted by a branded letter code on framing members and coded colours painted on board ends. (None of the expedition party had any previous construction experience.) Today the Main Hut interior is a cathedral-like space, its survival at one of the windiest sites on Earth testimony to the strength 
of its design and skill of its construction. 

The three other AAE huts are:

    • The Absolute Magnetic Hut, constructed during February 1912. It measured 
1.8 m x 1.8 m in plan with a skillion roof and had an Oregon timber frame to which boards of remnant timber were fixed. The hut was used in association with, and as a reference point for, observations made in the Magnetograph House. Today is it considered to be a standing ruin.
    • The Magnetograph House was erected in March 1912 to house equipment used to measure variations in the South Magnetic Pole. It measures 5.5 m x 2 m with a shallow pitched skillion roof and no windows. Large rocks were heaped against the hut to provide a wind barrier; sheepskin and hessian attached to the roof also assisted in keeping the internal temperature constant. These innovations may have contributed to the relatively intact condition of the hut today. 
    • Construction of the Transit Hut commenced in May 1913, with packing case timbers being affixed to an Oregon frame. The structure was also clad in sheepskin and canvas. Originally known as the Astronomical Observatory, the hut housed the theodolite used 
to take star sights to determine the exact longitude of Cape Denison. It is now considered to be a standing ruin.

    • Social and aesthetic values
Mawson’s Huts are of aesthetic value; the building form of the huts themselves shows the functional and efficient planning that was undertaken in response to the site position and the elements endured by the expedition members. The weathering of the huts and the decay of the remains gives a feeling of time elapsed and exposure to the elements. 


2.0 Aims and Objectives
The aim of the management plan is to provide protection for the huts so that their values can be preserved. Management of the Area aims to:

    • avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;
    • maintain the historic values of the Area through a planned conservation work program;
    • allow management activities which support the protection of the values and features of the Area; 
    • allow scientific research; and
    • prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area, its features and artefacts by means of managed access to the four Australasian Antarctic Expedition huts. 


3.0 Management Activities
The following management activities may be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
    • a program of conservation work and environmental monitoring work on Mawson’s Huts and any artefacts contained within the huts and the five (5) metre buffer zone around the huts;
    • visits made as necessary for management purposes;
    • review of the Management Plan at least once every five (5) years, and update as required; and
    • consultation among national Antarctic programs operating in the region, or those with an interest or experience in Antarctic historic site management, with a view to ensuring the above provisions are implemented effectively.


4.0 Period of Designation
This ASPA is designated for an indefinite period. 


5.0 Description of the Area
5.1 Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Cape Denison is a 1.5 km-wide peninsula projecting into the centre of Commonwealth Bay, a 60 km-wide stretch of coast in George V Land, east Antarctica. The topography of Cape Denison is defined by a series of four rocky ridges, running south-southeast to north-northwest, and three valleys filled with ice, snow, and glacial moraine. The largest, most westerly of these valleys contain the four Australasian Antarctic Expedition huts. At the seaward end of this valley is Boat Harbour, a 400 m long indent in the coast. 

Map A indicates that Mawson’s Main Hut is located about 65 m from the harbour. The Transit Hut is located 40 m northeast of the Main Hut; the Magnetograph House is some 310 m 
north-northeast of the Main Hut; and the Absolute Magnetic Hut is some 275 m northeast of 
the Main Hut. 

The ASPA covers four areas. Each area consists of one hut and a five (5) metre buffer zone extending from the perimeter of the hut. The huts are located at:

    • Main Hut: 67º 00’ 31” S, 142º 39’ 39” E;
    • Transit Hut: 67° 00’30” S, 142° 39’ 42” E;
    • Absolute Magnetic Hut: 67° 00’23” S, 142° 39’ 48” E; and
    • Magnetograph House: 67° 00’ 21” S, 142° 39’ 37” E.

Cape Denison is the summer habitat for breeding Adélie penguins, Wilson’s storm-petrels, snow petrels and south polar skuas. Several colonies are located close to the proposed ASPA, and the ASPA areas may from time to time be traversed by penguins returning to their nests. Weddell seals, southern elephant seals and leopard seals have been recorded hauling out and, in the case of elephant seals, moulting at Cape Denison. However, the presence of seals within the immediate ASPA boundaries is unknown. 
 
The only flora evident near the huts is lichens and non-marine algae. Although the non-marine algae have yet to be studied, a list of lichen species is included at Appendix A.


5.2 Access to the Area
Sea, land and air access to Mawson’s Huts is difficult due to the rugged topography and climate of the area. Sea ice extent and uncharted bathymetry may constrain ship access to approximately 3nm from the coastline. Access is then gained either by small watercraft or by helicopter, although attempts to land are frequently hampered by heavy seas and prevailing north-westerly or katabatic winds. Boat landings may be made at Boat Harbour and due north of Sørensen Hut (within ASMA XXX). The helicopter landing site and approach and departure flight paths are indicated on Map B. 

Onshore access to and within the ASPA is on foot. With the exception of a short boardwalk close to the Main Hut, there are no roads or other transportation infrastructure on shore. The boardwalk is frequently covered by snow and therefore unusable for all but a few weeks of the year.

5.3 Location of structures and other anthropogenic objects within and near to the Area
The ASPA is located within the Cape Denison ASMA, which features several other structures from this expedition, including survey markers and the mast atop Anemometer Hill; and six non-historic structures, including temporary field shelters. The non-historic structure located closest to the ASPA is Granholm Hut, situated some 160 m northwest of the Main Hut. It contains numerous building materials, some field equipment and limited provisions. More building materials are stored beneath the hut. To the east of Granholm Hut is a stack of timbers for use in conservation work on the Main Hut. This stack is secured with galvanised wires attached to rock bolts. A similar timber stack is located on rocks some 100 m southeast of the Main Hut.

Objects left by the Australasian Antarctic Expedition are strewn within the Area. Of particular note is the artefact scatter located immediately north of the Main Hut.  Due to their significant cultural heritage value, these artefacts have been included within the Cape Denison ASMA and HSM No. XX. 

5.4 Location of other protected areas in or near to the Area
ASPA XXX is located within the Cape Denison ASMA. For further details about ASMA XXX, refer to the separate document pertaining to this Area. Cape Denison is simultaneously listed as a Historic Site under the Antarctic Treaty. 


6.0 Zones within the Area
There are no zones within ASPA XXX. 


7.0 Maps of the Area
Map A: Cape Denison Management Zones. This map shows the boundaries of the ASPA, the Historic Site, the Visual Protection Zone, ASMA No. XXX, and significant topographic features of the Area. The inset map indicates the location of Cape Denison in relation to the Antarctic continent.

Map B: Cape Denison Flight Paths and Bird Colonies. This map indicates the approaches, departures and landing site for helicopters, as well as the location of bird colonies in the vicinity.


8.0 Permit Conditions
Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol) prohibits entry into an ASPA except in accordance with a Permit.
Permits shall only be issued by appropriate national authorities and may contain general and specific conditions. A Permit may be issued by a national authority to cover a number of visits 
in a season. Parties operating in the Commonwealth Bay area shall consult together and with 
non-government operators interested in visiting the Area to ensure that visitors are managed appropriately.  

General conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the ASPA may include: 
    • activities related to conservation, inspection, maintenance, research and/or monitoring purposes; 
    • management activities consistent with and/or in support of the management objectives of the ASPA Management Plan objectives; and
    • educational and recreational purposes and activities, including tourism, consistent with the aims and objectives of this Management Plan.

The Permit should be issued for a stated period and shall be carried within the Area. A visit report should be supplied to the authority named in the Permit within three (3) months of the expiry date of the Permit.

8.1 Access to and movement within or over the Area
Onshore access to and within the huts is on foot. Depending on snow conditions, a short boardwalk close to the Main Hut may be accessible and should be used whenever practicable so as to avoid potential impact on the artefact scatter to the north of the Main Hut.

8.1.1 Visitor management
Day visits to Mawson’s Huts may be permitted, provided that:
    • each group is accompanied by a person with cultural heritage skills (to the satisfaction of the permitting Party) who remains in the Area for the duration of the visit;
    • briefings on this management plan and the values of the ASPA are conducted prior to visits and adequate site interpretation materials are made available to each visitor; and
    • visitors accessing the Area avoid sensitive historic artefacts, such as the artefacts scatter 
to the immediate north of the Main Hut, and other sensitive areas, such as lichen communities.

Visitors may enter the Main Hut and Magnetograph House provided that:
    • a person who has appropriate cultural heritage skills accompanies all visitors inside the huts; 
    • visitation of the interior of the huts is limited to up to four (4) persons (including the guide) at any one time inside the Main Hut, and up to three (3) persons (including the guide) in the Magnetograph House; and
    • artefacts are not touched.

8.2 Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area
    • Activities related to the regular program of conservation work, and activities for inspection, maintenance, research and/or monitoring purposes; 
    • scientific research;
    • visitation for the educational or recreational purposes, including tourism; and
    • visitation to assess the effectiveness of the management plan and management activities.

8.3 The installation, modification, or removal of structures
    • Other than to preserve the values of Mawson’s Huts, no new structures should be installed. 
    • No alteration to Mawson’s Huts shall be made, or structures installed, except for those required for the conservation, research, monitoring or maintenance activities specified above.
    • Cape Denison is simultaneously designated as a Historic Site. In accordance with Annex V, Article 8 (4) of the Protocol, no historic structure or other artefact at Cape Denison (including Mawson’s Huts) should be damaged, removed or destroyed. A historic artefact may only be removed from the Area for the purposes of restoration and/or preservation and then only in accordance with a Permit issued by a national authority. 
    • The repatriation of the artefact to its original location at Cape Denison is generally preferable unless further damage or deterioration may result from repatriation. 

8.4 The location of field camps
Routine use of Mawson’s Huts as accommodation is not permitted.

8.5 Restrictions on materials and organisms that may be brought into the Area
    • No living animals, plant material, micro-organisms or soils shall be deliberately introduced into the Area, and all reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental introductions. 
    • No poultry or poultry products, with the exception of sterilised egg powder, may be brought into the Area. 
    • No polystyrene packaging materials may be brought into the Area.
    • No pesticides or herbicides may be brought into the Area, except those used for the purposes of conservation or preservation of historic structures or artefacts, which shall 
be allowed into the Area in accordance with a Permit, and then removed from the Area 
at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.
    • Fuel, food and other materials are not to be deposited in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted.
    • Use of combustion-type lanterns is not permitted inside the Area under any circumstances.
    • Smoking in the Area is not permitted.

8.6 Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a separate Permit issued under Article 3 of Annex II (of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty) by the appropriate national authority specifically for that purpose. 

8.7 The collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
    • No historic structure or other artefact in the Area may be handled, disturbed or removed from the Area unless for restoration, preservation or protection purposes, or for scientific reasons, and then only in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate national authority.
    • The repatriation of the artefact to its original location at Cape Denison is generally preferable unless further damage or deterioration may result from repatriation. 
    • If an artefact is to be removed, the Australian national program should be informed so that documentation regarding that program’s archaeological research at Mawson’s Huts may be amended accordingly. 
    • Material of human origin that is likely to compromise the values of the Area, and which was not brought into the Area by the Permit holder or otherwise authorised, may be removed and repatriated unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ. In this event, the appropriate authority should be notified and advice sought.
8.8 Disposal of wastes
All wastes, including human solid wastes, should be removed from the Area to the maximum extent practicable. 

8.9 Measures that may be necessary to ensure aims and objectives of the Plan can continue to be met
    • The provision of information for tourists and other visitors to the Area, including a briefing video and interpretative literature;
    • a post-visit survey to assist in the formal monitoring of visitor impact (with primary regard to conservation requirements, rather than visitor access); 
    • off-site interpretation of the Area that maximises the use of available media, including the Internet; and
    • the development of skills and resources, particularly those related to the excavation of artefacts from ice, to assist in the protection of the Area’s values.

8.10 Reports to be made to the appropriate authority regarding visits to the Area
To enhance cooperation and the coordination of activities in the Area, to allow for effective site monitoring and management, to facilitate the consideration of cumulative impacts, and to fulfil the aims and objectives of this Management Plan, Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report Form contained in Appendix 4 of Resolution 2 (1998)(CEP 1).


9.0 Exchange of Information
Parties should maintain a record of activities approved for this ASPA and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of this Management Plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies in a publicly accessible archive (such as the dedicated Mawson’s Huts website at http://www.aad.gov.au/mawsons_huts) to maintain a record of visitation of the Area, to be used both in any review of this Management Plan and in organising further visitation and/or use of the Area.


10.0 Supporting Documentation
Angela Bender, mapping officer, Australian Antarctic Division, pers. comm. 9 April 2003; 
16 April 2003.

Dodge, C.W. 1948. BANZARE Reports, Series B, Vol. VII. British Australia New Zealand Antarctic Expedition.

Foreign & Commonwealth Office London/British Antarctic Survey 1997. List of Protected Areas in Antarctica. London, Cambridge: Foreign & Commonwealth Office/BAS: 9 22, 24, 25. 

Godden Mackay Logan 2001. Mawson’s Huts Historic Site, Cape Denison Commonwealth Bay Antarctica: Conservation Management Plan 2001. Sydney: Godden Mackay Logan: 36, 41–43, 110, 146, 147, passim.

Hayes, J. Gordon 1928. Antarctica: a treatise on the southern continent. London: The Richards Press Ltd.: 212.

McIntyre, D, and M. McIntyre 1996. “Weddell seal survey in Boat Harbour”. In: Australian Antarctic Division 1997. Initial Environmental Evaluation: AAP Mawson’s Huts Foundation Conservation Program 1997–98: Attachment D.

Mawson, D. 1996 (reprint). The Home of the Blizzard. Adelaide: Wakefield Press: 53, 54, 62, 68.

Patterson, D. 2003. Mawson’s Huts Conservation Expedition 2002: Field Leader’s Report.

Professor Rod Seppelt, botanist, Australian Antarctic Division, pers. comm. 19 February 2003.





Appendix A

Flora recorded at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay

The following taxa were recorded at Cape Denison by the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) of 1911–14 and the British Australian New Zealand Antarctic Research Expedition (BANZARE) in 1929–31 and published by Carroll W. Dodge in BANZARE Reports, Series B, Vol. VII, July 1948.

LICHENS

Lecideaceae
Lecidea cancriformis Dodge & Baker        
Toninia Johnstoni Dodge                            

Umbilicaiaceae
Umbilicaria decussata (Vill.) Zahlbr.            

Lecanoraceae
Rhizoplaca melanophthalma (Ram.) Leuck. & Poelt        
Lecanora expectans Darb.
Pleopsidium chlorophanum (Wahlenb.) Zopf

Parmeliaceae
Physcia caesia (Hoffm.) Th. Fr.                         
 
Usnaeceae
Pseudephebe minuscula (Nyl. ex Arnold) Brodo & D. Hawksw.            
Usnea antarctica  Du Rietz 
 
 Blasteniaceae
Candelariella flava (C.W. Dodge & Baker) Castello & Nimis                 
Xanthoria elegans (Link) Th. Fr.                    
Xanthoria Mawsoni Dodge

Buelliaceae
Buellia frigida Darb.          
 

BRYOPHYTES
No bryophytes evident at Cape Denison.
 
 
There are numerous non-marine algae; however, no surveys have been undertaken.


