

Proposals to improve the Management and Regulation of Antarctic Tourism

Submitted by the United Kingdom



SUMMARY

To contribute to the debate on Antarctic Tourism, this Working Paper re-examines the regulatory basis for tourism activities, identifies deficiencies in the existing management and regulation of those activities, and proposes means to address those matters through a series of recommendations (see below).  It is concluded however that the need for a further Annex to the Protocol is not warranted.

To enhance management and regulation of tourism, we recommend adoption of the following measures.

    1. Greater and more imaginative use of site-related management:

    (a) through enhanced use of area protection and management under Annex V to the Protocol;

    (b) adoption of “Site Guidelines” for the majority of tourist-visited sites along with amendment of Recommendation XVIII – I.

    2. Adoption of a Resolution calling on Parties to review their legal and administrative measures with respect to tourism to ensure adherence with the provisions of the Protocol;

    3. Adoption of stringent guidelines to control unsupervised ‘adventure tourism’ activities.  Such guidelines should address contingency plans, e.g. SAR, medivac provisions, insurance, liability etc;

    4. Creation of a centralised database on tourism, with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat mandated to collect, collate, analyse and disseminate information relating to Antarctic Tourism;

    5. Introduction of a co-ordinated monitoring programme with agreed methodological protocols to collect quantitative data on the potential impacts, including cumulative impacts, of tourism on the Antarctic environment;

    6. Critical evaluation and adoption of Guidelines for ships operating in Antarctic ice-covered waters; with such Guidelines being referred back to the IMO for (hopefully) adoption;

    7. Consolidation of the position of IAATO through Parties actively discriminating against non-IAATO affiliated tour-companies (e.g. in providing access to their Antarctic stations);

    8. Reconsideration of a “Departure State” regime (possibly held under a MOU amongst all ATCPs). The aim of this would be elaboration of consistent standards to be applied by Port States when inspecting expeditions due to depart to Antarctica from their territory;

    9. Production and dissemination of a ‘Lay Guide’ to the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol in all four languages of the Antarctic Treaty.  The target audience for such a guide should be tourists and tour operators.  The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat should be mandated to produce such a lay guide;

    10. Adoption of an on-board Observer Scheme.

Provisions that addressed the above would go a long way to ensure that tourism activities in Antarctica were conducted in a fully responsible and consistent manner.



Background

Stemming from a recommendation of ATCM XXIV, discussions on the regulation of Antarctic Tourism were held at the Warsaw Consultative Meeting (paras 107-120 of the Final Report of ATCM XXV refer).  This debate on tourism, particularly on the question of the appropriateness of a further Annex to the Environmental Protocol, was the first such substantive discussion to be held on the subject by the ATCM since the major exchanges in 1992 and 1994 (ATCM XVII (Venice) and XVIII (Kyoto)).

Central to the discussion in Warsaw was Working Paper (ATCM XXV/WP2) submitted by France.  This paper advocated that, in the face of increasing trends in Antarctic tourism, there was now the need for a further Annex to the Environmental Protocol, given the risks of environmental damage in Antarctica and that such commercial activity may hamper scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  The apparent rationale underpinning this contention was that neither the Antarctic Treaty nor its Environmental Protocol specifically address tourism.

ATCM XXV decided that further consideration of the issue of tourism should be given by the next Consultative Meeting (Madrid, 2003).



Recent Trends in Antarctic Tourism 

Tourism activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area have increased since the substantive debates by the ATCM of 1992 - 1994.  Specifically:

    • ship-borne tourists, particularly to the Peninsula area, have more than doubled;

    • ship-borne tourist activities have diversified,  and may include sub-aqua diving, camping, mountaineering, kayaking etc.  In addition increasing numbers of sites are being visited;

    • the increasing number of “joint venture” tourism activities between commercial tourist operators and some national Antarctic operators;

    • the advent of larger tourist vessels with a carrying capacity in excess of 1,000 passengers (first seen in the Antarctic in the 1999/2000 season and now with 3- 4 vessels each season);

    • re-introduction of tourism overflights, now occurring both to the “Ross Sea” and Peninsula regions;

    • ‘adventure tourism’.

Ship-borne Tourism

Despite the percentage increase in ship-borne tourism, overall numbers remain relatively low at around 12 - 13,000 p.a. (max. 13,826 in the 1999/2000 season) (see Figure 1) with around 20 tour ships operating in the Antarctic each season. This compares for example with the 40,000 plus ship-borne tourists now visiting Svalbard in the Arctic each year. There is however no indication that ship-borne tourism per se has had a detrimental impact on either the Antarctic environment, or on science activities.  



Against this increase the operating expertise of Antarctic tourist companies has been enhanced greatly over the past decade to its current high standard.  This parameter must also be factored in.  The majority of ship-borne tourism is undertaken by IAATO-affiliated companies which are required to operate under the Association’s by-laws.  These internal regulations are either in line with, or tougher than, the Guidelines adopted by the ATCM (e.g. Recommendation XVIII – I). 

In some seasons up to 50% of tour vessels operating in the Antarctic are however flagged with non-Treaty Parties such as the Bahamas, Liberia and Panama.  Given that most tour companies are IAATO-affiliated and registered in the territories of Consultative Parties this does not necessarily present practical problems in respect of e.g. adherence to the provisions of the Protocol and other regulations. But flagging of vessels does raise the issue of the effectiveness of self-regulation and jurisdiction.  These are matters dealt with later in this paper.

Further, COMNAP in its annual report to ATCM XXV stressed that, in the collective view of national operators, ship-borne tourism does not create particular problems for science programmes or the operation of national Antarctic stations.  The management of tourism in such situations can be dealt with effectively through bi-lateral arrangements between national operators and IAATO (or its individual tour companies); i.e. national operators maintain the effective control over activities at their facilities.  


Large Ships.

Most tourist ships operating in Antarctica are relatively small (both in tonnage and tourist carrying capacity), and are diesel powered.  This ensures that tourist numbers ashore are more easily managed, and that, even in the event of a major maritime accident involving a grounding or sinking, any environmental impact is likely to be relatively contained.

But the advent of large tourist vessels operating in Antarctic waters carries greater environmental and health and safety risks. Rarely, are such large ships ice-strengthened, whilst they are more likely to be fuelled by heavy bunker fuel oil carried in much greater quantities.  In the event of a maritime accident serious, more long-lasting pollution may result.  In addition there is a significant risk of major loss of  life because of the hostile environment, and the inadequacy of current search and rescue (SAR) services to cope with such demands.

IAATO has attempted to respond to the large ship issue by imposing (through revised by-laws of the Association) more rigorous conditions on the operation of such vessels in the Antarctic, for example by prohibiting on-shore visits from such ships.  Nevertheless, the inherent concerns relating to the operation of large, non ice-strengthened vessels in Antarctic waters remain.  These highlight the inability to date of Parties to elaborate further on the provisions of Article 10 of Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol.  Adopting Guidelines for ships operating in Antarctic waters would be one obvious way of proceeding.  But this matter has not received the attention from Treaty Parties that it warrants.


Tourism overflights	

Tourism overflights of Antarctica were discontinued after the tragic accident on Mount Erebus in 1979.  They were resumed again in 1994/95 with flights operating out of Australia to the Victoria Land Coast, Oates, George V and Adélie Land regions.  In the 2001/02 season, six flights carried a total of over 2000 passengers on this route whilst to date over 22,000 passengers on 64 flights have used this service.

In addition, numerous flights to the South Shetlands/Antarctic Peninsula are undertaken from Chile, though more precise information on these activities appears not to be generally available.

The risks, and potential environmental impacts associated with such aircraft activities remain unclear.  But they would need to be set in context against other aircraft operations over Antarctica undertaken both by national operators in support of their science and logistic programmes, and commercial intercontinental flights.

Adventure Tourism 

‘Adventure tourism’ has increased and diversified markedly since the early 1990s and poses particular problems.  These are not usually of an environmental nature, but rather relate to health, safety, insurance, and liability particularly with regards to “high risk” or extreme forms of ‘adventure tourism’.  Such activities are often difficult for Parties to regulate under their domestic Antarctic legislation, e.g. national laws enacting the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.  Yet adventure tourism has the capacity adversely to impact on national operators and their science programmes, (or indeed other tour operators) in the event of SAR, medivacs etc.  A serious accident, even to a small-scale Adventure tourism expedition, can lead to substantial knock-on effects and costs on those who have to effect emergency procedures.  These concerns were particularly highlighted by COMNAP in its annual report to ATCM XXV.


Regulatory Mechanisms

Earlier ATCM Recommendations (adopted prior to 1991; see Appendix I) now have limited relevance to the current management and regulation of Antarctic tourism.

The key  current regulatory provisions are therefore :

    • the Environmental Protocol and its Annexes;
    • Recommendation XVIII-I (the “Tourism Guidelines”);
    • Other subsequent decisions (specifically Resolution 3 (1995), Resolution 3 (1997), and Resolution 6 (1999).

The Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty is non-discriminatory in terms of its application. It embraces all activities in Antarctica including the regulation of tourism.  This is made clear both by the references in the Protocol to “all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area” (e.g. Article 3(1)), and in particular to the explicit references in Articles 3 (4), 8 (2) and 15(1) that the Protocol covers: 

“Activities………….. pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities”.

Treaty Parties concluded in 1992 that adoption of a further Annex to the Protocol was not warranted.  Rather “all Parties stressed that the Protocol and its Annexes apply to all activities in Antarctica including tourism and non-governmental activities” (para 111, of the Report of ATCM XVII, 1992 refers).  Parties amplified this interpretation in 1996 (para 83, of the Report of ATCM XX) by the statement that “the management and regulation of tourism was best achieved by effective implementation of the Protocol and its Annexes (through domestic implementing legislation)”.

In approaching the substantive debates in 1992 – 94 on tourism, the UK undertook a detailed analysis of the actual and potential impact of tourism activities, and the regulatory basis to address such activities.  As a result, deficiencies (i.e. gaps) in the then regulatory provisions were identified.  Stemming from that exercise the UK put forward a series of recommendations (see Appendix II).  A number,  though not all, of those recommendations have since been implemented.  Of particular importance was recognition of the need for guidelines for tour operators and expedition organisers, as well as for tourists and visitors. This issue was addressed through the adoption of Recommendation XVIII – I; a provision that remains crucial to the management of Antarctic tourism. 

Since then, ATCM attention on tourism has waned, and only three relatively minor, technical decisions have been made by the Treaty Parties – namely Resolutions 3 (1995) and 3 (1997) dealing with post-visit reporting procedures and Resolution 6 addressing the involvement of non-Consultative Parties in Antarctic tourism.

The  question now is whether in light of the issues and concerns raised above,  these various provisions continue to provide adequately for the management and regulation of Antarctic tourism.  If not, what further measures should be introduced?

Areas of Deficiency.

The UK has re-examined current tourism practices against regulatory provisions.  In our opinion there are five broad categories of activity that warrant further attention:

    A. Implementation of the Protocol and other existing provisions;

    B. Information needs;

    C. Monitoring (particularly with respect to potential cumulative impact);

    D. Technical standards;

    E. Jurisdiction.


A: Implementation of existing provisions

Full and consistent implementation of all provisions of the Environmental Protocol and its Annexes remains key to the effective management and regulation of tourism in Antarctica.  Yet twelve years after its adoption, and five years after its entry into force deficiencies in the implementation of the Protocol remain.  Issues that require further attention are: -

    (i) Site–related management, i.e. more constructive and imaginative use of Annex V and other site-related measures as a means of managing tourism activities;

    (ii) The enactment of effective national legislation;

    (iii) The introduction of rigorous administrative procedures to implement such law;

    (iv) Commitment from those non-Consultative Parties involved in Antarctic tourism through ratification of the Protocol and its Annexes, and implementation of their provisions.


(i)	Site Related Management

Annex V of the Protocol provides for the designation of protected and managed areas (ASPAs and ASMAs respectively).  To date the attention of the ATCM in addressing Annex V has largely been directed towards revising or introducing Management Plans for previously designated sites (SSSIs, SPAs etc) and transferring such sites over to the new (Annex V) system.  Relatively few new sites have been introduced, and only one Management Plan for an ASMA (Admiralty Bay, King George Island) put forward.  With the exception of the Historic huts in the Ross Sea area (e.g. ASPAs 155, 157, 158 and 159) no site designation proposals, with a view to managing tourism, have been proposed.

Yet Annex V provides a ready mechanism to regulate or manage tourism activities either by putting sites “off limits” (ASPA) or enabling activities to be controlled (ASMA).  That said, active  management within ASMAs is only likely to be effective if on-site management is available.  This may mean that tourism-related ASMAs are in practice only likely to be a realistic option if sited close, or in juxtaposition, to operational stations.  For this reason widespread use of ASMAs as a tourism management tool may be neither desirable nor effective.  In such circumstances other site-related measures could however have value and should be considered. 

In the Antarctic Peninsula area alone some 70 + sites are now visited regularly by tour operators. The management of such sites could be enhanced through the use of prescriptive “Site-specific Guidelines”.  In a separate Working Paper the UK has proposed such an approach.  That paper  advocates: -

    • an extension to Recommendation XVIII–I to include Site-specific Guidelines for visitor sites, and provides;

    • model examples of such Site Guidelines for adoption.

(ii)	National legislation and (iii) administrative procedures

It is still evident that not all Parties have domestic legislation that enables them effectively to manage or control tourism activities in Antarctica.  There have been recent examples whereby Consultative Parties, as flag-States, have apparently been unable to control the activities of their (large) tourist vessels in Antarctica through lack of legislation.  Furthermore, there would appear to be deficiencies in how some Parties administratively deal with tourism activities; for example – by ensuring that such activities undertake appropriate Environment Impact Assessments (EIA); by controlling such activities in Antarctica through some form of legal permit or licence, and thereafter having the legal capacity to take sanctions against tourists and tour operators if there is failure of compliance.  All of these matters require further attention if a consistently rigorous approach to managing and regulating tourism is to be achieved.

‘Adventure tourism’ is perhaps the most problematic example where management by Parties may be difficult to effect. Part of the problem may stem from the fact that national Antarctic legislation may be directed towards enactment of the environmental provisions of the Protocol.  Yet adventure tourism rarely generates significant environmental impact.  Rather, it is issues such as search and rescue (SAR), medivacs, insurance and liability that arise when national operators are called upon to respond to tourism emergencies.  These may cause significant disruption to science and logistic support programmes and incur substantial costs which may not necessarily be recoverable.

The real problem lies with unsupervised freestanding adventure tourism.  In contrast, certain IAATO-affiliated tour operators provide responsible, specialised services to adventure tourists including full back-up in the event of emergencies.  Indeed, such tour operators have on occasions mobilised their services to assist national operators.

(iv)	Commitment from non-Consultative Parties

Concerns have been expressed over a number of years that some non-Consultative Parties, notably Canada which had a not insignificant involvement in Antarctic tourism, had neither ratified the Environmental Protocol nor had the legal capacity to enact its provisions.  The problem was such as to prompt the UK (between 1998 and 2000 ) to issue permits for the activities of Adventure Network International (ANI) – a Canadian-registered company using Canadian-registered aircraft (albeit with a company address then in the UK).

To highlight these concerns the ATCM adopted Report language in both 1996 and 1998 followed up by Resolution 6 in 1999.  However, the efficacy of such texts remains debatable.

We therefore conclude that implementation of the Protocol and other existing provisions is a responsibility of Parties, and recommend that: -

    • through a Resolution, Parties be urged to review their legal and administrative measures with respect to tourism to ensure adherence with the provisions of the Protocol by both tourists and tour operators.  Furthermore, that consistency of approach and standards in implementing the Protocol be improved by enhanced information exchange between Parties (under Articles 13 and 17 of the Protocol), and the adoption of standardised guidelines e.g. similar to those in place regarding EIAs.

    • in respect of unsupervised adventure tourism, Parties should adopt stringent guidelines that ensure that adequate insurance and practical back-up is in place before such tourism is authorised by Governments. (Such guidelines should address contingency plans, e.g. SAR, medivac provisions, insurance, liability etc).


B:	Information Needs

A prerequisite for the effective management and regulation of tourism is accurate, comprehensive information on the status and trends of the industry.

Although the ATCM has adopted two Resolutions 3 (1995) and 3 (1997) requiring tour operators to report in detail on their activities, no collation or analyses of those data have been made by the Treaty Parties i.e. there is a lack of a centralised, co-ordinated and up-to-date database.

Instead, reliance has been placed on the annual report provided to the ATCM by IAATO (under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty).  In addition, information on Antarctic Tourism is collated annually by the United States’ National Science Foundation (NSF) (using the ATCM post-visit report forms) – a task that formally was also done by the International Database on Antarctic Tourism, (IDAT) instigated by ICAIR in New Zealand.  (Incidentally, IDAT was discontinued due to lack of sufficient funding and interest from most Treaty Parties). 

It is therefore recommended that:

-	to assist the ATCM in the management and regulation of Antarctic tourism, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, to be established in Buenos Aires, should be mandated to collect, collate, analyse and disseminate information relating to Antarctic tourism.  To this end the Secretariat should establish and maintain a comprehensive, up-to-date database on Antarctic tourism.  These tasks should be identified in the functions of the Secretariat.

C: 	Monitoring

The actual or potential impact of tourism on the Antarctic environment has been commented on at length, yet few quantitative data are available to back up this assertion.  Tourism however remains probably one of the activities in Antarctica with the greatest capacity to produce cumulative impacts stemming from repeated activities undertaken over a period of time.

This fact has been recognised by various workshops/meetings held under the auspices of e.g. SCAR/IUCN – including that convened by the US National Science Foundation, US Environmental Protection Agency and IAATO in La Jolla, California in June 2000.  (The recommendations from that Workshop however have yet to receive full attention from the ATCM).

Few quantitative studies have been undertaken of the environmental impact of tourism in Antarctica.  All have been limited geographically; most restricted in duration.  The Site Inventory Project undertaken by the NGO “Oceanites” in the Antarctic Peninsula area represents perhaps the most comprehensive approach to collecting data with the specific objective of monitoring the potential environmental impact of the industry at a range of tourist-visited sites.  

Although ATCM XIX (para 61 of the Final Report) urged Parties to: -

    • Support the identification of (such) sites – both impacted and control;

    • determine indicator variables; and

    • evaluate site-related management Measures, 

there has been no agreement on, or co-ordinated commitment to, a centralised monitoring programme.  Input to tourism monitoring by the Treaty Parties remains under-resourced.  For example, the monitoring undertaken by “Oceanites” has been supported by few Parties (e.g. Germany, UK and US).  There has been little attempt to expand this work.

The consequence is that the information base on which to determine and quantify the nature and scale of impact (or otherwise) of tourism on the Antarctic environment is inadequate.

Monitoring needs to be expanded beyond that of the traditional tourist-landing sites to also encompass e.g. the marine environment, overflights, and visits to certain Historic Sites and Monuments.


It is therefore recommended that:

-	Treaty Parties give greater attention to collecting relevant data to ensure that the potential impacts of tourism are adequately monitored.  Agreed, consistent methodological protocols need to be established.  Monitoring should be extended both geographically and to include a wider spectrum of tourism activities.   Ideally, a centralised, co-ordinated programme of monitoring should be instigated (akin to CCAMLR’s Eco-System Monitoring Programme (CEMP)), with data held centrally (by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat).  This task should be identified as a function of the Secretariat.

In the shorter term, greater commitment from the Consultative Parties in terms of financial and other resources towards Tourism Monitoring should be encouraged.

D:	Technical Standards

	Crucial to this issue is adoption of guidelines for shipping in Antarctic waters.

Tourism vessels are a major component of the shipping operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Although many of these vessels are relatively new, and built for purpose, a significant proportion are flagged with non-Treaty Parties and thus outwith the regulatory control of the Antarctic Treaty System.  A number of those vessels, particularly in the case of large tourist vessels, are not ice-strengthened, nor particularly adapted for operating in ice-covered waters.

Article 10 of Annex IV of the Protocol states that:

“In the design, construction, manning and equipment of ships engaged in or supporting Antarctic operations, each Party shall take into account the objectives of this Annex”

This succinct, yet crucially important Article has yet to receive adequate attention from Treaty Parties.  What the standards should be for Antarctic shipping remain to be elaborated.  It would not be appropriate in this paper to rehearse the recent history of discussions on Antarctic shipping.  Suffice it to say that the IMO, at the 76th session of its Maritime Safety Committee and 48th session of the Marine Environment Protection Committee, adopted in December 2002 “Guidelines for Ships operating in Arctic Ice-covered Waters”.  

As a matter of some import it is therefore recommended that Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties :- 
	
    • evaluate critically the applicability of the Arctic Guidelines (as adopted by the IMO) to Antarctic conditions (see comment below); 

    • adopt Guidelines, in existing or modified form (to suit Antarctic conditions) by means of a Decision of the ATCM;

    • subsequently transmit those Guidelines to the IMO for their consideration and  (hopefully) adoption.

(Comment.  Parties will recall that COMNAP has already undertaken a technical review of the IMO’s draft (as was) of Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-covered Waters, and concluded that with some relatively modest amendments those Guidelines could indeed be extended to the Antarctic Treaty Area.  (See ATCM XXV/Info Paper 40 submitted by COMNAP).

On the basis of the final form of the Guidelines adopted by the IMO, COMNAP should now be asked whether its recommendations of 2002 still hold.  If so, preparation of an amended (Antarctic) version of the Guidelines should be a relatively straightforward exercise.

It is recommended that the ATCM adopt its own Guidelines for Antarctic Shipping prior to taking such Guidelines back to the IMO, given the length of time that the documents may take to achieve formal adoption in the IMO.  ATCM Guidelines would in the shorter-term ensure that at least a proportion of Antarctic shipping (that flagged by Treaty Parties) could be held under agreed standards.  Such a move would, we expect, also be taken note of by IAATO.  If however consistency of standards is to be achieved across the wider range of vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty Area, then the involvement of the IMO will be crucial, so that third Party-flagged vessels are also addressed).



E:	Jurisdiction

The unique jurisdictional regime in Antarctica has significant implications for the management and regulation of tourism.  For example in respect of:-

    • extra territorial jurisdiction over nationals;

    • the activities of third Party States and their flag-vessels.

The latter has the more profound implications in respect of tourism activities, though the ability to which States can exercise effective control over their nationals in Antarctica has a major bearing on whether adventure tourism for example can indeed be controlled.  Such control has been introduced by the UK in respect of British expeditions proceeding to Antarctica.  These require authorisation by permit.  Such legal provisions do not however extend to UK nationals going to Antarctica on organised tourist ships that are under the management of a responsible Tour Operator.  Nor does the UK Government permit expeditions that already have written authorisation from another Contracting Party to the Protocol. 

The difficulties of ensuring effective management and control of the tourism industry when a substantial proportion of the ships operating in Antarctic waters are flagged with non-Treaty Parties has been raised at previous ATCMs.  In the absence of effective jurisdictional control within the Antarctic Treaty Area, the two most applicable means of ensuring compliance with agreed standards are:-

    • self regulation through the industry – legally weak but practically implementable;

    • other means of jurisdictional control, effected outside the Treaty Area.

Used together these two mechanisms could achieve an enhanced degree of compliance with the tough standards set by the ATCM.  Certainly, if neither were utilised the effective management and regulation of the Antarctic tourism industry would be in doubt.

Self-Regulation.  Flagging of vessels with third-Party States means that a significant proportion of the ships operating in Antarctica are outwith the control of the ATCPs.  That said, the great majority of vessel operations are undertaken to appropriately high standards through self-regulation by the industry.  From a legal perspective such a situation is not ideal.  But given only partial jurisdictional control, self-regulation by the industry is nevertheless to be welcomed.  It does provide a practical and workable solution in a situation which is legally imperfect.  

Self-regulation through the by-laws of IAATO ensures the maintenance of high standards of the provisions of the Protocol.  IAATO-affiliated companies now encompass 94% of ship-borne tourism in Antarctica.  Companies outside of IAATO may or may not operate to the same standards and provide the ATCM/Treaty Parties individually with no central point of contact.  Effective dialogue with the industry is therefore more difficult.  Despite the imperfections in the system, the UK believes it is to the mutual benefit of both the ATCPs and IAATO for the position of the latter to be consolidated.  The presence of a commercial Association provides the Treaty Parties with a clear focus for dialogue.  For a number of years the UK has attempted to bolster the position of IAATO through a national policy which stipulates that no access to UK-operated stations, will be provided to non-IAATO companies.  Such a mechanism provides some incentive for tour operators to affiliate to the Association.  A similar policy is implemented by some other national operators e.g. the U.S.  The efficacy of such a policy would however be greatly increased if universally adopted by Treaty Parties and their national operators.

-	It is therefore recommended that Treaty Parties adopt a policy of providing access to their stations and facilities, as appropriate, only to IAATO-affiliated tour companies.

Port State Jurisdiction

Means to effect tough, consistent standards in the Antarctic Treaty Area could be effected by Treaty Parties outside the Treaty Area though implementation of coastal or port-state control.  Proposals to this effect have been presented previously to the Consultative Parties e.g. by the Netherlands at ATCM XX (Working Paper 9), the UK at ATCM XXI (Working Paper 22) and ASOC at ATCM XXV (Info Paper 63).  Important commentaries on the use of such jurisdictional control have also been presented, e.g. by Orrego Vicuna an eminent Chilean international lawyer. The view of the UK is that the most appropriate way to achieve this would be through a comprehensive Port State regime which would apply equally to all Consultative Parties irrespective of their geographical location. Such a mechanism would in effect be a logical extension to existing provisions under both the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol.  Treaty Parties already have certain responsibilities for expeditions (which by definition also includes tourism expeditions, e.g. tour ships) which are either:

“organised in, or depart to Antarctica from, their territories……….”

This provision of Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty is confined to a reporting mechanism through advanced notification.  In the Protocol however it has broader implications.  Although mention of the Article VII formula relating to expeditions is only found explicitly in the Protocol in three references  (Articles 3(4), 8 (2) and 15 (1), that in the first relates to the general principles of the Protocol and its Annexes. It therefore encompasses generically all provisions of the instrument and goes well beyond mere reporting through advanced notification.  It follows that a Party that has responsibility for the activities of an expedition in Antarctica ought to take steps to ensure that such activities are conducted to the highest standards determined by the Protocol.  One such means would be through checks made in ports (or airports) under the control of Consultative Parties prior to expeditions departing to Antarctica.  Article VII(5) makes no mention of the nationality of expeditions departing to Antarctica from the territory of a State.  From this we conclude that the activities of third Parties may also be held under this provision.  Certainly, this is the interpretation exercised in UK law.  This defines for example a “British expedition” not by whether it is composed of UK nationals, but rather whether it departs to Antarctica from UK territory – irrespective of the nationality of participants, or flag or registration of the vessel or aircraft.

But if it is to be most effective, port state control must be conducted to consistent standards agreed between Parties; otherwise standards will inevitably be varied with the potential consequence that tour operators will seek out that country that operates the least rigorous controls in its ports.

Our view, expressed previously, remains that to avoid certain sensitivities the most pragmatic way through which to achieve this end would be through a comprehensive port-state regime.  This should apply equally to all Consultative Parties, irrespective of their geographic location, from whose territory ships and aircraft depart to Antarctica.  Such a “Departure State” regime could as suggested by ASOC (2002) be held under a MOU based on the approach of the 1982 Paris MOU.  It is recognised that such an MOU could have novel features compared to other MoUs concluded under regional arrangements in that (a) it did not relate to a defined geographical area of port coverage such as the Mediterranean or Caribbean.  Rather, its membership would be the Consultative Parties and the geographical focus Antarctica, and (b) port inspections would go beyond those matters normally subject to inspections, e.g. adherence to SOLAS and MARPOL, and also include the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.

    • It is therefore recommended that Parties give consideration to the introduction of a comprehensive port state control mechanism that would ensure adherence to the standards of the Protocol by vessels due to depart to Antarctica.


Miscellaneous

Appendix I sets out the recommendations of the UK from 1992 regarding Antarctic tourism.  A number of those proposals have since been implemented by the ATCM e.g. Guidelines for Tourist and Tour operators, and enhanced information exchange.  Others such as a centralised database are addressed elsewhere in this paper.  Two matters however warrant further consideration: -

    • a Lay Guide to the Treaty and its Environmental Protocol;

    • an on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels.

Lay Guide

The standards to be adopted in Antarctica are laid out in legal terms in the Treaty, its Environmental Protocol and national implementing legislation.  But as a means of ensuring that all who go to Antarctica are made aware of the environmental standards that they will be expected to comply with, a ‘Lay Guide’ to the texts should be prepared in the four Treaty languages and made widely available.  This should be written in plain, easily understood language.  At the same time it would need to be clear and unambiguous and entirely consistent with the legal text.  The task of preparing such a guide should be delegated to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

-	It is therefore recommended that the Secretariat, to be established in Buenos Aires, prepare a draft ‘Lay Guide’ to the Protocol.

On-board observers

Some countries (e.g. New Zealand) have employed on-board national observers on tourist vessels, particularly when ships are intending to visit their sub-Antarctic islands.  But in some instances national tourism observers have also been employed (e.g. by the US) within the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Such observers however have no status under the Antarctic Treaty.

Owing to the fact that, under Article VII of the Treaty (as well as Article 14 of the Protocol) ships and aircraft can only be inspected “at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel…” these inspection provisions have only limited application to tourism activities. In consequence, and partly due to these restrictions (which respect the freedom of high seas rights to be found under Article VI of the Treaty), very few tourism activities or facilities have been subject to formal inspection - though note the Treaty Inspections in 1991 of the German-flagged Europa, the Liberian-flagged Explorer and the Russian-flagged Akademik-Sergey Vavilov in 1991, and the Bahamas-flagged  MarcoPolo in 1999.

CCAMLR’s Schemes of International Observation and Inspection provide two contrasting mechanisms to gain information about fishing vessels.  Verification through Inspectors, and information gathering from Observers.  The first, unlike Antarctic Treaty Observers, have the authority to board vessels underway within the Convention Area and conduct inspections to check on  compliance.  Such inspections tend to be short-term spot checks.  The function of CCAMLR Observers in contrast is to report facts regarding the operation of fishing vessels.  The task of subsequently determining whether such facts relate to compliance, or not, is for the CCAMLR Commission itself to determine.

The UK sees virtue in adopting a parallel scheme which at least provides for the possibility of Antarctic Treaty Observers to be deployed on board tourist vessels in a manner akin to CCAMLR Observers.  At present no such mechanism exists. There is therefore no means for the Treaty Parties to gain first hand information on the activity of those vessels.  We are not advocating, nor do we believe it warranted, that all (or even most) tourist vessels would be required to carry such observers.  Rather, it would be a mechanism to be used more sparingly.  This paper does not detail how such an Observer Scheme might be constituted, though the scheme used by CCAMLR would provide  a useful starting point.

-	It is therefore recommended that Parties give consideration to the introduction of a on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty Area.


Conclusions

We conclude that despite the rising trend in tourism activities, the predicted widespread impact of tourism forecast by some has not materialised.  Most Antarctic tourism is conducted in a highly responsible way under stringent rules, albeit often under a form of industry self-regulation.  Some worrying trends are however evident such as the escalation of adventure tourism and the increasing use of large (> 1000 passengers) tourist vessels.

The UK continues to believe that the most effective means of managing and regulating the tourism industry in Antarctica is through implementation of the provisions of the Environmental Protocol. These explicitly include all tourist and non-governmental activities.  Consistency of approach amongst Parties towards implementation is however important and it could be achieved by adoption of agreed guidelines.

To enhance management and regulation of tourism, we recommend adoption of the following measures.

    1. Greater and more imaginative use of site-related management:
    (c) through enhanced use of area protection and management under Annex V to the Protocol;

    (d) adoption of “Site Guidelines” for the majority of tourist-visited sites along with amendment of Recommendation XVIII – I.

    2. Adoption of a Resolution calling on Parties to review their legal and administrative measures with respect to tourism to ensure adherence with the provisions of the Protocol;

    3. Adoption of stringent guidelines to control unsupervised ‘adventure tourism’ activities.  Such guidelines should address contingency plans, e.g. SAR, medivacs provisions, insurance, liability etc;

    4. Creation of a centralised database on tourism, with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat mandated to collect, collate, analyse and disseminate information relating to Antarctic Tourism;

    5. Introduction of a co-ordinated monitoring programme with agreed methodological protocols to collect quantitative data on the potential impacts, including cumulative impacts, of tourism on the Antarctic environment;

    6. Critical evaluation and adoption of Guidelines for ships operating in Antarctic ice-covered waters; with such Guidelines being referred back to the IMO for (hopefully) adoption;

    7. Consolidation of the position of IAATO through Parties actively discriminating against non-IAATO affiliated tour-companies (e.g. in providing access to their Antarctic stations);

    8. Reconsideration of a “Departure State” regime (possibly held under a MOU amongst all ATCPs). The aim of this would be elaboration of consistent standards to be applied by Port States when inspecting expeditions due to depart to Antarctica from their territory;


    9. Production and dissemination of a ‘Lay Guide’ to the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol in all four languages of the Antarctic Treaty.  The target audience for such a lay guide should be tourists and tour operators.  The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat should be mandated to produce such a lay guide;

    10. Adoption of an on-board Observer Scheme.












































ATCM decisions relating to Antarctic Tourism






Recommendation IV – 27 (1966):		Effects of Antarctic Tourism;

Recommendation VI – 7 (1970):	Effects of Tourists and non-Governmental Expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Recommendation VII – 4 (1972):	Effects of Tourists and non- Governmental Expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Recommendation VIII – 9 (1975):	Effects of Tourists and non- Governmental Expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Recommendation X – 8 (1979)	Effects of Tourists and non- Governmental Expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Recommendation XVIII –I (1994):	Tourism and non-Governmental Activities;

Resolution 3 (1995):	Reporting on Tourism and non-Governmental Activities;

Resolution 3 (1997):	Standard form for advanced notification and post-visit reporting on Tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica;

Resolution 6 (1999):	Adherence to the Environmental Protocol by non-Consultative Parties.	












UK recommendations to improve the management/regulation of tourism (from 1992)







    • Produce revised guidelines for tour operators and expedition organisers, as well as for tourists and visitors;


    • Produce new provisions for information exchange;


    • Introduce observer scheme for tourist vessels;


    • Liase with e.g. IMO, Marine Certification Societies on further provisions on shipping, and liability;


    • Develop lay guide to Treaty and its Environmental Protocol;


    • Task SCAR/COMNAP to convene Working Group on Tourism;


    • Introduce central co-ordination of collation, of collection, collation, analysis of data on tourism and dissemination of such information;


    • Liase with IMO on Antarctic Special Area Designation under MARPOL 73/78. 









