




ATCM XXV 
Working Paper WP-041
Agenda Item 4(a)
Australia
Original:  English





















Procedure for the Appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty 































Procedure for the Appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty 


Advertisement


    (i) Consultative Parties may advertise, at their own cost, the vacancy in publications and websites they consider appropriate.

Eligible Applicants

    (ii) Nationals of a Consultative Party may apply for the post of Executive Secretary to their National authority, who will be responsible for forwarding applications to the Depositary Government.

Submission of Applications

    (iii) Applications must be submitted electronically to the Depositary Government after written notification to the Consultative Parties of the lodgement process.  

Receipt of Applications

    (iv) The Depositary Government will notify Consultative Parties of the receipt of applications who will then notify their nationals accordingly.

Availability of Applications

    (v) Each application received by the Depositary Government by 15 February 2004 shall be forwarded electronically by the Depositary Government to the Representative of each Consultative Party.  Consultative Parties shall be notified in writing in advance by the Depositary Government that applications are being forwarded.

Ranking of Applicants

    (vi) Each Consultative Party will notify the Depositary Government of it’s 10 preferred candidates in order of preference, by 31 March 2004.  On receipt of all Consultative Parties’ preferences, the Depositary Government will aggregate individual applicants’ rankings, awarding 10 points for a first preference, 9 points for a second preference etc.

Short List

    (vii) The candidates with the five highest aggregate scores will be short-listed for selection.  Should the application of any candidate be withdrawn, the next ranking candidate will be substituted.

Interview Process

    (viii) The short-listed candidates will be notified to Consultative Parties by the Depositary Government by 15 April 2004.  Consultative Parties will invite their short-listed candidates to attend an interview at the XXVII ATCM.
    (ix) Travel and per diem expenses of candidates invited for final selection will be met by the applicants except where a Consultative Party pays for the costs directly.  Consultative Parties are strongly urged to assume these costs.
    (x) Short-listed candidates will be interviewed by those Heads of Delegation wishing to participate in the selection process at the XXVII ATCM.  
    (xi) The out-come of the selection process will be notified to short-listed candidates at the conclusion of the first week of the XXVII ATCM by the Chair of that meeting.

Start Date

    (xii) The chosen candidate will report to the Secretariat headquarters in Buenos Aires for commencement of duties as soon as possible following their appointment, but no later than the date agreed to by the ATCM.


Draft Advertisement

EXECUTIVE SECRETARY OF THE SECRETARIAT OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY


The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) invites applications for the position of Executive Secretary.
The ATCM consists of 27 Consultative Parties which meet on an annual basis to consult on the application of the Antarctic Treaty.  The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty is located in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
The Executive Secretary manages a small administrative staff to carry out the duties of the Secretariat assigned to it by the ATCM.   She/he presents and manages the Secretariat’s budget; organises meetings of the ATCM and performs other duties identified by the ATCM.

Selection Criteria
Applicants must have the following qualifications:
    1. Experience or detailed knowledge of the operations of international, regional and/or intergovernmental organisations;
    2. Demonstration of a high level of managerial and leadership experience and proven competence, in such areas as;
        a. the selection and supervision of professional, administrative and technical staff;
        b. the preparation of financial budgets and the management of expenditures;
        c. the organisation of meetings and provision of secretariat support for high level committees; and
        d. the oversight and management of computer services and information technology.
    3. Familiarity with Antarctic affairs;
    4. Fluency in one of the four official working languages of the ATCM (English, French, Russian or Spanish); 
    5. A post-graduate academic degree, or equivalent qualification; and
    6. Be a national of a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty.

Salary and Allowances
The appointment will be for a term of four years with the possibility of one additional four-year appointment.  The commencement salary will be $US88,762 p.a. net.  No Argentine  income tax will be payable on this salary, except in the case of the successful applicant being an Argentine national or permanent resident.  An additional 25 % of this salary shall be paid to the successful applicant to provide for allowances and salary on-costs, such as superannuation, life and medical insurance, installation grant and repatriation allowances and child education benefits.  
Interview
A short list of applicants will be drawn up by the Depositary Government by 15 April 2004.  Interviews of the short-listed candidates will be undertaken during the XXVII ATCM to be held in Cape Town, South Africa (24 May – 4 June 2004  ).
Availability
The individual chosen for the post of Executive Secretary should be available to commence duties as soon as possible following appointment, but no later than the date determined by the ATCM.
Additional Information
Please consult the following website ???????? for complete information on duties, selection criteria the application process, staff regulations and other relevant documents.
Equal Employment Opportunity
The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty is an equal opportunity employer.
Closing Date
Applications must be received no later than 15 February 2004 and must be submitted in electronic format to ?????????

STANDARD SUMMARY APPLICATION FORM

Name:
Address:
Phone:
Fax:
Email Address:
Nationality:

University and/or Other Qualifications
(List degrees and years awarded)
Language Proficiency in English, French, Russian, Spanish
(Note level)
Professional and Management Experience
(Include additional information elaborating on this summary in resume or narrative application)
