

WP:….
CEP VI Agenda Item: 4.d
Presented by: Argentina


PROGRESS REPORT 
OF THE CEP INTERSESIONAL CONTACT GROUP 
ON ANNEX II REVIEW


During the IV CEP Meeting (St. Petersburg, 2001) the Committee decided to undertake a rolling review of the Annexes to the Madrid Protocol. The IV CEP Final report, under par.6, stated that “The CEP noted that its work, most recently the intersessional considerations of Specially Protected Species, had shown that improvements could be made to the Annexes of the Protocol. The Committee therefore decided to conduct a rolling review of the Annexes, starting at CEP V with Annex II”.

At the V CEP Meeting (Warsaw, 2002), after the presentation of WP 7 (Argentina), WP37 (SCAR), and IP 60 (ASOC), the CEP decided to establish an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG), to start with the review of Annex II to the Protocol, according to the following Terms of Reference (TORs):

    1. Examine the text of Annex II;

    2. identify those articles requiring deletion, amendment or modification and to prepare an amended draft text of Annex II as appropriate ensuring consistency with the Protocol and its annexes;

    3. explore options for developing criteria that Parties could use in making their decisions on permit request to collect specimens for educational or cultural purposes as provided for under Article 3 of Annex II and

    4. present a progress report to CEP VI to which would be attached an amended draft text of Annex II. This should be indicated the changes proposed to the existing Annex as clearly as possible.


The ICG is coordinated by Argentina, and contact points from Australia, Chile, Spain, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Uruguay, USA, SCAR and ASOC have participated, so far, of three rounds of discussions.
 
This paper details the outcomes of the ICG for the first intersessional period, for the consideration of the Committee. In particular, guidance is requested on a number of specific issues. 


DISCUSSION

Over the first intersessional period, the ICG has been able to achieve the following tasks:

    a) Examine the text of Annex II;
    b) identify those articles requiring deletion, amendment or modification;
    c) explore options for developing criteria that Parties could use in making their decisions on permit request to collect specimens for educational or cultural purposes as provided for under Article 3 of Annex II, and
    d) present a progress report to CEP VI 

There has been insufficient time for the ICG to fully consider the tasks contained in the second part of ToR 2 (to prepare an amended draft text of Annex II as appropriate ensuring consistency with the Protocol and its annexes), and in the last sentence of ToR 4 ( to attach an amended draft text of Annex II, indicating the changes proposed to the existing Annex as clearly as possible). Consequently, these tasks have only been partially completed. 

Further discussion is still needed on these issues, and the ICG considers it necessary to take forward its work for another intersessional period.  

The conclusions and/or partial trends the Group has drawn after the consideration of each issue contained in the ToRs, are presented below. The reasons why the issue was identified are given, followed by the (either definitive or partial) results of the discussions after this first intersessional period. The WP 7 (Argentina), WP 37 (SCAR) and IP 60 (ASOC), presented to the CEP V (Warsaw, 2002), were used as a basis to trigger discussions.



1.Title of the Annex: In WP 37, SCAR had proposed renaming the Annex to “Conservation of Antarctic Biota”, as this is currently considered a more inclusive scientific term than the current “flora and fauna”, which has proved difficult to apply objectively to some of the lower organisms. 

The ICG concurred that the title of the annex should be changed. It was agreed that the title should be “Conservation of Antarctic Living Organisms”. The term “Antarctic Living Organisms” was considered as a more useful alternative to the term “biota”, since such a title would be more readily understood by people of all academic backgrounds.


2.Preamble for Annex II: WP 37 stated that since only one of the Annexes is specifically described in the body of the Protocol, it would be helpful if all the Annexes started with a descriptive preamble defining their objectives more clearly. Thus, SCAR pointed out two inconsistencies of the Protocol: 1) the unbalanced situation between Annex I and the other four annexes, and 2) the need to clearly state the purpose of each Annex. 

Several participants have not supported the  need for including a preamble in Annex II. Others noted that this issue, although an important one, is not critical at this stage of the review. Therefore, the ICG has considered it convenient to continue with the treatment of this issue during the next intersessional period.


3. Re-organization of the Articles of Annex II: WP 7 noted that the likely threats to Antarctic species identified in Annex II (Taking, Harmful Interference and Introduction of Alien Species) as well as the different mechanisms to afford protection to Antarctic flora and fauna (Prohibition of taking and harmful interference unless a permit is issued; Designation of Specially Protected Species and Prohibition to introduce non-native species, unless a permit is issued) are currently scattered around the text of Annex II. The paper proposed that they (threats and protection mechanisms) should be re-organised under two single titles/sections within the text, so as to provide Annex II with a clear statement of what kind of threats and what kind of measures / procedures can be implemented, and the circumstances in which they should be applied.

The Group suggests that, in order to avoid that a reorganization of paragraphs might turn into an attempt to redefine issues, leading to a major re-drafting of the Annex, (which is not an objective of this review) this issue could be revisited and discussed further at a later stage. 


4. Scope of the Annex: In its WP 7, Argentina pointed out that, from an environmental point of view, the fact that the scope of Annex II is restricted only to certain species (those defined in its Article 1) confronts basic ecological principles and impedes a proper compliance with the environmental principles of the Protocol. In parallel, SCAR’s WP 37, expressed that there would seem to be a substantive opportunity, as the Annex is presently drafted, to include any marine species within those elements from which they are not specifically excluded. The paper also noted that the inclusion of any species warranting protection from either marine or terrestrial realms makes scientific sense, but may run counter to what is believed to be current jurisdictional responsibilities.

All opinions on this issue coincided in that it would be better scientifically if the scope of Annex II was broadened to include all living organisms in the Antarctic. 
The use of the term Conservation of Antarctic Living Organisms as the title of the Annex would solve the questions related to its scope, as it would encompass all living organisms.  The title would then reflect the scope of the Annex (which would make it more coherent), and, in addition, once all living organisms were included, the Annex would be fully consistent with the objectives and principles of the Protocol. 
However, some members expressed caution about detailed elaboration of the scope of the Annex in recognition that some grey areas (with regard to jurisdictional responsibilities) might exist between the CEP and other component bodies of the Antarctic Treaty System, particularly CCAMLR. Therefore, the ICG considers that there is need for collaboration and discussion between the Committee and other relevant ATS bodies to ensure a common understanding for those instances where there might be some uncertanties.


5. Area to which Annex II applies: SCAR WP 37 noted that Article 1 (a) & (b) of Annex II do not define native mammals and birds as occurring or visiting only land or ice shelves. In addition, and in parallel with these paragraphs of Article 1, SCAR, when referring to the issue of introduction of non-native species, questioned whether or not the competence of the ATCM extends to the high seas, since, if it does, then the Parties may find themselves in an uncertain situation, when issuing permit introductions into “water” in the AT area. 

some members felt that: 
    • there are unclear aspects associated to this matter, 
    • some action needs to be taken with respect to collaboration and discussion between the various AT bodies/conventions to ensure a common understanding of competence, and that 
    • it is worth highlighting this issue to the CEP, so as to be passed to the ATCM for consideration. 
    • 
However, most members considered that this question lies beyond the scope of this ICG.

6.Taxonomic definitions [Article 1 (a), (b), (c) and (d)]: The Argentine paper warned that the species defined in Annex II were inconsistent, as some were taxonomically defined (Aves and Mammalia), while others were not (invertebrate and plant). The SCAR´s paper raised a similar point when it stated that parasites are categorised by function whilst all the other groups are defined taxonomically.

Most participants agreed that, if the scope of the Annex included all Antarctic livings organisms, there would be no need to define any particular taxonomic category, and, hence, this inconsistency would be resolved. However, some members indicated that it might not be feasible that all protection measures/provisions of Annex II could apply to all taxonomic categories (e.g. permits regarding invertebrates), ant that it therefore might be necessary to maintain a list of taxonomic categories.
The resolution of this issue will be tied to what eventually is concluded about the Title and Scope of Annex II as well as other issues related to the Annex II discussions. 


7.Invertebrates: Both papers (WP 7 & 37) have noted that Invertebrates, as defined by Article 1 of Annex II, could not be protected by some mechanisms included in the text of the Annex (i.e. prohibition of “taking” and the designation of “specially protected species”), as they are not specifically included in the provisions of such an article. This situation looks, at least at first sight, unfair, and senseless. Discussion took place on whether the category Invertebrates should be included in the text of Annex, in such a way that all mechanisms of protection therein can apply to them.

The Group agreed that, if invertebrates were included in the scope of the annex as Antarctic living organisms, then they would be covered by the prohibition and permit conditions of Article 3. 
On this particular matter it was also stated that some problems might arise in the permitting procedures, since, simply by moving around or doing any work, invertebrates might be killed, injured or molested. Therefore, this particular aspect should be subject to further discussion.


8. Taking and Harmful Interference: WP 7 notes that “taking” seems to be too-wide a concept, involving very different actions, such as killing, handling, molesting, etc.  These actions can cause different effects on a given species, while the term “Harmful Interference” is not defined in Annex II. Article 1 [h] only lists certain actions that could cause "harmful interference”, which, on occasions, overlap the definition of  “taking.” 
SCAR´s paper argued that terms such as “local distribution”, “disturbance”, “concentration” and “significantly affected” were not accurate and might be subject to differing interpretations. 

The group acknowledged that certain aspects associated with these terms need elaboration, since the current text of Annex II leaves room, on occasions, for some overlap between the activities/actions included under the definitions of Taking and Harmful Interference , contained in article 1. 
Therefore, it was agreed that it could be useful to establish a clearer distinction between these two terms. thus, the group suggested that only “killing or permanently removing organisms” could constitute “taking”. this term could then be undoubtedly associated with the disappearance of living organisms from the Antarctic environment, which would provide a more accurate figure of the annual loss of organisms as a result of human action.
discussion on the issue of whether local removal (ie, within antarctica) may constitute “taking” or not, is still required.

More discussion is also required to elaborate the term “Harmful Interference”. One particular concern was to avoid that any action on any species may fall under its definition, and, therefore, affects the development of science. 

Advice from the Committee is requested on how to go forward with the treatment of this issue: either by attempting a new definition of Harmful interference, by proposing a more accurate term (or terms) to replace it, or by elaborating a set of guidelines to help Parties determine likely situations/activities that may cause Harmful interference.  

During the discussions on these terms, some participants have questioned whether to include dead organisms within the scope of these terms, since removing dead organisms might have an effect on the environment, such as reducing the food or nutrient supply of some species, or  increasing predator pressure.

Although several participants have acknowledged the importance of this issue, its consideration should not be within the text of annex II, since it only refers to living organisms. It was noted, however, that the removal/collection of any number of NON-LIVING items may also affect the environment (and living organisms) and should be covered in EIA processes in the same way that other impacts are.


9. Collecting live specimens for educational or cultural purposes (Art. 3.2 a and b): As a consequence of the presentation of  IP 60, by ASOC, to the V CEP Meeting, the Committee prepared the third Term of Reference to the ICG, which requires the group to: explore options for developing criteria that Parties could use in making their decisions on permit request to collect specimens for educational or cultural purposes as provided for under Article 3 of Annex II.

The IP 60 stresses that, while the Madrid Protocol strongly promotes the conservation of the intrinsic values of Antarctica and allows the taking of wildlife for use in animal exhibit under a permit, it does not provide guidance concerning the actual value of the activity or use for which species may be taken. 

The paper remarks that criteria are needed to discriminate between the sorts of purposes, and sorts of institutions, for which a compelling case may be made. Criteria should include not only considerations regarding what the environmental impact of the taking could be, but also the purpose and value of the proposed activity, the merits of scientific components of the proposed activity, the alternatives, the life-expectancy of captive species, the conditions in which wildlife will be kept in captivity, and the plans to maintain and replenish captive wildlife following the initial taking.  

The paper concluded that any proposal to collect Antarctic wildlife for animal exhibits should be: 
    • Subject to appropriate level EIA, and 
    • Referred to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) for discussion before a final decision is made.  

Regarding the first proposal, the group agreed that, since Art.8 of the Protocol, and Arts. 1 to 3 of Annex I already establish, and even regulate, EIA procedures, it would not be appropriate to duplicate wordings within the Protocol.
In respect of the second proposal, there was agreement that, unless the collection was subject to a draft CEE, referral to the CEP would not be appropriate, as it is matter of the Parties to attend to, in accordance with domestic procedures.
However, all participants agreed that ASOC´s proposal to establish criteria to guide Parties in their assessment for the collection of Antarctic wildlife is useful. Specific criteria and likely ways to implement them are yet to be fully discussed within the group. 


10. Specially Protected Species: The lack of criteria to identify and designate Antarctic SPS, as well as the lack of specific mechanisms to ensure that additional protection be afforded to SPS generated, during CEP III (The Hague, 2000), the establishment of an intersessional ICG, which, after two years of discussions, has presented its results to CEP V. The Committee agreed that the findings of this group provided a sound basis for resolving the matter of SPS (para 40, CEP V Final Report). 

All participants agreed that the key findings of the SPS ICG should be reflected in any revision of Annex II. However, it was also noted that the detail provided in the recommendations of the SPS ICG should not be included in the revised text of the Annex, so as to arrive at a revised Annex containing durable obligations on Parties. This approach will allow flexibility in terms of refining the process (as experience develops) and limit the need to change the Annex in the future.

Some members have suggested that certain findings of the ICG on SPS could be specifically introduced in the text of the annex, such as:  
    • Including invertebrates as possible candidates for SPS status
    • Using lethal techniques on SPS only for compelling scientific reasons, whose goal is strictly related to the furtherance of conservation, and
    • Incorporating some text, which states that Parties may decide on appropriate protection and management provisions for any species designated as an SPS.
    • 
    • It was proposed that the more detailed recommendations of the SPS ICG (such as the use of the IUCN criteria for designation) could be developed through an ATCM Decision, after proper consideration of these recommendations by the CEP. 

In addition, other members have suggested that it would also be appropriate to include in the text of annex II some reference either to other AT bodies with competence in these matters, or to Articles 4 to 6 of the Protocol (relating to cooperation and coordination among ATS bodies). In this sense, it was stressed that, during CEP V (Warsaw, 2002), CCAMLR had noted that further dialogue would be welcome on how the category of specially protected species under the Protocol might be applied to marine species that are under the purview of CCAMLR. Advice of the Committee is therefore required on this particular proposal. 


11. Introduction of Non-Native Species: After analyzing the text of Article 4, the Group has identified some issues requiring revision: 

    a) Accurate reach of the Article: The WP 7 states that the term introduction of non-native species is not defined in Annex II, and that, although its definition may seem obvious, its accurate reach may not be. 

The Group has approached this issue taking into account two aspects: what should not be introduced, and under which circumstances species could be considered as “introduced”. 

Regarding the former, the group suggested that any organism which is being imported should require a permit, no matter what type of organism, or even whether it occurs in Antarctica or not. Thus, taking into account the proposed new title and scope of the Annex, all references to “non-native species”, included in paragraphs 1, 4 and 6 of Article 4 should be deleted, while all references to “animals and plants”, included in paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of the same article should be replaced by “living organisms”. 

And concerning the issue of under which circumstances species could be considered as “introduced”, the group considered that the non-intentional importation of a non-native species (mainly micro-organisms) is an issue of concern, since an absolute prohibition on the introduction of biota could cause significant adverse effects on science, because scientists and support persons themselves may unwittingly introduce non-native biota in the form of microbes. 

discussion is continuing on whether or not the present text of article 4 covers both the need to control deliberate introductions and to minimise inadvertent, unavoidable and unintentional introductions. In reference to the latter, it was proposed that the word “intentionally” could be inserted after “...to the Antarctic Treaty area shall be…”, in the text of paragraph 1 of Article 4, which would help avoid misinterpretations about the unwittingly introduction of species, but total agreement is yet to be achieved. Therefore, this issue still needs further elaboration.

b) Precautions to prevent the introduction of non-native species: SCAR, in its WP 37, stressed that it was simply impossible at the present state of knowledge to be able to say exactly what viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts and fungi are native to the Antarctic. Therefore, the paper suggests that the last phrase of Article 4 (6) (“not present in the native flora and fauna”) be removed. 

The group agreed that, if The last sentence of paragraph 4.6 of Annex II (“not present in the native fauna and flora”) was to be removed, this issue, in principle, would be resolved. 

The paper also added that parasites are generally not micro-organisms and, indeed they are categorised by function, whilst all the other groups are defined taxonomically, so parasites should be removed from the list. 

The term “parasites” should also be eliminated from paragraph 4.6, since all participants agreed on that such a term defines a function rather than a taxonomic category, as the rest of the examples quoted in such a paragraph. 

c) Dogs: It was noted that Article 4 (2) is now redundant 

The group concluded that, since there are clear references to the prohibition of introducing non-native species in Article 4 and Appendix B, and taking into account that all dogs have already been removed from Antarctica more than 8 years ago, the language of paragraph 4.2 is no longer necessary. Therefore, it should be removed.

d) Exception to the introduction of non native species: When referring to the requirement of sterilization means of introduced species (Article 4[4]), SCAR´s paper proposes the elimination of the clause “unless it is determined that they pose no risk to native flora and fauna”, as there is no guidance on how such a determination should be made, or what constitutes risk. The paper concludes that it would be preferable that all introduced species be disposed of or removed from the area. 

In principle, the group agreed that removing the clause “unless it is determined that they pose no risk to native flora and fauna” from Article 4.4 would make the provision clearer for implementation purposes.
It was also noted that some reference to undertaking risk assessments should also be included. 


12. Inspections of poultry products. Appendix C (1): SCAR (WP 37) suggested that it was believed to be impossible to detect the diseases mentioned (Newcastle, tuberculosis or yeast infection) simply by inspection of prepared carcasses, as they must be detected in living birds. Therefore the paper suggests that such a requirement (inspections of dressed poultry before packaging) should be eliminated.  

There was general agreement with SCAR on the impossibility to detect the diseases mentioned simply by inspection of prepared carcasses. While most participants considered that, until a more effective detection procedure is available, paragraph 1 of Appendix C should remain as it is; others noted that, to enhance the sense of the article, an alternative language, such as “All reasonable efforts shall be made to ensure that poultry contaminated with disease such as Newcastle’s Disease, tuberculosis or yeast infection is not imported into Antarctica”, be considered.


13. Parasites checks (Appendix C): In reference to the previous point, SCAR´s paper stated that whilst there should be no mention of parasites in Article 4.6, it may well be appropriate to list parasite checks in this Appendix. 

The Group agreed that it would be appropriate to list parasites checks in Appendix C. Several participants stated that scientific advice from SCAR would be needed on this issue, although SCAR acknowledged that listings may be incomplete. Further guidance is therefore needed on this matter.


14. Importation of non-sterile soil: SCAR´s WP 37 suggests that the recommendation included in Appendix C.2 (“the importation of non-sterile soil shall be avoided to the maximum extent practicable”) is contradictory to Article 7 of Annex III, which specifically prohibits the importation of non-sterile soil. 

All participants agreed that paragraph 2 of Appendix C should be consistent with the provisions of Article 7 of Annex III, although potential differences of meaning (ie, what is meant by non-sterile soil in annex II, and what in annex III) need to be further clarified.  

15. Conditions for issuing permits: It was noted  that, in some English versions, Article  3.3.(c) currently makes reference to the “Antarctic Treaty”, instead of the “Antarctic Treaty Area”, which should have given much more sense to the sentence. 

All participants supported the interpretation that Article 3.3.c in the English version should read as follows: “…and the balance of the ecological systems existing  within the Antarctic Treaty Area are maintained”.



CONCLUSION

After examining the text of Annex II, the ICG has identified a number of topics/articles that should be considered for deletion, amendment, modification or that needs further discussion as follows: 

	General
    • Preamble to the Annex (usefulness or not)
    • Title of the Annex, (modification to “Conservation of Antarctic Living Organisms”)
    • Scope of the Annex  (need for clearer interpretation of it)

Article 1: Definitions
    • Need for clearer definitions of “taking” and “harmful interference”.

Article 3.2 Collecting live specimens
    • Need to establish criteria to guide Parties in their assessment for the collection of Antarctic wildlife (para [a] & [b]).

Article  3.3: Protection of Native flora and fauna
    • need to edit paragraph [c], referring to the Antarctic treaty area.

Article 3.4: Specially Protected Species 
    • Need to determine what findings of the SPS ICG are to be incorporated in the text of Annex II and how to reflect the more detailed recommendations of such ICG.

Article 4: Introduction of non-native species
    • Accurate reach of the article (Need to clarify what should not be introduced, and under which circumstances species could be considered as “introduced”)
    • Precautions to prevent the introduction of non-native species (No need to distinguish between native and non-native microorganisms, due to the impossibility of determining such a distinction; para 6)
    • Dogs (No need to retain specific prohibition of dogs; para 2)
    • Exception to the introduction of non native species  (Delete exceptions for  removal, destruction or other sterilization means of introduced species; para 4)
    • Parasites checks (Advice needed on how to prepare a list of parasites checks)

Appendix C
    • Inspections of poultry products (Need to delete or rewrite the requirement of inspecting poultry products; para 1) 
    • Importation of non-sterile soil (need to make paragraph 2 of Appendix C consistent with the provisions of Article 7 of Annex III)


Finally, the Group has identified the following areas needing further advice from the CEP:
 
Scope of the Annex; Specially Protected Species
    • explore ways to achieve collaboration and discussion between the various bodies/conventions involved.

Definition of “Harmful Interference”
    • Guidance to define this term.

Parasite checks
    • Guidance on how to (or whether if) include a list of parasite checks requirement into appendix C


The review process is yet to be concluded. It will demand, at least, another intersessional period to fulfill the tasks included in ToRs 2 and 4, that is, “to present an amended draft text of Annex II as appropriate ensuring consistency with the Protocol and its annexes indicating the changes proposed to the existing Annex as clearly as possible”. 

The group considers that the CEP Meeting offers an excellent opportunity to discuss the identified topics, to evaluate the way this review process is being led, and to propose how to go forward on the issues requiring advice.  

Therefore, the Group requests the Committee to undertake a deep analysis of this document, and to provide guidance on how to continue with the review process of Annex II.  

