
Antarctic Protected Areas System
Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area
Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea

Working Paper
Submitted by Italy

    1. Background

At CEP V (Warsaw, Poland, September 9-14, 2002) Italy introduced a draft management plan in proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) at Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea (Working Paper XXV ATCM/WP36). The Area proposed for special protection is a small and narrow strip of waters extending approximately 9.5 km in length immediately to the south of Terra Nova Bay Station and up to a maximum of 7 km from the shore.  The total area of the proposed site is just under 30 km2.  The background and rationale for the protected area proposal was given in Working Paper XXV ATCM/WP36. The site is considered of outstanding scientific interest and the scientific investigations being conducted are at risk of interference if they are not managed explicitly through a management plan.

The Committee agreed at CEP V to establish an open-ended Intersessional Contact Group to consider the submitted draft plan, which was chaired by Italy (Dr Sandro Torcini).  This paper both reports on comments received and submits the final draft plan as attached for adoption under Annex V, together with a draft Measure to this effect.

    2. Report from the Intersessional Contact Group

Comments on the proposed draft plan were received from SCAR and Australia, and are summarised in Table 1 below, together with how the points have been addressed in the revised draft. No other comments have been received. The plan was considered by CCAMLR prior to submission to CEP V (2002), and CCAMLR's comments, including those made by CCAMLR’s Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management, were taken fully into account at that stage. Italy is very grateful for all comments received, which have been most helpful in preparing the draft.

The draft plan is attached for consideration for adoption as a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area. A draft Measure is also attached that would give effect to the proposal should it be accepted.

Table 1.	How comments received have been addressed in the revised draft Management Plan for the proposed ASPA at Terra Nova Bay

Comments received (in summary)
How the revised draft Management Plan attached has addressed comments received
Sec 1 Description of Values
SCAR noted the statement relating to CCAMLR and harvesting appeared to contradict the statement about protecting the area from human impact.

The statement causing concern referring to harvesting has been eliminated from the plan.
Sec 5. Maps
SCAR commented on:
    • The use of unofficial place names is discouraged;



    • Consider marking the Adélie colony on the map;
    • The map was considered good, but the central meridian is not vertical and there could be merit to including a second inset showing the location of Terra Nova Bay.
    • Adelie Cove is an official name adopted by NZ. Reference to the unofficial name "Penguin Cove" has been eliminated. Reference to the unofficial name "Campo Icaro" has been changed to "Atmospheric monitoring facility (locally referred to as 'Campo Icaro') ". It was considered useful to keep reference to 'Campo Icaro' for the benefit of local station personnel. Italy would be willing to amend the plan and refer to it simply as an “atmospheric monitoring facility” if the Parties believe this would be the preferable approach in this case.

    • The Adélie colony has now been marked on the map of the Area.

    • The central meridian is UTM Zone 58S, which uses standard parameters. The deviation from vertical is slight. A second inset map has been included showing the location of TNB.
Sec 6(i) Description of the Area
    • In the description (Sec 6(i) Para 3, Line 2), it was not clear whether 20-30 m was a depth or distance from the shore. 
    • The small cove referred to as the "unnamed cove" should be given a name. 


This has been clarified to "depth of 20-30 m".

This is a very minor feature, so the plan has been altered to refer to the cove by its location, rather than by a name.
Sec 7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted
SCAR commented that there may be merit in noting:
    • that fishing is allowed only by Permit.
    • that transit of the Area by ship would require a Permit

    • Fishing is covered by Sec 7(vi), which requires a Permit for all taking of animals, including fish.
    • Transit is covered in the provision "Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit." (Sec 7). Also covered in Annex V (Article 3(4)).
Sec 7(iv) Camping
SCAR suggested it could be useful to identify the location of the campsite on the beach at Adelie Cove.

The campsite is not within the Area, is used only occasionally, and has no designated position. The point is made in the plan for general information purposes - it is not intended to manage the campsite through the plan.
Sec 7(v) Retsrictions on materials / organisms
SCAR questioned whether this section was relevant to marine areas.

This section was considered relevant to management of this marine area and it has been retained.
Sec 7(vi) Taking or harmful interference
SCAR suggested there may be merit in noting that fishing is allowed only by Permit.

It was felt this point is covered by the requirement that ALL taking requires a Permit, which includes fishing.
Sec 7(viii) Disposal of waste
Australia suggested there would be benefit to consistency with requirements at other marine sites (eg.  ASPA No. 153 at Dallmann Bay) where it is proposed that all wastes, including human wastes, should be removed from the Area.

The wording has been changed to maintain consistency with the other marine plans.
Sec 7(ix) Measures to ensure aims and objectives are met
SCAR questioned how one can enforce "clean ships" in the Area.

The provision attempts to reduce the risk of impacts, rather than require "clean ships". The wording has been changed to focus more specifically on the risk of fuel release from vessels, which is one of the main risks of operations within the Area.

DRAFT MEASURE YY (2003)

Antarctic Protected Area System: Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas


The Representatives, 
Recalling Article 6(2) of Annex V, and Appendix 5 of the Final Report of CEP V, on procedures for consideration of Management Plans for protected areas with a marine component;

Noting that the draft Management Plan appended to this Measure has been endorsed by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources;

Noting also that the draft Management Plan appended to this Measure has been endorsed by the Committee for Environmental Protection and commented upon by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Recognizing that the Area supports diverse biota of outstanding scientific interest and that scientific investigations being conducted are at risk of interference if they are not managed through a management plan;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 6 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty:

That the Management Plan for the following site:

    • Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XYZ, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea;

which is annexed to this Measure, be adopted.

























Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. XYZ
TERRA NOVA BAY, ROSS SEA

1.  Description values to be protected
A coastal marine area encompassing 29.4 km2 between Adélie Cove and Tethys Bay, Terra Nova Bay, is proposed as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) by Italy on the grounds that it is an important littoral area for well-established and long-term scientific investigations. The Area is confined to a narrow strip of waters extending approximately 9.4 km in length immediately to the south of Terra Nova Bay Station and up to a maximum of 7 km from the shore. No marine resource harvesting has been, is currently, or is planned to be, conducted within the Area, nor in the immediate surrounding vicinity.  The site typically remains ice-free in summer, which is rare for coastal areas in the Ross Sea region, making it an ideal and accessible site for research into the near-shore benthic communities in the region.  Extensive marine ecological research has been carried out at Terra Nova Bay since 1986/87, contributing substantially to our understanding of these communities which had not previously been well-described.
High diversity at both species and community levels make this Area of high ecological and scientific value.  Studies have revealed a complex array of species assemblages, often co-existing in mosaics (Cattaneo-Vietti, 1991; Sarà et al., 1992; Cattaneo-Vietti et al., 1997; 2000b; 2000c; Gambi et al., 1997; Cantone et al., 2000).  There exist assemblages with high species richness and complex functioning, such as the sponge and anthozoan communities, alongside loosely structured, low diversity assemblages. Moreover, the sponge and anthozoan communities at Terra Nova Bay show an unique structure and long-term transects have been established to monitor changes in coastal benthic communities, both natural and human-induced.  The presence of a population of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Adélie Cove allows assessment of the effects of this colony on the adjacent marine environment (Povero et al., 2001).
It is important to protect the Area as far as possible from direct human impacts in order that it can be used to monitor potential impacts arising from activities at the nearby permanent scientific station of Terra Nova Bay (Mauri et al., 1990; Berkman & Nigro, 1992; Focardi et al., 1993; Minganti et al., 1995; Bruni et al., 1997; Nonnis Marzano et al., 2000). The high ecological and scientific values derived from the diverse range of species and assemblages, in particular through the collection of extensive data on these features, together with the vulnerability of the Area to disturbance by pollution, over-sampling and alien introductions, are such that the Area requires long-term special protection.

2.  Aims and objectives
Management at Terra Nova Bay aims to:
    • avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
    • allow scientific research on the ecosystem, in particular on the marine species assemblages, while ensuring it is protected from oversampling or other possible scientific impacts;
    • allow other scientific research and support activities provided they are for compelling reasons which cannot be served elsewhere;
    • maintain long-term monitoring sites to evaluate natural changes in marine communities;
    • monitor the effects of the research station and its associated activities on the marine ecosystem;
    • minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;
    • allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan.

3.  Management activities
The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
    • A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be displayed prominently, and a copy of this Management Plan shall be kept available, at Terra Nova Bay Station (Italy);
    • A sign illustrating the location and boundaries with clear statements of entry restrictions shall be installed at Terra Nova Bay Station at a prominent location;
    • Buoys, or other markers or structures erected for scientific or management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition, and removed when no longer necessary;
    • Visits shall be made as necessary to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and whether management and maintenance measures are adequate.

4. Period of designation
Designated for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs
Map 1: 	Terra Nova Bay, Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XYZ, bathymetric map. 
Map specifications:   Projection: UTM Zone 58S; Spheroid: WGS84.  Bathymetric contour interval 50 m.  Land contours and coast derived from 1:50,000 Northern Foothills Satellite Image Map (Frezzotti et. al. 2001). Bathymetry within ASPA derived from high resolution sidescan sonar data surveyed by Kvitek, 2002.  Bathymetry outside of ASPA supplied by Italian Hydrographic Office 2000. Marine data collected under Terra Nova Bay marine protected area Project (PNRA 1999-2001). Inset 1: The location of Terra Nova Bay in Antarctica. Inset 2: Terra Nova Bay location map, showing the region covered by Map 1, stations, and sites of nearby protected areas.

6. Description of the Area
6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features
The designated Area is situated in Terra Nova Bay, between the Campbell Glacier Tongue and Drygalski Ice Tongue, Victoria Land.  The Area is confined to a narrow strip of coastal waters to the south of Terra Nova Bay Station (Italy), extending approximately 9.4 km in length and generally within 1.5 – 7 km of the shore, comprising an area of 29.4 km2 (Map 1). No marine resource harvesting has been, is currently, or is planned to be, conducted within the Area, nor in the immediate surrounding vicinity.
The western boundary of the Area is defined as the mean high water mark along the coastline extending between 74°42'57"S in the north (2.3 km south of Terra Nova Bay Station) and 74°48'00"S in the south (the southern shore of Adélie Cove), and includes the intertidal zone (Map 1). The northern boundary of the Area is defined as the 74°42'57"S line of latitude, extending from the coast 1.55 km eastward to the 164°10'00"E line of longitude. The boundary position may be recognised near the shore by the presence of a large and distinctive offshore rock in the northernmost cove on the coast south of Terra Nova Bay Station, which is an unique feature on this stretch of coast.  The southern boundary is defined as the 74°48'00"S line of latitude, extending from the coast 3.63 km eastward to the 164°10'00"E line of longitude. The boundary position may be recognised visually as being at the southern shore of the mouth of Adélie Cove, immediately south of a distinctive rocky outcrop at the base of the coastal cliffs. The eastern boundary of the Area is defined as the 164°10'00"E line of longitude extending between 74°42'57"S in the north and 74°48'00"S in the south.
The coastline of Terra Nova Bay is characterised predominantly by rocky cliffs, with large boulders forming occasional ‘beaches’ (Simeoli et al., 1989). In the sheltered areas, the soft bottom begins at a depth of 20–30 m. The tidal range is 1.5–2 m and pack ice of approximately 2–2.5 m thick covers the sea surface for 9–10 months of the year (Stocchino & Lusetti, 1988; 1990).  Data available for the summer period suggest that ocean currents in the Area are likely to be slow and to flow generally in a north-south direction.  Along the coastline of the Area there are two main coves; the larger Adélie Cove in the south and a smaller cove around 3 km to its north. The sea floor substrate of the smaller consists of pebbles of various sizes, while Adélie Cove is characterised by fine-grained, muddy sediments.  An Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colony is situated at Adélie Cove, with a 1991 population of approximately 7899 breeding pairs. Outside of the coves, the sea floor characteristics and benthic species assemblages are relatively homogenous along the coastal length of the Area, and are observed to vary more particularly with the vertical gradient.
The seafloor within the Area is primarily granitic rock, with softer substrates composed of coarse sands or gravels.  In the supralittoral zone, only cyanobacteria and diatoms colonise the hard substrates, while the intertidal zone (1.5–2.0 m wide) has, in the most sheltered areas, a high coverage of the green alga Urospora penicilliformis and Prasiola crispa (Cormaci et al., 1992b). Below the tidal zone, down to 2–3 m depth, the community is very poor, due to the persistent presence and scouring action of pack ice, and is mainly composed of epilithic diatoms and the crustacean amphipod Paramoera walkeri.  Immediately deeper, rocks can be fully colonised by the red alga Iridaea cordata (Cormaci et al., 1996), frequently found with Plocamium cartilagineum, to a depth of 12 m (Gambi et al., 1994; 2000a). At this level large sessile animals such as Alcyonium antarcticum and Urticinopsis antarctica can be occasionally observed, while frequent are the asteroid Odontaster validus and the echinoid Sterechinus neumayeri.  Phyllophora antarctica is another red alga forming expanded mats from 12 to 25 m depth, often fully colonised by sessile organisms, mainly hydroids (Cerrano et al., 2000c, Puce et al., 2002), serpulids and bryozoans (Celleporella antarctica and Harpecia spinosissima).  The upper algal belts represent shelter and a food source for diversified and abundant communities of mobile fauna. Numerous invertebrates, such as the polychaete Harmothoe brevipalpa, the mollusc Laevilittorina antarctica, the crustacean amphipod Paramoera walkeri and the isopod Nototanais dimorphus feed on these algal species and can be very abundant. On rocky bottoms in deeper layers, the algal colonisation is replaced by a calcareous crustose coralline alga (Clathromorphum lemoineanum) on which sea-urchins feed.
The soft bottoms from 20–40 m depth are coarse sands and gravels, where the community is characterised by the mollusc bivalve Laternula elliptica and the polychaete Aglaophamus ornatus (Nephtiidae).  The bivalve Yoldia eightsi is abundant in fine-sand sediments.
Between 30–70 m, the substrate becomes finer and is completely colonised by the bivalve Adamussium colbecki, the shells of which are colonised by a micro-community comprising mainly forams, bryozoans (Aimulosia antarctica, Arachnopusia decipiens, Ellisina antarctica,  Micropora brevissima) and the spirorbid Paralaeospira levinsenii (Albertelli et al., 1998; Ansell et al., 1998; Chiantore et al., 1998; 2000; 2001; 2002; Vacchi et al., 2000a; Cerrano et al., 2001a; 2001b). In this region, large predators such as the gastropod Neobuccinum eatoni and the nemertean Parborlasia corrugatus are frequent.  The echinoid Sterechinus neumayeri and the starfish Odontaster validus are still very frequent at all depths on both hard and mobile substrates (Chiantore et al., 2002; Cerrano et al., 2000b).
Below 70–75 m down to 120–130 m depth, heterogeneous substrates allow hard- and soft-bottom communities to coexist.  On the sparse rocky outcrops the encrusting algae disappear and the benthic communities are dominated by the sessile zoobenthos. This diversified filter feeding assemblage is mainly characterised by sponges and anthozoans, while in soft sediments detritus-feeder polychaetes and bivalves dominate.  Among sponges, which can reach very high biomass values, Axociella nidificata, Calyx arcuarius, Gellius rudis, Phorbas glaberrima, Tedania charcoti, are very abundant (Sarà et al., 1992; 2002; Gaino et al., 1992; Cattaneo-Vietti et al., 1996; 2000c; Bavestrello et al., 2000; Cerrano et al., 2000a).  Numerous invertebrates constitute an important component of this assemblage which develops down to 120-140 m depth.  These include the epibiont polychaete Barrukia cristata on Thouarellid gorgonians, crustacean peracarids, pycnogonids, mollusc opisthobranchs (Austrodoris kerguelenensis, Tritoniella belli) (Cattaneo-Vietti, 1991; Gavagnin et al., 1995) and bivalves, ophiuroids and holothuroids, bryozoans, and the endobionts.  The conspicuous sponge spicule mats found at these depths underline the important role of sponges in this area, besides the one played by diatoms, in determining the sediment texture and silica content.  A peculiar community, dominated by polychaetes and by the bivalve Limatula hodgsoni, can be associated with these mats.
Below 130 m the hard substrates become very sparse and are mainly colonised by the polychaete Serpula narconensis (Schiaparelli et al., 2000) and several bryozoans (Arachnopusia decipiens, Ellisina antarctica, Flustra angusta, F. vulgaris and Isoschizoporella similis).  The dominant muddy bottoms are instead characterised by tubicolous polychaetes (Gambi et al., 2000b), mainly Spiophanes.  Much deeper, at about 150-200 m depth, brachiopods and various species of bivalves characterise the environment on small gravels as well as on the soft bottom (Cattaneo-Vietti et al., 2000b). The great heterogeneity of these substrates contributes to the creation of communities with considerable species richness, diversity and biomass.
Finally, the faunal assemblage of the Area includes notothenioid fishes, represented especially by species of the Trematomus group, including T. bernacchi, T. pennelli, T. hansoni and T. loennbergii. These exert an important role in benthic food webs as consumers of many invertebrate species, mainly crustaceans and polychaetes (Vacchi et al., 1991; 1992; 1994a; 1994b; 1995; 1997; 2000b; La Mesa et al., 1996; 1997; 2000; Guglielmo et al., 1998).
Human impacts within the Area are believed to be minimal and confined to those arising from the nearby Terra Nova Bay Station and scientific work conducted within the Area. The station can accommodate approximately 80 people, has facilities for helicopter operations and a jetty for mooring small boats. Fuel used at the station is a light petroleum diesel, stored in three steel tanks with a total capacity of 1.8 million litres. Fuel is transferred to the station annually from resupply ship either via hoses routed across sea ice or via barge when sea ice is not present.  Station waste water, purified by a biological plant, is discharged into the sea adjacent to the station on the eastern side of the peninsula on which the station is located, 2.3 km from the northern boundary of the Area.  Combustible rubbish generated at the station is incinerated and the smoke washed and filtered with water. This water is discharged to the waste water treatment plant at intervals which vary with incinerator usage. An atmospheric monitoring facility (locally referred to as ‘Campo Icaro’) is situated approximately 650 m north of the northern boundary of the Area and 150 m from the shore: no wastes are discharged from this facility.  A support ship regularly visits Terra Nova Bay Station during the summer, and there are occasional visits from tourist ships. These may station offshore several kilometres to the north of the Area.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area
None.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area
There are no structures within the Area. The nearest structure is the atmospheric monitoring facility (locally referred to as ‘Campo Icaro’) 650 m north of the northern boundary of the Area, while Terra Nova Bay Station (74°41'42"S, 164°07'23"E) is situated on a small peninsula on the coast adjacent to Tethys Bay, a further 1.65 km to the north.

6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
ASPA No. 118, summit of Mount Melbourne, is a terrestrial site situated 45 km to the NE, which is the only other protected area within close proximity.

7. Permit conditions
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit are that:
    • it is issued for scientific study of the marine environment in the Area, or for other scientific purposes which cannot be served elsewhere; and/or
    • it is issued for essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection, maintenance or review;
    • the actions permitted will not jeopardise the values of the Area;
    • any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
    • the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
    • The Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area;
    • a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit;
    • permits shall be issued for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Access into the Area shall be by sea, land, over sea ice or by air.  There are no specific restrictions on routes of access to and movement within the Area, although movements should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise disturbance. Anchoring  is prohibited within the Area.  There are no overflight restrictions within the Area and aircraft may land by Permit when sea ice conditions allow. Ship or small boat crew, or other people on small boats or ships, are prohibited from moving beyond the immediate vicinity of their vessel unless specifically authorized by Permit.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time or place
    • Scientific research or essential operational activities that will not jeopardise the values of the Area;
    • Essential management activities, including monitoring;
    • Activities that involve trawling, dragging, grabbing, dredging, or deployment of nets within the Area should be undertaken with great care because of the sensitivity of the rich bottom communities to disturbance: before Permits are granted for such activities careful consideration should be given to the impact of such activities on the ecosystem under special protection versus the expected scientific or management benefits, with consideration given to alternative, more selective and less-invasive, sampling methods;
    • The appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were not included in the authorized Permit.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
Structures or scientific equipment shall not be installed within the Area except as specified in a Permit.  All markers, structures or scientific equipment installed in the Area shall be clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area.  Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be a condition of the Permit.  Permanent installations are prohibited.

7(iv) Location of field camps
None within the Area.  An occasional field camp has been positioned on the beach at Adélie Cove.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area
No living animals, plant material, pathogens or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area. Poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall not be released into the Area. No herbicides or pesticides shall be introduced into the Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be used in the minimum quantities necessary to achieve the purpose of the activity for which the Permit was granted.  Use of such chemicals shall be with due regard for the values of the Area.  All materials shall be stored and handled so that risk of their accidental introduction into the environment is minimized.  Where practical, materials introduced shall be for a stated period only and shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period.  If release occurs which is likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the impact of removal is not likely to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The appropriate authority should be notified of any materials released that were not included in the authorized Permit.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.  Permits shall not be granted if there is a reasonable concern that the sampling proposed would take, remove or damage such quantities of substrate, native flora or fauna that their distribution or abundance within the Area would be significantly affected. All samples collected shall be described in terms of their type, quantity and the location from which they were taken.  This information shall held in an archive accessible at Terra Nova Bay Station in order to maintain a record of usage that will assist assessment of the impacts of sampling activities and in the planning of future sampling.  Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or otherwise authorized, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes, including all human wastes, shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met
    1. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of limited samples for analysis or review, or for protective measures.
    2. Any specific sites of long-term monitoring that are vulnerable to inadvertent disturbance should be appropriately marked on site where practical and, as appropriate, on maps of the Area.
    3. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the marine communities found within the Area, visitors shall take special precautions against marine pollution.  Of concern are the release or spillage of hydrocarbons from ships, and biological introductions.  To minimize the risk of such pollution, visitors shall ensure that sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area are clean.  Vessels that are found to show fuel leakage, or a significant risk of such leakage, are prohibited from entering the Area.  If a fuel leak from a vessel is discovered while within the Area, the vessel shall leave the Area unless the leak can be promptly stopped.  Handling of fuels and oil within the Area shall be the minimum necessary consistent with meeting the objectives of the permitted activities.

7(x) Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organizing the scientific use of the Area.

References
Albertelli G., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Chiantore M., Pusceddu A., Fabiano M., 1998. Food availability to an Adamussium bed during the austral Summer 1993/94 (Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea). Journal of Marine Systems 17: 425-34.
Ansell A.D., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Chiantore M., 1998. Swimming in the Antarctic scallop Adamussium colbecki: analysis of in situ video recordings. Antarctic Science 10 (4): 369-75.
Bavestrello G., Arillo A., Calcinai B., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Cerrano C., Gaino E., Penna A., Sara’ M., 2000. Parasitic diatoms inside Antarctic sponges. Biol. Bull. 198: 29-33.
Berkman P.A., Nigro M., 1992. Trace metal concentrations in scallops around Antarctica: Extending the Mussel Watch Programme to the Southern Ocean. Marine Pollution Bulletin 24 (124): 322-23.
Bruni V., Maugeri M.L., Monticelli L.S., 1997. Faecal pollution indicators in the Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica). Marine Pollution Bulletin 34 (11): 908-12.
Cantone G., Castelli A., Gambi M.C., 2000. The Polychaete fauna off Terra Nova Bay and Ross Sea: biogeography, structural aspects and ecological role. In: Ross Sea Ecology, F. Faranda, L. Guglielmo and A. Ianora Eds., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg: 551-61.
Cattaneo-Vietti R., 1991. Nudibranch Molluscs from the Ross Sea, Antarctica. J. Moll. Stud. 57: 223-28.
Cattaneo-Vietti R., Bavestrello G., Cerrano C., Sara’ M., Benatti U., Giovine M., Gaino E., 1996. Optical fibres in an Antarctic sponge. Nature 383: 397-98.
Cattaneo-Vietti R., Chiantore M., Albertelli G., 1997. The population structure and ecology of the Antarctic Scallop, Adamussium colbecki in Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica). Scientia Marina 61 (Suppl. 2): 15-24.
Cattaneo-Vietti R., Chiantore M., Misic C., Povero P., Fabiano M., 1999. The role of pelagic-benthic coupling in structuring littoral benthic communities at Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea) and inside the Strait of Magellan. Scientia Marina 63 (Supl. 1): 113-21.
Cattaneo-Vietti R., Chiantore M., Gambi M.C., Albertelli G., Cormaci M., Di Geronimo I., 2000a. Spatial and vertical distribution of benthic littoral communities in Terra Nova Bay. In: Ross Sea Ecology, F. Faranda, L. Guglielmo and A. Ianora Eds., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg: 503-14.
Cattaneo-Vietti R., Chiantore M., Schiaparelli S., Albertelli G., 2000b. Shallow and deep-water mollusc distribution at Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica). Polar Biology 23: 173-82.
Cattaneo-Vietti R., Bavestrello G., Cerrano C., Gaino E., Mazzella L., Pansini M., Sarà M., 2000c. The role of sponges of Terra Nova Bay ecosystem. In: Ross Sea Ecology, F. Faranda, L. Guglielmo and A. Ianora Eds., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg: 539-49.
Cerrano C., Arillo A., Bavestrello G., Calcinai B., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Penna A., Sarà M., Totti C., 2000a. Diatom invasion in the Antarctic hexactinellid sponge Scolymastra joubini. Polar Biology 23: 441-44.
Cerrano C., Bavestrello G., Calcinai B., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Sarà A., 2000b. Asteroids eating sponges from Tethys Bay, East Antarctica. Antarctic Science 12(4): 431-32.
Cerrano C., Puce S., Chiantore M., Bavestrello G., 2000c. Unusual trophic strategies of Hydractinia angusta (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa) from Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica. Polar Biology 23(7): 488-94.
Cerrano C., G. Bavestrello, B. Calcinai, R. Cattaneo-Vietti, M. Chiantore, M. Guidetti, A. Sarà, 2001a. Bioerosive processes in Antarctic seas. Polar Biology 24: 790-92.
Cerrano C., S. Puce, M. Chiantore, G. Bavestrello, R. Cattaneo-Vietti, 2001b. The influence of the epizooic hydroid Hydractinia angusta on the recruitment of the Antarctic scallop Adamussium colbecki. Polar Biology 24: 577-81.
Chiantore M., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Albertelli G., Misic M., Fabiano M., 1998. Role of filtering and biodeposition by Adamussium colbecki in circulation of organic matter in Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica). Journal of Marine Systems 17: 411-24.
Chiantore M., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Povero P., Albertelli G., 2000. The population structure and ecology of the antarctic scallop Adamussium colbecki in Terra Nova Bay. In: Ross Sea Ecology, F. Faranda, L. Guglielmo and A. Ianora Eds., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg: 563-73.
Chiantore M., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Berkman P.A., Nigro M., Vacchi M., Schiaparelli S., Albertelli G., 2001. Antarctic scallop (Adamussium colbecki) spatial population variability along the Victoria Land Coast, Antarctica. Polar Biology 24: 139-43.
Chiantore M., R. Cattaneo-Vietti, L. Elia, M. Guidetti, M. Antonini, 2002. Reproduction and condition of the scallop Adamussium colbecki (Smith 1902), the sea-urchin Sterechinus neumayeri (Meissner, 1900) and the sea-star Odontaster validus Koehler, 1911 at Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea): different strategies related to inter-annual variations in food availability. Polar Biology 22: 251-55.
Cormaci M., Furnari G., Scammacca B., Casazza G., 1992a. Il fitobenthos di Baia Terra Nova (Mare di Ross, Antartide): osservazioni sulla flora e sulla zonazione dei popolamenti. In: Gallardo VA, Ferretti O, Moyano HI (eds) Actas del Semin. Int. Oceanografia in Antartide. Centro EULA, Universitad de Concepción, Chile. ENEA: 395-408.
Cormaci M., Furnari G., Scammacca B., 1992b. The benthic algal flora of Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica). Botanica Marina 35(6): 541-52
Cormaci M., Furnari G., Scammacca B., 1992c. Carta della vegetazione marina di Baia Terra Nova (Mare di Ross, Antartide). Biologia Marina 1: 313-14.
Cormaci M., Furnari G., Scammacca B., Alongi G., 1996. Summer biomass of a population of Iridaea cordata (Gigartinaceae, Rhodophyta) from Antarctica. In: Lindstrom SC, Chapman DJ  (Eds) Proceedings of the XV Seeweeds Symposium. Hydrobiologia 326/327: 267-72.
Fabiano M., Danovaro R., Crisafi E., La Ferla R., Povero P., Acosta Pomar L., 1995. Particulate matter composition and bacterial distribution in Terra Nova Bay (Antarctica) during summer 1989-90. Polar Biology 15: 393-400.
Fabiano M., Povero P., Danovaro R., 1996. Particulate organic matter composition in Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica) during summer 1990. Antarctic Science 8(1): 7-13.
Fabiano M., Chiantore M., Povero P., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Pusceddu A., Misic C., Albertelli G., 1997. Short-term variations in particulate matter flux in Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Antarctic Science 9(2): 143-149.
Focardi S., Bargagli R., Corsolini S., 1993. Organochlorines in marine Antarctic food chain at Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea). Korean Journal of Polar Research 4: 73-77.
Gaino E., Bavestrello G., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Sara' M., 1994. Scanning electron microscope evidence for diatom uptake by two Antarctic sponges. Polar Biology 14: 55-58.
Gambi M.C., Lorenti M., Russo G.F., Scipione M.B., 1994. Benthic associations of the shallow hard bottoms off Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica): zonation, biomass and population structure. Antarctic Science 6(4): 449-62.
Gambi M.C., Castelli A., Guizzardi M., 1997. Polychaete populations  of the shallow soft bottoms off Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica): distribution, diversity and biomass. Polar Biology 17: 199-210.
Gambi M.C., Buia M.C., Mazzella L., Lorenti M., Scipione M.B., 2000a. Spatio-temporal variability in the structure of benthic populations in a physically controlled system off Terra Nova Bay: the shallow hard bottoms. In: Ross Sea Ecology, F. Faranda, L. Guglielmo and A. Ianora Eds., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg: 527-538.
Gambi M.C., Giangrande A., Patti F.P., 2000b. Comparative observations on reproductive biology of four species of Perkinsiana (Polychaeta, Sabellidae). Bulletin of Marine Science 67(1): 299-309.
Gavagnin M., Trivellone E., Castelluccio F., Cimino G., Cattaneo-Vietti R., 1995. Glyceryl ester of a new halimane diterpenoic acid from the skin of the antarctic nudibranch Austrodoris kerguelenensis. Tetrahedron Letters 36: 7319-22.
Guglielmo L., Granata A., Greco S., 1998. Distribution and abundance of postlarval and juvenile Pleuragramma antarticum (Pisces, Nototheniidae )of Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antartica). Polar Biology 19: 37-51.
Guglielmo L., Carrada G.C., Catalano G., Dell'Anno A., Fabiano M., Lazzara L., Mangoni O., Pusceddu A., Saggiomo V., 2000. Structural and functional properties of sympagic communities in the annual sea ice at Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica). Polar Biology 23(2): 137-46.
La Mesa M., Arneri E., Giannetti G., Greco S., Vacchi M., 1996. Age and growth of the nototheniid fish Trematomus bernacchii Boulenger from Terra Nova Bay, Antartica. Polar Biology16: 139-45.
La Mesa M., Vacchi M., Castelli A., Diviacco G., 1997. Feeding ecology of two nototheniid fishes Trematomus hansoni and Trematomus loennbergi from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Polar Biology 17: 62-68.
La Mesa M., Vacchi M., T. Zunini Sertorio, 2000. Feeding plasticity of Trematomus newnesi (Pisces, Nototheniidae) in Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, in relation to environmental conditions. Polar Biology 23(1): 38-45.
Mauri M., Orlando E., Nigro M., Regoli F., 1990. Heavy metals in the Antarctic scallop Adamussium colbecki (Smith). Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 67: 27-33.
Minganti V., Capelli R., Fiorentino F., De Pellegrini R., Vacchi M., 1995. Variations of mercury and selenium concentrations in Adamussium colbecki and Pagothenia bernacchii from Terra Nova Bay (Antarctica) during a five year period. Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem. 61: 239-48.
Nonnis Marzano F., Fiori F., Jia G., Chiantore M., 2000. Anthropogenic radionuclides bioaccumulation in Antarctic marine fauna and its ecological relevance. Polar Biology 23: 753-58.
Povero P., Chiantore M., Misic C., Budillon G., Cattaneo-Vietti R., 2001. Pelagic-benthic coupling in Adélie Cove (Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica): a strongly land forcing controlled system? Polar Biology  24: 875-82.
Puce S., Cerrano C., Bavestrello G., 2002. Eudendrium (Cnidaria, Anthomedusae) from the Antarctic Ocean with a description of new species. Polar Biology 25: 366-73.
Pusceddu A., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Albertelli G., Fabiano M., 1999. Origin, biochemical composition and vertical flux of particulate organic matter under the pack ice in Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica) during late summer 1995. Polar Biology 22: 124-32.
Sarà A., Cerrano C., Sarà M., 2002. Viviparous development in the Antarctic sponge Stylocordyla borealis Loven, 1868. Polar Biology 25: 425-31.
Sarà M., Balduzzi A., Barbieri M., Bavestrello G., Burlando B., 1992. Biogeographic traits and checklist of Antarctic demosponges. Polar Biology 12: 559-85.
Schiaparelli S., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Chiantore M., 2000. Adaptive morphology of Capulus subcompressus Pelseneer, 1903 (Gastropoda: Capulidae) from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea (Antarctica). Polar Biology 23: 11-16.
Simeoni U., Baroni C., Meccheri M., Taviani M., Zanon G., 1989. Coastal studies in Northern Victoria Land (Antarctica): Holocene beaches of Inexpressible island, Tethys Bay and Edmonson Point. Boll. Ocean. Teor. Appl. 7(1-2): 5-16.
Stocchino C., Lusetti C., 1988. Le costanti armoniche di marea di Baia Terra Nova (Mare di Ross, Antartide). F.C. 1128 Istituto Idrografico della Marina, Genova. 
Stocchino C., Lusetti C., 1990. Prime osservazioni sulle caratteristiche idrologiche e dinamiche di Baia Terra Nova (Mare di Ross, Antartide). F.C. 1132 Istituto Idrografico della Marina, Genova. 
Vacchi M., Greco S., La Mesa M., 1991. Ichthyological survey by fixed gears in Terra Nova Bay (Antarctica). Fish list and first results. Memorie di Biologia Marina e di Oceanografia 19: 197-202.
Vacchi M., Romanelli M., La Mesa M., 1992. Age structure of Chionodraco hamatus (Teleostei, Channichthyidae) samples caught in Terra Nova Bay, East Antarctica. Polar Biology 12: 735-38. 
Vacchi M., Greco S., 1994a. Capture of the giant Nototheniid fish Dissostichus mawsoni in Terra Nova Bay (Antarctica): Notes on the fishing equipment and the specimens caught. Cybium 18(2): 199-203.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., Castelli A., 1994b. Diet of two coastal nototheniid fish from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Antarctic Science 6(1): 61-65.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., 1995. The diet of Antarctic fish Trematomus newnesi Boulenger, 1902 (Notothenidae) from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Antarctic Science 7(1): 37-38.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., 1997. Morphometry of Cryodraco specimens of Terra Nova Bay. Cybium 21(4): 363-68.
Vacchi M., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Chiantore M., Dalù M., 2000a. Predator-prey relationship between nototheniid fish Trematomus bernacchii and Antarctic scallop Adamussium colbecki at Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea). Antarctic Science 12(1): 64-68.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., Greco S., 2000b. The coastal fish fauna of Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea (Antarctica). In: Ross Sea Ecology, F. Faranda, L. Guglielmo and A. Ianora Eds., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg: 457-68.


