AU-ATA-DD-3-BB-AQ-109                  AT01989N

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE               ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE           XVth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ          XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                      PARIS
                                      9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/22
Item 6 a) of the provisional
agenda
Original : Spanish


WHITE BOOK
(submitted by the Delegation of Chile)
(ii) In the light of the above review and taking 
account of other components of the Antarctic 
Treaty System, to identify areas of activity, 
and possible future activity, in respect of 
which environmental protection and wildlife 
conservation might be enhanced by the adoption 
of additional measures;

(iii) To consider in the case of each existing or 
additional measure whether its effectiveness 
would be enhanced by being cast in mandatory 
terms;

(iv) To consider what additional steps might be 
taken to ensure compliance with existing 
or additional measures;

(v) To consider questions of response action and 
liability with respect to en[?]vironmental 
damage caused by Antarctic activities other 
than mineral activity;

(vi) To consider the extent to which environmental 
protection and wildlife conservation might be 
enhanced by the adoption of general principles 
of environmental protection and wildlife 
conservation; and

(vii) To consider the form or forms in which 
agreements reached might most effectively 
be cast.

2. They convene in 1990, in accordance with the 
Final Act of the Fourth Special Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting, a meeting to embark on the 
elaboration of a Liability Protocol under Article 8(7) 
of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic 
Mineral Resource Activities.
WHITE BOOK

I- Introduction

II- The history of international scientific co-operation in 
Antarctica

a) Development of programmes based on co-operation. The first 
international scientific missions, observation of Venus. Polar 
Years, geographical congresses, learned scientific societies, 
projects of international polar institutes and commissions.

b) The International Geophysical Year and related programmes.

c) The negotiation of the Antarctic Treaty and its accompanying 
instruments.

III- The Antarctic System and its Operation

a) Functioning of the Consultative Meetings.

b) Decision-making machinery.

c) Forms of participation in the System.

d) Advice on scientific questions provided by SCAR.

e) Operation and achievements of the System.

IV- Information about the Antarctic System

a) Organization of information concerning the Antarctic System.

b) Bibliographies, handbook, compilations of documentation, 
treatises published on a regular basis, periodicals.

c) Research institutes, higher education institutions, informal 
fora of the System (Kiel, Marsh, Beardmore, Madrid, etc.).

d) Descriptive guide to manuscript and printed sources of 
information. Data banks.

e) Museums and collections of historic Antarctic memorabilia.

V- The public and the Antarctic System

a) The value and significance of Antarctica for mankind.

b) The Antarctic environment and its protection.

c) Norms and practices in Antarctic tourism.

d) Human safety in Antarctica.

e) Antarctica : the ethics of a community.
VI- The future of the Antarctic System

a) The conservation (and expansion ?) of the peace zone.
b) Mankind's scientific laboratory.
c) Special regulations for the region.
d) A model of international cooperation.
e) The special conservation area.
