AU-ATADD-3-GB-AIR-112

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              ANTARCTIC TREATY
XV CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE           XVth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBESCАНИЕ        XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989                     DT/01989 C

XV ATCM/WP/30
Item 13 of the agenda
Original : English

WORKING PAPER
(submitted by the delegation of the
Federal Republic of Germany)
Working Paper

submitted by the delegation
of the Federal Republic of Germany

In view of the uniqueness of the Antarctic landscape, fauna and flora,
tourism in the Treaty Area may well be regarded as a natural development.
However, a considerable increase in tourist activities and non-governmental
expeditions, often including tourist elements, may have adverse effects both
in environmental terms with respect to possible damage to the fragile eco-
system and in scientific terms with respect to national research programmes.

Ship cruises and the unloading of passengers are a potential source of
harmful impacts and additional hazards because of their frequent occurrence
and the fact that they are concentrated on a small number of sites that are
particularly vulnerable to disturbance.

This is particularly true of land excursions. An increase in activities of this
kind will necessarily lead to an expansion of infrastructure, e. g. additional
fuel reserves, extra means of transport. In addition, more waste will be
produced. Provisions for the disposal of existing waste are already
inadequate.

Furthermore, in large numbers such visits to Antarctic scientific stations can
be disruptive. In the long run they may interfere with the efficiency of
scientific work. Financial means may thus be diverted from their proper
purpose. Accidents involving tourists and members of non-governmental expe-
ditions requiring search and rescue operations can be expensive, demanding
on the limited resources and facilities available, and a threat to the safety of
station personnel.

Consequently, it seems essential to limit these additional risks, all the more
so as Rec. XII-3 and XIV-2 already establish special responsibilities of the
sponsoring state with regard to government-sponsored scientific expeditions.
- 2 -

The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany is therefore of the opin-
ion that the problem of tourism and non-governmental expeditions needs to 
be thoroughly discussed, particularly in view of the implications for the 
environment. The question of liability is of special importance and should be 
given priority.

Issues of liability and insurance in respect of tourist and non-governmental 
expeditions have already been raised on several previous occasions, the last 
of which was the 1987 Consultative Meeting in Rio de Janeiro.

In this context attention is drawn to the fact that fundamental principles of 
liability regarding possible mineral activities have been developed in the text 
for a Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities 
(CRAMRA). The differences between mineral activities, should they ever 
occur, and tourist expeditions may be considerable, particularly with regard 
to the extent of possible damage but both have a commercial aspect. Fur-
thermore, tourist activities may lead to heavy damage through plane crashes 
and ship accidents, for example, but also in the form of pollution caused by 
fuel reserves (additionally deposited for tourist transport purposes), and 
destruction of Antarctic flora and fauna. For such damage it would seem 
sensible to apply similar principles of liability, as already developed.

The perception of the risks attaching to tourism and a strict liability 
regime will prompt both planning agencies and tourists to act responsibly 
in the highly sensitive Antarctic environment.

This is why the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany presented at 
the preparatory meeting a draft recommendation on the problem of liability 
for tourism and non-governmental expeditions in Antarctica.
3

Tourism and non-governmental expeditions in Antarctica are complex issues which also involve the question of jurisdiction, for which a solution on the basis of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty has still be be found. The question of liability in connection with tourism and non-governmental expeditions is and important element of a comprehensive development of methods of protecting the Antarctic environment and should therefore be debated in this new context. Owing to the importance of liability deriving from such activities, the Federal Republic of Germany strongly advocates the early establishment of effective liability rules in this field.
