AU-ATAD3-3-BB-AQ-108                 AT 10 10 1989
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE             ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE         XVth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ        XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/18
Item 9 b) of the provisional
agenda
Original : Spanish

FORMULATION OF A STRATEGY TO PREVENT MARINE POLLUTION
AND PROVIDE MARITIME SAFETY IN ANTARCTICA
(working paper presented by the Delegation of Uruguay)

Paris, 10 October 1989
WP-ROU 1/39

FORMULATION OF A STRATEGY TO PREVENT MARINE POLLUTION 
AND PROVIDE MARITIME SAFETY IN ANTARCTICA

Working Paper presented by the Delegation of Uruguay

A. Background

1. The WP-9/05/89 proposal by the Delegation of Spain, in 
which mention is made of the advisability of co-ordinating 
the study and publication of hydrographic activities in the 
Treaty Area.

2. The PREP/WP/11/89 proposal by the Delegation of the USSR, in 
which, based on Recommendation XIV-10, reference is made to 
the advisability of improving and developing marine 
meteorological and sea ice information services in the 
Treaty Area.

3. The PREP/WP/2/02/05/89 proposal by the Delegation of the 
USA, which recommends the taking of all reasonable measures 
necessary to prevent marine pollution in the Treaty Area.

4. The increased scientific interest in Antarctica which has 
multiplied the number of ships, bases and people in the 
surrounding seas.

5. The increased harvesting of Antarctic marine living 
resources which has led to the presence of fishing vessels 
of varied characteristics in the Treaty Area, not all of 
which are suitable for operating in extreme conditions.

6. The eventual entry into force of the Convention on the 
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities which 
will result in the increased presence of research vessels in 
the Treaty Area.

7. The multiple presence in Antarctica of all types of 
tourist vessels.

8. Eventual accidents in the Treaty Area.

9. The existence of a series of International Conventions 
referring to the prevention of marine pollution, many of 
which have already been ratified by Treaty Member States. 
These are:
      
- the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution 
by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (LDC 1972);
- the International Convention for the Prevention of 
Pollution from Ships, 1973, and the Protocol of 1978 
Relating Thereto, with Annexes (MARPOL 73/78);
- 2 -

- the International Convention for the Safety of Life 
at Sea, 1974, and the Protocol of 1978 Relating Thereto 
(SOLAS);
- the International Convention on Standards of 
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers with 
Annex, 1978 (STCW 78);
- the International Convention on Load Lines, 1966 
(L.L. 1966); and
- the Convention on the International Regulations for 
Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972 (COLREGS).

10. The fact that a constant objective of the Antarctic 
Treaty System has been the protection of the environment. In 
this respect, the following adopted measures can be 
highlighted:

    a. Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora;
    b. Code of Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions and 
Station Activities;
    c. the creation of working groups to determine man's 
impact on the Antarctic environment;
    d. Guidelines for Scientific Drilling in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area; and
    e. the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Seals, the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources, and the Convention on the 
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities.

B. Analysis

The foregoing facts merit the study of a series of measures 
which:
    - will assist in the prevention of accidents capable of 
causing pollution or disturbing the ecological equilibrium 
in the Treaty Area;
    - will limit the amount of pollution damage in the 
unfortunate eventuality of an accident; and
    - will assist in the determination and the delimitation 
of liabilities, facilitating the administrative mechanisms 
for determining the amount of compensation for pollution 
damage which will restore, so far as is possible, the 
initial ecological equilibrium of local fauna and flora.

The existing international provisions are not entirely 
appropriate for the Treaty Area because of the difficulty of 
applying the concepts of "coastal State" and of "port State 
control", on the one hand, and of "high seas" regulations on 
the other.
- 3 -

In consideration of the above:

1. This paper proposes the creation of a "Group of Experts" which will meet separately from the ATCMs. In order to analyze the subject matter being considered, seeking to adapt existing international provisions to the particular legal and maritime characteristics of the Treaty Area.

This Group of Experts should function in the same way as the existing Group of Experts on Air Safety and could analyze:

    a. the advisability of the ratification of the aforementioned Conventions by all Member States;

    b. the advisability of requiring all States which intend to become Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to previously ratify all of these Conventions (whether or not they are coastal States); and

    c. in consideration of the fact that the provisions of these six International Conventions cannot be fully applied in the Treaty Area for the reasons already noted, the advisability of adapting them in a new text which will specifically refer to the problem of pollution.

2. In order to determine the possible areas of applicability of the measures which could eventually be adopted, both for preventing marine pollution as well as for promoting maritime security, this Group of Experts should aim at the formulation of a strategy to:

    a. prevent oil spills;

    b. require that those vessels which operate in the Treaty Area, and particularly oil tankers, have contingency plans as well as sufficient elements on board for containing and recovering the oil they transport;

    c. determine the policy of employing effective dispersants in the Treaty Area;

    d. determine a precise Research Program which will lead to the elaboration of a "Sensitivity Chart" for each particular coastal area, taking account of various factors including the quantity and behavior of existing species, in accordance with the information provided by CCMLAR. This "Sensitivity Chart" should especially be elaborated for those areas where man's presence is significant, possibly suggesting more adequate measures for promoting conservation.

    e. This strategy should propose the implementation of a system which will permit Member States geographically situated in the vicinity of the Treaty Area to install waste reception stations which would be available to Antarctic ships returning from the Continent. Their use would be
agreed upon by the parties involved through a mechanism of 
just compensation.

f. This strategy should also propose a broader program 
of integrating cartographic publications (including the 
joint publication of nautical charts), with ample 
overlapping areas between them. For this it will be 
necessary to unify the publications by taking the reference 
charts corresponding to each area and standardizing the 
existing grid systems (where necessary), issuing tide 
tables, predicting tides, including an annex which could 
serve as a "conversion table" for geographic nomenclature, 
etc. All these actions will tend to make the existing 
information more reliable. This proposal should be feasible 
since all States involved are members of the International 
Hydrographic Organization.

g. Finally, this strategy should propose the radio 
broadcasting of a warning bulletin for navigators, 
corresponding to predetermined areas. The information would 
be collected by the various stations and transmitted to a 
coastal station responsible for summarizing and periodically 
broadcasting it on a predetermined frequency (with an 
alternative emergency frequency), applying the criteria 
established by IMO. This would improve maritime safety and 
the safeguarding of human life at sea, in accordance with 
applicable international provisions.

3. In order to determine the joint liability of a State in 
the event of an incident which causes pollution damage, it 
is necessary to identify the link between ship or station 
and the State before selecting the course of action to be 
taken; and in the case of a ship, to determine whether it is 
owned or chartered by the State, a warship carrying out 
auxiliary or commercial activities, or a privately chartered 
vessel. The liability of the State exists in all of these 
cases, but the final text which could eventually be adopted 
must explicitly indicate its share of liability, which will 
obviously be greater when there is a direct link between the 
ship and the State.

It should also be noted if the ship is a logistics or a 
research vessel. In the particular case of a warship, and 
given the fact that these vessels frequently assist the 
Antarctic activities of Member States, this paper fully 
agrees with the USA proposal when it states that "... each 
party should commit itself to ensure, by the adoption of 
appropriate measures not impairing operations nor 
operational capabilities of such vessels, that they act in a 
manner consistent, so far as is reasonable and practicable, 
with these conventions."
- 5 -

4. In regard to the discharge of any other types of 
pollutants, and particularly of inorganic products such as 
all forms of plastics, this paper proposes:

    a. the total ban on all intentional discharges of these 
products in the Treaty Area, in accordance with what was 
stated above under 8.2.e.; and

    b. if organic wastes are discharged more than 12 
nautical miles from land or ice shelves, the strict 
adherence to the previously mentioned international 
provisions.

5. With regard to the difficulty of applying the previously 
mentioned Conventions, and considering that all ships must 
be able to move freely from one part of the world to 
another, it is essential that the operational standards that 
regulate them be common to all States.
