TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]CTIQUE          ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE        XVth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  PARIS
                                  9-19 OCTOBRE 1989
                  he pm 01.
                  16/5/94

XV ATCM/WP/43
Point 10 (c) (i) de
l'ordre du jour
Original : anglais


COMPTE RENDU DES VISITES EFFECTUEES SUR
LE TERRITOIRE ANTARCTIQUE AUSTRALIEN
REPORT ON VISITS TO PROTECTED AREAS

as recommended in ATCM XIV Report para 79

PROTECTED AREAS IN AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC TERRITORY

Recent visits to the following Specially Protected Areas, Sites of 
Special Scientific Inst?rest, and Historic Monuments are reported.

TAYLOR ROOKERY, MAC.ROBERTSON LAND     (SPA)

ROOKERY ISLANDS, HOLME BAY, MAWSON COAST     (SPA)

ODBERT AND ARDERY ISLANDS     (SPA)

NORTH-EAST BAILEY PENINSULA, BUDD COAST, WILKES LAND     (SSSI)

CLARK P?NINSULA BUDD COAST, WILKES LAND     (SSSI)

MARINE PLAIN, MULE PENINSULA, VESTFOLD HILLS, PRINCESS ELIZABETH 
LAND     (SSSI)

ROCK CAIRN, WALKABOUT ROCKS, VESTFOLD HILLS     (HISTORIC)
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA NO 1

TAYLOR ROOKERY, MAC.ROBERTSON LAND

1. Co-ordinates

Latitude 67°26'S, longtitude 60°50'E

1 a Description of the Area

The Area consists of the whole of the northernmost rock exposure on 
the east side of Taylor Glacier, Mac.Robertson Land.

2. Dates of visits/methods of transport

Five visits were made to the Area by Mr Graham Robertson, Antarctic 
Division biologist, as listed below -

Visit 1 - 12/7/88 to 15/7/88
Visit 2 - 14/9/88 to 17/9/88
Visit 3 - 8/11/88 to 9/11/88
Visit 4 - 30/11/88 to 13/1/89
Visit 5 - 15/1/89 (one day only)

Visits 1 to 4 were made by Hagglunds over-snow vehicle. Visit 5 on 
15 January 1989 consisted of two helicopter flights to the Area.

2 a Names of visiting party

Visit 1 - G Robertson , D McCormack (plant inspector), E Piket 
(plumber), Dr J Gill (medical officer), M Whittle (carpenter), E 
Szworak (meteorologist).

Visit 2 - G Robertson, E Logan (communications officer) R 
Hutchinson (geophysicist) D McCormack (plant inspector), S Raynor 
(meteorologist).

Visit 3 - G Robertson, P Barnaart (station leader) D McCormack 
(plant inspector), C Corbett (electrician), C Eavis (electronic 
engineer).

Visit 4 - G Robertson, A Alexander (mechanic and biology 
assistant).

Visit 5 G Robertson, E Piket (plumber) P Turner (helicopter pilot), 
D Pullinger (helicopter pilot).

3. Physical environment, soils, vegetation and fauna 
additional to or different from existing records.

No changes.

3a. Meteorology

No changes.

4. Description of any markers, buildings, other
installations or man-made features and their
purpose(s) within the Area or Site

A field hut has been in the Area since the late 1950's. Near the
field hut are two drum beacons made from two 200 litre fuel drums
welded end to end with a length of water pipe several metres long
through them. One is standing as a navigation aid; the other is
lying on the ground nearby. There is a quantity of rubbish lying
on the ground in the immediate vicinity of the hut (see 7 below).
Also nearby is a full 200 litre drum of aviation turbine kerosene
(used by occupants of the hut for cooking and heating purposes) and
a 2m square wooden box.

Mr Robertson removed all rock cairns from the headlands around the
Specially Protected Area.

5. Evidence of any recent physical or biological change,
particularly when such change might have been brought
about by human activities

There was no evidence of physical or biological change.

6. Evidence of any activity contrary to the Agreed
Measures or the relevant management plan

Evidence of activity contrary to the Agreed Measures was not
observed. Mr Robertson held the permit to enter and work in the
Area and the people listed above accompanied him to either provide
logistic support or to assist with the program. Mr Robertson has no
doubt, however, that previous unauthorised visits have been made to
the Area by expeditioners.

Over the 1988 winter, after consideration by the Australian
Antarctic Division's Antarctic Environment Committee, a field hut
was established at Colbeck Archipelago, some 5 kms away from the
SPA, to satisfy the need for a refuge in the Area for operational
and safety purposes and to limit unauthorised entry to the SPA for
these purposes. Mr Robertson believes that there is still some risk
that unauthorised visits will be made to the Area from this hut.

7. Observations on special features of conservation
significance

As noted above there is no evidence of any change, either recent or
in the immediate past, that will threaten the conservation status
of the SPA. The rubbish referred to is unsightly but does not
threaten the well-being of the Emperor penguins at Taylor Glacier.
The rubbish is old and confined to the immediate vicinty of the
field hut. It is principally composed of remnants of ration packs,
guy wire, water pipe, portions of wooden boxes and a quantity of
scattered nails. The material is unsightly when it becomes visible
as the snow melts off the rocks during late December and January.
Since visits by sea ice to Taylor Glacier are usually not allowed
after about mid-November, most visitors would never see the
rubbish. Mr Robertson recommended that a helicopter trip be
undertaken in January with three or four people to remove the
rubbish. He estimates that such an operation would clear it in
about four hours. There is no rubbish in the amphitheatre where 
the birds breed.

The field hut has been there since the 1950's and is in danger of 
blowing away. As it has some historical value there are proposals 
being developed for its removal intact.

Early indications from Mr Robertson's data indicate that the 
population of breeding emperors has not changed substantially.

8. Description of any scientific research that has been 
undertaken in the SPA

See attached list.

Mr Robertson undertook work on the feeding ecology of the emperor 
penguins breeding in the SPA, including stomach flushing of a 
sample of adult birds returning to the colony, the deployment of 
data loggers on adult birds departing on feeding trips, sampled 
adults and chicks for an estimate of their feeding rate, determined 
the mortality of chicks for the 1988 breeding season and chronicled 
the event of fledging.

9. Evidence as to whether the Area or Site is continuing 
to serve the purpose for which it was originally 
designated

The original reason for designation is the presence of the Emperor 
penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) colony; one of the few and probably 
the largest of the known colonies of the species located wholly on 
land. Mr Robertson said that the evidence suggested that the SPA 
is continuing to protect the colony.

10. Any other information considered relevant or useful in 
furthering the purpose for which the Area or Site was 
originally designated

See Point 7 above (ie. the rubbish should be removed).
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA NO 2

ROOKERY ISLANDS, HOLME BAY (MAWSON COAST)

1. Co-ordinates

The Area is defined as comprising the islands and rocks lying within a rectangle between Latitudes 67°37'S and 67°39'S and between Longitudes 62°33'E and 62°36'E. In the process of researching this report, it was discovered that these boundaries do not include the majority of the islands in the group, including Giganteus Island (the feature of greatest conservation significance), and in fact include a portion of the coast (see attached map). The Area is actually between Latitudes 67°33'S and 67°38'S and between Longitudes 62°33'E and 62°40'E (as shown on the map)

1 a Description of the Area

The Area consists of approximately 75 small islands, varying in size from small rocks to the two largest members of the group, Giganteus Island (about 400 m wide,400m long and 30 m high) and Rookery Island which is of similar area, but slightly more elongate and reaches an altitude of 62 m.

2. Dates of visits/methods of transport

The Area was visited on 16/11/88 by a party of five  The party used two Hagglunds oversnow vehicles.

2 a Names of visiting party

Mr Graham Robertson (wintering biologist), Dr J Gill (medical officer), R Hutchinson (geophysicist), E Szworak (meteorologist) and T Everett (Construction foreman).

3. Physical environment, soils, vegetation and fauna additional to or different from existing records

No evidence of change.

4. Description of any markers, buildings, other installations or man-made features and their purpose(s) within the Area or Site

None evident.

5. Evidence of any recent physical or biological change, particularly when such change might have been brought about by human activities

No evidence.

6. Evidence of any activity contrary to the Agreed Measures or the relevant management plan
The Rookery Islands lie directly west of Mawson and consequently 
lie in the path of field parties heading west from Mawson station.
Field parties often travel past or between the islands on sea ice,
and may make unauthorised visits or enter the Area inadvertently.
There was no evidence of such visits within the Area. There are
only about four weeks of the year when the birds the Area is 
designated to protect are present and the sea ice is firm enough to
allow travel. In managing the SPA to achieve the objectives for 
which it is designated, provision should be made both to ensure 
that field trips during this period do not disturb the birds within 
the Area and that trips outside the period are not subject to 
unnecessary restrictions.

7.     Observations on special features of conservation 
       significance

None reported.

8.     Description of any scientific research that has been 
       undertaken in the SPA

See attached list.

9.     Evidence as to whether the Area or Site is continuing 
       to serve the purpose for which it was originally 
       designated

There is no evidence to suggest that the breeding populations of 
the six bird species present are not safeguarded.

10.    Any other information considered relevant or useful in 
       furthering the purpose for which the Area or Site was 
       originally designated

Mr Robertson noted in his report his belief that of the Rookery 
Islands, Giganteus Island is the most deserving of protection as an 
SPA by virtue of the Giant Petrel colony it supports. While the 
other islands do support breeding populations of various Antarctic 
bird species, they are not unique or special in the or the 
Antarctic. It has also been pointed out that the original reason 
for designation, to safeguard the unusual "association" of six 
specis, is not correct, since the only association known between 
the species is between the Antarctic skua and each of the other 
species in a predator-prev relationship. It would be more correct 
to speak of an unusual juxtaposition of breeding populations.
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA 3

ODBERT AND ARDERY ISLANDS

1. Co-ordinates

Latitude 66°22'S, longitude 110°28'E.
Latitude 66°22'S, longitude 110°33'E.

1a Description of Area

The Area consists of Ardery Island and Odbert Island which lie off-
shore in Vincennes Bay, 7 nautical miles south of Wilkes.  The off-
lying rocks are not included in the Area.

2. Dates of visits/methods of transport

Dr J van Franeker, a Dutch ornithologist, visited Ardery Island
between 7/11/84 and 22/3/85 as part of the Australian National
Antarctic Research Expedition (ANARE) to study the comparative
breeding ecology of four related species of petrels (Cape Petrels
(Daption capensis), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), Antarctic
fulmars (Fulmarus glacialoides) and Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica
antarctica) breeding sympatrically on the island. He was
accompanied by T Montague.  To support the study an "Apple"
removable field hut was positioned on the Island.

The commencement of his field work was delayed for a month because
of logistic problems.  On 19 November 1984 Dr van Franeker walked
from Robinson's Ridge out to Odbert Island over the sea ice.  An
inspection of the island revealed that it was not a suitable site
for his proposed study as, although Antarctic fulmars were in
abundance, few Cape petrels and no Antarctic petrels were present.
His opinion was that they had flown back out to sea prior to
laying.  Dr van Franeker decided to conduct his research on Ardery
Island where he considered that the birds would be more numerous
and more accessible. Observation of Ardery Island through
binoculars revealed that the island was surrounded on the landward
side by a shelving of ice which would preclude landings at that
stage by either the Zodiac or even the Icebird's work boat.

On the arrival of Icebird on 6 December 1984 initial supplies
(including the Apple filed hut which was too large to be
transported by Zodiac) were transported to the island by Icebird's
small work boat.  The transport of the remaining supplies together
with Dr van Franeker and his assistant was delayed by bad weather
and was later completed by one Zodiac boat with helicopters
standing by.  Field work commenced on the island on 10 December
1984. Subsequent trips were made by one Zodiac supported by a
helicopter flying overhead.

Resulting from the experience detailed above an amendment was made
to the Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980 (AT(EP)
Act), the Australian legislation which implements the Agreed
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. The
legislation now permits a helicopter landing in a SPA provided that
it serves a compelling scientific purposes which could not be 
served elsewhere, and that it would not jeopardize the natural 
ecological system existing in the Area.  Previously the only means 
of transport permitted by the Act within an SPA was by foot, while 
any means of transport could be used to approach an SPA. Further 
considerations relating to landing helicopters in the SPA are 
discussed under item 10.

During the period 15/10/86 to 24/3/87 Dr J van Franeker, 
accompanied by P Bell, returned to Ardery Island to continue his 
study. Their mode of transport to and from Ardery Island was 
helicopter, and there was a total of six helicopter flights. 
Resupply trips were made from Casey by two Zodiac inflatable boats. 
The field hut was removed by helicopter on completion of Dr 
Franeker's work in the Area.

The AT(EP) Act provides for the appointment of inspectors, with 
limited powers, to police adherence to its provisions. One such 
inspector, Dr Rod Seppelt (Antarctic Division Biologist) led a 
small visiting party to both islands on 24 January 1989. The party 
traveled by two Zodiac craft. They remained on Ardery Island for 
approximately 45 minutes and spent an hour on Odbert Island, 
landing near the Adélie penguin colony on the north west side.

He was accompanied by J Schmiechen (Station Leader), Ling Hua U 
(wintering biologist) and B Sorensen (summer chef).

On 31 January 1989 Dr Seppelt, accompanied by J Enfantie (wintering 
carpenter), C Mynard (summer plant operator) and 
G Pankoke (summer carpenter), returned to Odbert Island by Zodiac 
to inspect the Fulmar colony on the north side.  They remained on 
the island for approximately half an hour.

Visits were made to the islands at an opportune time under good 
weather conditions.

For safety reasons the two Zodiac boats traveled together, each 
with a helmsman and one passenger. To conform with ANARE safety 
requirements all personnel went ashore and all passengers were 
briefed on the necessity of exercising extreme care near the 
nesting birds to prevent their disturbance, particularly in the 
Antarctic fulmar colonies.

2a  Landing sites

Three landing sites have been identified for Ardery Island - Cave 
Landing and Robertson Landing near the north-west end of the 
island, and Penney Landing near the eastern tip of the island. 
Only one landing, Cave Landing, was practical at the time of Dr 
Seppelt's visit. He noted that a secure landing there is difficult 
to obtain if there is a wind or swell from the north-east to the 
north-west.

There are many potential landing sites on Odbert Island, both from 
the water and from the air using helicopters.
Helicopter landings were made on Ardery Island in 1986/87 on a low 
knoll on the north-western corner of the island near to Cave 
Landing (see attached map).

Dr van Franeker considered that access by helicopters during the 
whole season would be possible on Ardery Island but that landing 
should be restricted to the high parts of the island during the 
breeding season to avoid disturbance of petrel colonies. Nearly 
all petrels, including Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) 
and snow petrels, breed on or near the steep sides of the island.

Attached are maps of both islands indicating sites recommended by 
Dr van Franeker for helicopter landings. He also recommended that 
helicopters should approach both islands at a high altitude and 
(weather permitting) from a southern direction. (See 7. below.)

3.  Physical environment, soils, vegetation and fauna 
    additional to or different from existing records

No changes.

3a. Meteorology

The account of the Area in the SCAR publication Conservation Areas 
in the Antarctic (Bonner, N W and Smith, R L, 1985) notes, "No 
meteorological observations have been made on these islands; 
however, the principal features of the climate would be expected to 
vary little from those at Casey station". While he made no 
systematic observations, Dr van Franeker noted that the weather on 
the island can vary considerably at times from that at Casey which 
is located 12 km to the north.

3b. Marine

No marine data on the Area is recorded in Bonner and Smith. During 
summer Dr van Franeker and his assistant regularly observed Minke 
Whales and large groups of Killer Whales. Some samples of bird 
stomach contents were sent to Mr Dick Williams (Antarctic Division 
Marine Biologist) who advised that Ardery and Odbert Islands, like 
the Casey region in general, is notable for the abundance and 
diversity of its inshore marine fish. In particular the yellow-
belly rock cod (Notothenia neglecta) is common in this Area. This 
species has its centre of distribution in the Atlantic sector of 
the Southern Ocean, and the Casey region represents its western-
most occurrence.

3c. Birds and seals

In addition to the Weddell Seals frequently observed on the sea-ice 
around the islands and Elephant seals which haul out a little 
further south of the islands on Peterson Island and on the Browning 
Peninsula (Bonner and Smith, 1985). Dr van Franeker has observed 
Leopard Seals around the SPA.

4.  Description of any markers, buildings, other 
    installations or man-made features and their 
    purpose(s) within the Area or Site
Both Dr Seppelt and Dr van Franeker noted that in a small shallow cave in Cave Ravine on Ardery Island, adjacent to the nesting birds, there are some old remains of expeditions to Ardery which took place either in the early 1960's or in 1977. They include pieces of wood, an old canvas cover, sleeping bag, canned food, hand-driven generator, rusting cooking pot, and pieces of wire.

Removal of the items would be difficult as Antarctic fulmars, Cape petrels and Snow petrels are breeding in between the remains during summer and during winter the materials are buried by snow. The only possibility for removal might be early April when all birds have fledged.

A number of nesting sites were marked permanently by yellow or orange paint during the 1986/87 summer season. Dr Seppelt observed that some of the marked nest sites were not occupied in the 1988/89 breeding season. He recommended that if further studies are permitted in this protected Area then any marking of nests should be of a temporary and removable nature (eg: short numbered stakes).

All that remains of the Apple hut which was placed on Ardery Island from 1984 until 1987 is a series of rock anchors.

5. Evidence of any recent physical or biological change, particularly when such change might have been brought about by human activities

No evidence of change.

6. Evidence of any activity contrary to the Agreed Measures or the relevant management plan

From discussions with Casey wintering expeditioners, it is possible that unauthorised visits may have been made during the winter period to Odbert Island via the sea ice from Robinson Ridge. However, as this is outside the period of occupation of the Islands by the nesting birds, there is little likelihood of adverse effects on the Area.

7. Observations on special features of conservation significance

None reported.

8. Description of any scientific research that has been undertaken in the SPA

See attached list.

9. Evidence as to whether the Area or Site is continuing to serve the purpose for which it was originally designated

The reports show that the objective of protection of the Islands to provide a sample of the habitat of several breeding species of petrel, and to preserve their particular scientific value, continues to be served. The studies of fulmarine petrels performed in 1984/85 and 1986/87 and the extensive colour banding of birds
has added scientific value to the Area. The studies on Ardery 
Island may be useful in investigations of long-term population 
trends of fulmarine petrels.

10. Any other information considered relevant or useful in 
furthering the purpose for which the Area or Site was 
originally designated

The attached maps drawn by Dr J van Franeker illustrate bird 
colonies and his recommendations for helicopter landing sites.  His 
opinion is that helicopters can land on either island without 
significant disturbance to the birds. However, different 
precautions are required at different times of the year to relate 
to the breeding cycle of the birds.

At Ardery Island no penguins breed, and therefore the main concern 
is not to disturb petrels. Observations at Ardery showed that 
breeding birds did not leave their eggs or small chicks when 
disturbed. During disturbances (eg: by helicopters flying over 
Sparks Bay or any other kind of disturbance) birds flying off the 
cliffs suggested negative effects. However, closer observation 
revealed that only birds not committed to their eggs or chicks 
left, but they returned quickly. Impacts on the birds by such 
disturbances is only expected at extremely high frequencies of the 
disturbing factor.

Dr van Franeker considered that landing helicopters closer to the 
coastal colonies for special purposes should be limited to certain 
times of the year. For example, landing very close to the site of 
the field hut at Ardery is probably best restricted to a time 
before egg-laying (ie. before 25 November) and after first growth 
of the chicks (ie. after mid-February).

At Odbert Island the presence of two large Adélie penguin 
(Pygoscelis adeliae) colonies make the situation slightly 
different.  Dr van Franeker noted that Adélies seem rather 
sensitive to helicopter noises. Birds start running around and 
disturb the whole territorial structure of the colony. Even one 
panicking bird can cause a lot of disturbance, particularly to 
birds attending eggs or chicks. It seems best to avoid helicopter 
flights in the neighbourhood of Adélie colonies from early November 
until February. At Odbert Island the colonies are at the western 
and eastern tips of the island, leaving the central parts of the 
Island free for landing of helicopters at any time of the year.  As 
on Ardery Island, landing very close to cliffs should be avoided 
because of the petrels.

In 1987 Dr van Franeker submitted a paper to the Australian 
Antarctic Division urging that a ban be imposed on feeding Skuas in 
the vicinity of Antarctic stations. He was concerned that human 
intervention upset the balance between the birds and their prey. 
In particular he was concerned because many lamb chop and other 
bones were found on Ardery Island which demonstrated that Skuas had 
no difficulty in making a 10 km feeding trip into Casey.
This superseded previous advice which was that the skuas foraging 
at the station were most likely local non breeding birds. As a 
consequence, feeding of skuas at Australian Antarctic stations has 
been prohibited for the past three years.
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST 16

NORTH-EAST BAILEY PENINSULA, BUDD COAST, WILKES LAND

1. Co-ordinates

Latitude 66°17'S, 110°32'E longitude

1a Description of Site

The Site consists of an irregular area of rock exposed during summer and surrounding the Casey Station transmitter building,
located at approximately latitude 66°17'11"S and longitude
110°32'48"E. The boundary of the Site will be indicated by prominent markers.

In March 1988, at the time of P Heyward and R Graham's visit, the summer melt at Casey was the most extensive for many years,
revealing more of the rock outcrop than was exposed when the SSSI was proposed. The extent of the exposed rock during summer is
clear each year, but not constant from year to year. In winter snow drifts up to two meters thick covers the Site almost completely.
Because of the extent of the melt that summer, poles marking the boundary of the Site were well inside the area of rock exposed.
Expeditioners at Casey expressed the view that they had little idea of where the SSSI boundary is located. The problem is compounded
by the inadequacy of the small map attached to the Management Plan,
which shows no contours and thus cannot show the relationship of the boundary to the topography of the Site.

Mr Heyward and Ms Graham recommended that a more detailed map be prepared for use in the management of the Site, and that the
definition of the Site in the management plan be reviewed with a view to removing this uncertainty.

The SSSI boundary was surveyed in summer 1988/89, but the results are not yet available.

2. Dates of visits/methods of transport

On 10 March 1988 P Heyward and R Graham (Policy Section, Antarctic Division) entered the Site on foot with E Adamson (winter
biologist) to collect information for this report.

During summer 1988/89 Dr Rod Seppelt (Antarctic Division Biologist and AT(EP) Act Inspector) worked in SSSI 16 and provided
information for this report.

Under the AT(EP) Act, access to Sites of Special Scientific Interest is restricted by a permit system to those whose activities
are consistent with the management plan for the Site. Under ANARE operational rules, expeditioners may not operate in the field
alone, so at times researchers will be accompanied by assistants provided for, but not specified in permits. Also, since the
stations radio transmitters and associated aerial systems are
within the Site, technical officers are permitted to enter for maintenance purposes.

All access is on foot, only except to the transmitter building, where vehicle access is along a defined cane line. One exception was the removal of a field van on a sled and its replacement with a "melon" removable field hut as an emergency shelter and work station for the biological programs. This operation was conducted during winter using a D-5 dozer traveling over snow and ice, and the operating party advised that the impact was minimal. There was no evidence of disturbance reported by the visiting parties.

During the summer months, foot access is predominantly from the old station via Penguin Pass road, entering at the northern end of the Site.

Pedestrian routes within the Site are not defined. As a general rule, travel is via the tops of boulders, minimising damage. The management plan specifies that when moving within the Site, particular care should be taken to avoid damage to bryophytes and lichens, disrupting soils and glacial features, and to avoid causing changes to water quality or drainage. There was no evidence of such damage reported.

3. Physical environment, soils, vegetation and fauna additional to or different from existing records
None

4. Description of any markers, buildings, other installations or man-made features and their purpose(s) within the Area or Site

4 a Boundary markers

Marker poles, as described in a paper by Fleming and Keage (*****) were placed at various point on the boundary of the Site in 1986. A concrete block with a hole is used as a base for the markers which are bright yellow cylinders mounted on guyed aluminium posts. Inside each canister is information on the Site including maps, preferred entry points and a visitor's log book which must be completed by visitors to the Site.

In March 1988 the marker poles were indistinct against the background and there were too few to indicate the boundary clearly. Mr Heyward and Ms Graham felt that more marker poles would look unsightly and create visual pollution in a Site which is already dotted with stakes, masts and cables. Several poles had been swept away completely by the wind.

They recommended that marker poles only be used along the perimeter of the SSSI which runs along the road over Penguin Pass, where inadvertent access is most likely, and that they be more securely anchored.

During the summer season 1988/89 Dr Seppelt discovered that more of the markers had blown over. The canister on one marker at the western end of Bailey Peninsula was broken and the contents were
missing. It has become obvious that the markers cannot at times withstand the force of the wind and once they have blown over, they are difficult to see. Dr Seppelt recommended that the system be reviewed.

4b Radio power and telephone cables

Before designation of the area as a SSSI, there were three cables running across the Site from the northwest corner and terminating at the transmitter building. These had, over a number of years, become buried in parts of the moss beds. In view of the potential damage to moss beds that would be caused by their removal, Antarctic Division policy was to leave them in place, despite some criticism of their continuing presence after designation of the Site. Dr Seppelt has advised that to remove them completely would probably severely damage the moss beds, and disrupt the lichen growing on rocks and soil over which they pass.

In the 1988/89 summer, the communications centre was to be transferred from the old Casey station to the new station, which required reconnection of two of the cables. The point where the cables exit the SSSI was well north of the direct route to the new station and reconnection at the point raised problems of signal attenuation, and the considerable cost of the extra cable required. The cables ran through an area of rock and moraine with patches of lichen and small patches of moss then into a moss bed in which they were embedded.

A proposal was made that the two cables be disconnected from terminals on the south side of Thala Valley at the boundary of the SSSI, and rolled back towards the transmitters for 150 metres to a point just outside the first moss bed, then relaid in a westerly direction towards the new station, through an area which was used to quarry construction material for the Penguin Pass road prior to the declaration of the SSSI. This proposal for relocation of the cables was endorsed by the Antarctic Division's Antarctic Environment Committee, and a permit for the project was granted. In January 1989, the work was carried out under the supervision of Dr Seppelt.

The operation highlighted the need for careful consideration to be given to any future suggestions for removal or relocation of the masts or aerials.

4c Radio cable and mast rack

There is a stack for cables, mast parts, and other radioo equipment at the extreme western end of the Site. This is the location of the original transmitter building. On the ground around this stack are pieces of cable, wire, broken insulators, etc., and rusted nails and charcoal, the remnants of a previous burn of combustible materials, probably mainly timber.

Mr Heyward, Ms Graham and Dr Seppelt have recommended that the radio stack should be removed from the Site and the debris cleaned up.******

4 d Remnants of scientific studies
Dr Seppelt reported that in a number of places where ecological and 
long-term growth studies have been carried out there are scattered 
pieces of string (used to mark transect lines), brass pins (to mark 
growth study sites), steel poles and pieces of timber (used to 
facilitate profile studies and mark sites of growth studies).  The 
majority of these are no longer in use or of relevance to any 
study. Some of the pieces which could be identified as having no 
purpose were removed during the 1988/89 summer.

He recommended that all existing non-essential pieces of equipment 
and markers, together with other debris, be removed from the Site, 
and that in future, all remnants of scientific studies must be 
removed at the completion of the study by the relevant field 
personnel.

4e  Scientific instrumentation within the Site

A Stevenson Screen for meteorological instruments is set up 
adjacent to one of the moss dominated sites. These units have been 
in place for three years. At various locations are thermistor 
probes and humidity sensors. These instruments are of a temporary 
nature and their location may vary.

One area, designated as CMS1, has been gridded with vertical steel 
rods to aid location of specific study localities within this site 
and also to monitor snow depths over the Site during the year.

A number of photopoints and permanent lichen growth sites have been 
established. These are marked with small brass plates (5 x 2 cm) 
stuck onto rock.

A permanent microclimate station will be established at CMS1 in the 
1989/90 summer.

5.  Evidence of any recent physical or biological change, 
particularly when such change might have been brought about by human activities

None.

6.  Evidence of any activity contrary to the Agreed 
Measures or the relevant management plan

None.

7.  Observations on special features of conservation 
significance

None.

8.  Description of any scientific research that has been 
undertaken in the SSSI

See attached list. Between 1/5/88 and 9/3/89 Mr J Kilpatrick, a 
geologist who was stationed at Casey, collected (in conjunction the 
resident biologist) geological samples from the Site. The results 
of his findings have not yet been received. Mr Heyward and Ms
Graham noted in their report that there appears to be ample scope 
within the SSSI for geological investigation, including 
collections, without risk to biological studies, provided that such 
programs are undertaken in consultation with biological 
researchers.

9.  Evidence as to whether the Area or Site is continuing 
to serve the purpose for which it was originally 
designated    

The Site is designed to protect, for scientific study, a diverse 
assemblage of vegetation and other components of the terrestrial 
environment. The need for protection, and the value as a readily 
accessible research site, derive from the close proximity to Casey 
station. The reports indicate that the Site is continuing to meet 
this objective, although the proximity to the station means that 
there have been and will continue to be management decisions 
required in which operational considerations play a part. While 
this is not specifically provided for in the management plan at 
present, it is not inconsistent with it. However, it would be 
preferable for the plan to be revised with this in mind.

10.  Any other information considered relevant or useful in 
furthering the purpose for which the Area or Site was 
originally designated    

Nil.
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST 17

CLARK PENINSULA BUDD COAST, WILKES LAND

1. Co-ordinates

Latitude 66°15'S, longitude 110°36'E.

1a Description of Site

The Site comprises all land on Clark Peninsula within the southern 
boundary line connecting the east side of Stevenson Cove to 
trigonometrical station NM/5/6, trig. station G3 and a point to the 
east-south-east on Loken Moraines. The westernmost limit of Loken Moraines as far north as a point due 
east of Blakeney Point, and thence to the coast. The boundary of 
the Site will be indicated by prominent markers.

Dr Seppelt has pointed out that the Site description is incorrect, 
at least of the southern boundaries. On the map available to field 
personnel, survey points G7 and NM/S/6 are incorrectly placed. 
Their positions are, in fact, reversed, ie. G7 should be where 
NM/S/6 and vice versa.

He recommends that the Site description should be amended to read 
as follows:

The Site comprises all that land on Clark Peninsula bounded on its 
easterly side by the Loken Moraine, on its northerly side from a 
point on the Loken Moraine due east of Blakeney Point and extending 
west to Blakeney Point, on its westerly side by the coastline 
extending south west to Whitney Point, and on its southerly side by 
a line connecting Whitney Point to survey marker point G7 thence 
south east to survey marker point G8 and thence south east to the 
Loken Moraine line.

A survey of the coastline was conducted during the 1988/89 summer 
season.

2. Dates of visits/methods of transport

On 10 March 1988 Mr P Heyward and Ms R Graham overflew the Site by 
helicopter, and approached its boundary from the abandoned Wilkes 
station.

During the summer 1988/89 Dr Rod Seppelt (Antarctic Division 
Biologist and AT(EP) Act Inspector) worked in SSSI 17 and inspected 
it to provide information for this report.

Access to Wilkes Station, at the south western end of Clark 
Peninsula, is via a route defined by canes. This cane line passes 
along the southern boundary of the Site. However, as indicated in 
the description of the Site, the survey reference points as cited 
are incorrectly placed on the map and the access track to Wilkes 
may, in part, be just within the Site.
For safety reasons the access route should not be altered since on 
the side of the route away from the SSSI, there are ice cliffs 
which are dangerous to approach. Some alteration of the boundary or 
the management plan may therefore be necessary to provide for use 
of this route.

There are no defined pedestrian access routes.  The management plan 
specifies that pedestrian access should, where possible, be over 
snow.  Dr Seppelt reported no evidence of recent disturbance of 
sensitive localities within the Site, such as the south end of the 
Whitney Point penguin colony and the extreme north easterly hills, 
which are richly covered with lichens and moss.

3.  Physical environment, soils, vegetation and fauna 
additional to or different from existing records

None.

4.  Description of any markers, buildings, other 
installations or man-made features and their 
purpose(s) within the Area or Site

Boundary markers were placed along the moraine line where the route 
to Lanyon Junction skirts the SSSI in 1986.  The number of markers 
appears to be inadequate for marking a site of size of SSSI 17.  Ms 
Graham and Mr Heyward recommended that marker poles should be 
placed at the Wilkes end of the Site where there is a greater 
likelihood of inadvertent or unauthorised entry to the Site.

During the summer season 1988/89 Dr Seppelt found that some of the 
SSSI boundary markers had blown over.  It is apparent that the 
markers cannot at times withstand the force of the wind and once 
they have blown over, they are difficult to see.  He considered 
that the Site needs to be better marked, particularly at the 
southern end close to the station and recommended that the system 
be reviewed.

There is currently no instrumentation within the Site.

At Whitney Point there remains what is left of a "hide" utilised by 
the American penguin research team together with a large number of 
unused data cards.

A number of painted markers are still visible on rocks near the 
penguin colonies at Whitney Point.  These were placed to assist 
with the identification of specific colonies during the American 
studies.  They are faint but could still be used to obtain data to 
compare with the earlier studies.

5.  Evidence of any recent physical or biological change, 
particularly when such change might have been brought 
about by human activities

One area of gravels showing frost cracks on the eastern side of the 
Whitney Point penguin colony has been disturbed by digging.  It 
appears that pit was dug some time ago in the gravels to 
investigate the nature of a frost crack.  The pit has not been
filled in and levelled off and now a mount of gravel with a marked depression remains permanently.

6.  Evidence of any activity contrary to the Agreed Measures or the relevant management plan

Mr Heyward and Ms Graham gained the impression from conversations with expedition personnel that unauthorised visits to Whitney Point may still occur.

7.  Observations on special features of conservation significance

None

8.  Description of any scientific research that has been undertaken in the SSSI

Research carried out in recent years has been limited to botanical and invertebrate zoological surveys. Both plant and Invertebrate specimens have been taken. The invertebrate collections are held in the Zoology Department, University of New England, Armidale, NSW where they are being studied by Professor H Heatwole's group. Part of the collection of tardigrade fauna is currently in the USA as part of a program of comparison of the fauna of Greenland with that of the Antarctic. All plant collections are housed in the Antarctic Division Herbarium, Kingston, Tasmania. During the International Geophysical Year 1956/57 there were intensive studies carried out on Adélie penguin behaviour and ecology by American ornithologists at Wilkes Station, utilising the Whitney Point colony.

The Site is now used for baseline reference with only minimal research activity being conducted within it.

The Adélie Penguin colony at Whitney Point has been used as a study colony to monitor penguin numbers. Numbers of breeding birds show an increase from 1120 breeding pairs in 1959/60, 1320 pairs in 1960/61, 1152 pairs in 1961/62, to 2043 breeding pairs in 1971/72 and 4199 breeding pairs in 1983/84. Aerial survey work of the Casey region, including the Whitney Point rookery, and other areas within the SSSI is planned as part of the 1989/90 ANARE.

For further details of research see attached list.

9.  Evidence as to whether the Area or Site is continuing to serve the purpose for which it was originally designated

The reports indicate that the Site is basically undisturbed. As the purpose of its designation is to provide control for recording baseline data for comparative studies to monitor environmental impact at Casey station, this purpose is being served.

10.  Any other information considered relevant or useful in furthering the purpose for which the Area or Site was originally designated
On the understanding that Wilkes is likely to be a favoured access point for unauthorised visits, Ms Graham and Mr Heyward believed that information on the SSSI should be prominently displayed inside the refuge hut at Wilkes to pre-empt this.
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO 25

MARINE PLAIN, MULE PENINSULA, VESTFOLD HILLS, PRINCESS 
ELIZABETH LAND

1. Co-ordinates

The Site consists of the area, the boundary of which -

1 commences at the point of latitude 68°36'30"S, longitude 
78°09'00"E;

2 runs thence south-easterly along the geodesic to the point of 
latitude 68°36'45"S, longitude 78°10'30"E;

3 thence south-easterly along the geodesic to the point of 
latitude 68°37'30"S, longitude 78°12'30"E;

4 thence south along the parallel of longitude 78°12'30"E to 
its intersection by the low water mark on the northern shore 
of Crooked Fjord;

5 thence following the low water mark of the northern shore of 
Crooked Fjord to its intersection by the meridian of 
longitude 78°03'00"E;

6 thence north along the meridian of longitude 78°03'00"E to its 
intersection by the parallel of latitude 68°37'30"S;

7 thence north-easterly along the geodesic to the point of 
latitude 68°37'00"S, longitude 78°05'00"E; and

8 thence north-easterly along the geodesic to the point of 
commencement.

All co-ordinates are expressed in terms of the World Geodetic 
System 1972 (WGS72).

1a Description of the Site

Marine Plain (23.4km2) opens into Crooked Fjord on the southern 
side of Mule Peninsula, the southern-most of the three peninsulas 
which comprise the Vestfold Hills (approximately 400 km2). The 
Vestfold Hills is an essentially ice free oasis of rock and water 
at the eastern side of Prydz Bay on the coast of Princess Elizabeth 
Land.

2. Dates of visits/methods of transport

Ms Lyn Goldsworthy (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 
representative) and Ms Gail Cumming (Antarctic Division) visited 
Marine Plain on 15 February 1988. Access to the Site was by 
helicopter and they walked within the area.

************** Gordon ***************
On 4 February 1989 Mr Rob Easther (Station Manager Davis) flew to 
the Site by helicopter. He was accompanied by four members of the 
Australian House of Representatives Standing Committee on 
Environment, Recreation and the Arts conducting and Inquiry into 
Tourism in the Antarctic,

3. Physical environment, soils, vegetation and fauna 
additional to or different from existing records

None reported.

4. Description of any markers, buildings, other 
installations or man-made features and their 
purpose(s) within the Area or Site

No buildings or other installations were present in the Site.

5. Evidence of any recent physical or biological change, 
particularly when such change might have been brought 
about by human activities

Mr Easther reported that on 4 February 1989 footprints were in 
evidence though some areas where particularly soft, fine, dusty 
topsoil is present. Research scientists working in the Site 
advised him that all traces would be obliterated within a couple of 
years due to local wind conditions.

6. Evidence of any activity contrary to the Agreed 
Measures or the relevant management plan

None.

7. Observations on special features of conservation 
significance

None.

8. Description of any scientific research that has been 
undertaken in the SPA

See attached list.

9. Evidence as to whether the Area or Site is continuing 
to serve the purpose for which it was originally 
designated

The SSSI is designated to protect continuing palaeontological, 
limnological and biological studies within from accidental 
disturbance as a result of proximity to Davis Station. This 
objective appears to be being met.

10. Any other information considered relevant or useful in 
furthering the purpose for which the Area or Site was 
originally designated

Nil.
HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS - NO 6

ROCK CAIRN, WALKABOUT ROCKS, VESTFOLD HILLS, PRINCESS 
ELIZABETH LAND

1. Co-ordinates

Latitude 68°22'S, longitude 78°33'E.

1a Description of Site

Erected in 1939 by Sir Hubert Wilkins. The cairn houses a 
canister containing a record of his visit.

2 Date(s) of Visit

4 February 1989.

2a Method of Transport

Helicopter.

2b Composition (Names and Qualifications) of visiting 
party

Mr Rob Easther (Station Manager Davis, and an AT(EP) inspector), 
accompanied by Dr Des Lugg, Voyage Leader, Voyage 6.

3    Information about the monument which is additional to 
or differs from the description given in the Annex to 
Recommendation V11-9 and any other published account

Mr Easther opened the sealed container and checked the condition 
of the contents which were: a copy of Walkabout magazine; a copy 
of the Proclamation made by Sir Hubert Wilkins in 1939; and a 
visitors' log book. The visitors made an entry into the log book 
recording an official visit. The visitors reported that 
everything was in good condition. It was clear that the drift and 
snow had had no impact. The container is tucked into a little 
cranny in the rocks and is well protected.

4. Evidence of any recent change, particularly when such 
change might have been brought about by human 
activities

None.

5. Description of any markers, notices etc

None.

6. Description of any human activities in the vicinity 
of the monument

None.
7. Any other information considered relevant or useful 
in furthering the preservation of the monument

There is evidence that the Site is visited by expeditioners from 
Davis on recreation trips but their visits appear to have had no 
detrimental effects on the Site.  On 10 November 1988 Mr Dick 
Smith flew to Walkabout Rocks in his Twin Otter aircraft.  He 
commented that everything was in order.
