ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING     PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ПEPBOE KOHCYЛЬTAТИВHOE COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОP OБ AHTAPKTИКE

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL

Number: EXPL. MEMO/1
DATE: 10th July, 1961.
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

AGENDA ITEM 16

(TITLE)                  ANTARCTIC COMMUNICATIONS

Submitted by: Australian Delegation

ITEM 16 - ARRANGEMENTS FOR RADIO COMMUNICATIONS

Radio communications in and to Antarctica take place under the most
difficult conditions anywhere in the world. Messages must be transmitted
through the disturbed ionospheric conditions associated with the southern
auroral zone; fading is bad; noise level is high and at times "black-out"
conditions prevent any radio reception for days on end. Under such con-
ditions radio communications are frequently completely disrupted. While
improved transmitters of greater power and well-designed aerials. will bring
some improvements at most Antarctic stations, the usual levels of reliability
in communications will not be achieved completely until new techniques such
as forward scatter or communications satellites can be used.

There is no organisation to co-ordinate radio traffic in Antarctica
at present. The main problems are the sharing of time and the improvement
of capacity to the limits of physical operation. The communities are too
small to justify an extensive network of facilities, and schedules must
therefore be arranged in a co-ordinated and mutually accepted pattern.

There are several bodies controlling various aspects of communica-
tions in other parts of the world, but they are not appropriate for the
organization of Antarctic traffic, some because they are fully engaged in
other spheres, and others because they have no franchise to cover the whole
of the Antarctic Continent. For example, the International Telecommuni-
cations Union, through its affiliated International Radio Consultative
Committee, International Telephone and Telegraphic Consultative Committee
and International Frequency Registration Board takes an interest in the

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
- 2 -

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL

Number:  EXPL. MEMO/1

Date:  10th July, 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

specification of standards for communications and accepts responsibility for sharing out frequencies to users. Other organisations (e.g. Commonwealth Telecommunications Board, American Telephone and Telegraphic Company), have at times taken action to provide international links and to organise routes and traffic flow within their particular spheres of responsibility.

The Special Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has established a Communications Working Group "to advise on the practical aspects of communications within the Antarctic, and between the Antarctic and the rest of the world, because of the importance of this problem to Antarctic research". This group has, however, been handicapped by its absence of contact with governmental bodies and lack of authority in implementing plans.

Because of its general and world-wide concern that meteorological data should be freely and promptly exchanged for operational as well as research purposes, the World Meteorological Organisation has also been examining the problem of Antarctic communications. WMO is a governmental agency which has a charter "to promote the establishment and maintenance of systems for the rapid exchange of weather information". It also has formal Working Arrangements with the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), and the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), to accept "primary responsibility for the international organisations of meteorology (including matters such as meteorological communication systems) through intergovernmental co-operation"; while ICSU "is to arrange for proposals and recommendations in regard to the international Organisation of Meteorology to be directed to WMO". WMO has in fact co-ordinated such matters as meteorological codes and practices in the Antarctic, but is, of course, concerned only with meteorological data.

The improvements which have taken place in recent years are largely the results of bilateral arrangements.

The major requirements for radio communications traffic in and to the Antarctic are; first, administrative traffic between station and headquarters organisation; secondly, the transmission of scientific data (in particular, meteorological observations, which comprise approximately 70% of the total traffic between stations and to interested countries); and thirdly, traffic between Antarctic stations and parties. For certain traffic some delays are acceptable, but meteorological reports, seismological reports,

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
- 3 -

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL

NUMBER: Expl. Memo/1
DATE: 10th July, 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

geophysical alerts, aircraft movement plans, etc. require a prompt and efficient service; for example, the complete collection of meteorological reports from the Antarctic and the adjacent continents should be received at the IAAC (Melbourne) within five (5) hours of the times of observation.

The Australian Delegation believes that to further the objectives of the Treaty in relation to international co-operation (Article III and IX), the Antarctic Treaty powers should give particular consideration to establishing a telecommunications system of the highest practical performance in the Antarctic with links to the neighbouring countries. The system should be suitable for satisfactorily meeting the foreseeable needs for the operation of stations and the exchange of information.

The Australian Delegation is of the opinion that WMO should be requested to formulate the meteorological requirements and that SCAR should be requested to collect the requirements of the other scientific disciplines for the transmission and exchange of scientific data.

The Australian Delegation is also of the opinion that the question of co-ordinating the arrangement of telecommunications in a manner that will ensure their effective implementation should be studied by a group of communications specialists appointed for this purpose by the Governments of Contracting Parties concerned with Antarctic traffic. The Group should be empowered to propose practical measures to the Contracting Parties to achieve maximum satisfaction for all "customers" on Antarctic telecommunications traffic.

Proposed Terms of Reference for the Antarctic Communications Working Group are attached for consideration by the Consultative Meeting.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
- 4 -

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL

Number: EXPL. MEMO/1

Date: 10th July, 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

ANTARCTIC TREATY COMMUNICATIONS GROUP
Terms of Reference

1. Its name shall be the Antarctic Treaty Communications Group.

2. It shall be open to membership by all Contracting Parties entitled to
participate in meetings provided for under Article IX, and observers
may be received from United Nations specialised agencies and other
international organisations having a scientific or technical interest
in Antarctica.

3. It shall examine, and make recommendations to Contracting Parties
entitled to participate in meetings provided for under Article IX,
questions relating to the standards and co-ordination of the tele-
communications most suitable to meet the agreed requirements for the
transmission and exchange of data and information within Antarctica
and between Antarctica and the Contracting parties. Specifically, the
Group will examine and make recommendations on -

    (i) the routing required to meet demands of users most effectively;

    (ii) the modes of transmission

    (iii) the ?omer requirements for effective reception;

    (iv) the rationalisation of schedules and the evaluation of priorit-
         ies for traffic in normal and post blackout conditions;

    (v) new developments in the field of communications relevant to
         Antarctic requirements;

    (vi) such other matters as it may consider appropriate.

4. Its recommendations shall be adopted by a decision of the majority of
the representatives, with the agreement of each of the Contracting
Parties directly responsible for implementing those recommendations.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
