ANTARCTIC TREATY               
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE     
TRATADO ANTARTICO               
PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA       
ПEPBOE KOHCYЛЬTAТИВHOE COBEЩAHИE
ДОГОВОP ОБ AHTAPKТИKE           


CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL.

EXPL. MEMO/3.

10th July, 1961.

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)


Agenda Item No. 12

(TITLE):        
MATTERS RELATING TO LOGISTIC SUPPORT

Submitted by: New Zealand.

1.      Under the terms of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty the Contracting
        Parties have agreed to consult together at suitable intervals and to
        consider measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty
        including measures regarding the facilitation of scientific co-operation in
        Antarctica.

2.      The efficient organisation of logistic support of Antarctic expeditions
        is of fundametal importance to scientific research in the area. It is proposed
        therefore that the Treaty powers should undertake to exchange information on
        logistic problems. This might include information on the design and
        construction of buildings and airstrips, the performance of aircraft, ships,
        tractors and other vehicles, techniques of supply of coastal and inland stations,
        the transport and handling of cargo in Antarctic conditions, food and cold
        weather clothing.  This information would be additional to exchanges of
        iriformaticn on expeditions and stetions under Article VII, paregraph 5 of the
        Treaty and on facilities for mutual assistance in cases of emergency which are
        dealt with under seperate agenda items.

3.      Through such exchanges of information the Contracting Parties would be
        kept fully aware of recent developments in this field. This exchange of
        information might be carried out bilaterally or through a Treaty Secretariat
        shoulc the latter be estabilshed.

(This paper was originally circulated as Doc./P.1 under date 10th
      July, 1961 and has been re-issued as Expl. Memo/3 of 10th July,
      1961.)

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
- 2 -

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL

EXPL. MEMO/3

10th July, 1961.

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

4.    At its fourth meeting in September 1960 the Special Committee on 
Antarctic Research set up a permanent working group on logistics "in view of the 
importance to scientific researoh of the efficient organisation of logistic 
support in Antarctica and of the importance of good international liaison in 
these activities".  The working group recommenced the completion of a 
logistics report by each member country summarizing the "pertinent logistic 
factors of each Antarctic permanent or semi-permanent installation"  and the 
circulation by each member country of an annual outline "summarising the 
proposed ship movements, air operations and itineraries of inland travelling 
parties".  These recommendations were approved by SCAR.

5.    These tasks which have been undertaken by SCAR would be duplicated 
by the exchange of information on expeditions and stations under Article VII (5) 
of the Treaty and should be extended by the Treaty powers by the proposed 
exchange of information on logistic problems.  It is felt that such exchanges 
would be more effectively co-ordinated by the Treaty powers rather than by a 
non-governmental organisation such as SCAR since not only is the required 
information dominantly non-scientific but also in most countries governments 
rather than scientific committees supply the logistic support of expeditions.

6.    If representatives of the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty 
should agree that this activity should be undertaken by the Treaty powers they 
might decide to inform accordingly the scientists and national scientific bodies 
which participate for their respective countries in the work of SCAR so that the 
letter might consider the position at the forthcoming meeting of SCAR in 
Wellington from 9-13 October 1961.

7.    It is noted that consideration has been given in SCAR to a proposal to 
hold a symposium to discuss all aspects of logistic support.  The Treaty powers 
might wish at a later stage to consider the desirability of convening a meeting 
of logistic experts.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL.
