ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING   PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTATIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ПEPBOE KОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ


CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL

DOC/P18

14 July 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

AGENDA ITEM NO. 13

PRESERVATION AND CONSERVATION OF LIVING RESOURCES

Submitted by:  UNITED KINGDOM

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that:

(1) they should consider suitable measures for the
preservation and conservation of living resources
for the Antarctic on the basis of the proposals
set out in the annexed draft;

(2) they should also consider the form in which it would
be most suitable to promulgate whatever measures
might eventually be agreed upon;

(3) they should, until such time as suitable measures
are agreed upon, make every effort to ensure that
persons in the Antarctic act in accordance with the
principles embodied in paragraph 1 of the
proposals set out in the annexed draft.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
ITEM NO. 13

ANNEX

Draft Proposals on the Preservation and Conservation of 
Living Resources in the Antarctic

I.  The present proposals shall apply to the area south of 60° South 
Latitude, including all ice shelves, but nothing in these proposals shall 
prejudice or in any way affect the rights, or the exercise of the rights, 
of any State under international law with regard to the high seas within that 
area.

II.  In these proposals 'native mammal' means any individual, at any 
stage of the life cycle, of any species belonging to the Class Mammalia 
excepting members of the Order Cetacea (whales), indigenous to the Antarctic 
or occurring there by natural agencies of dispersal.  Similarly 'native bird' 
means any individual, at any stage of the life cycle (including eggs), of 
any species of the Class Aves indigenous to the Antarctic or occurring 
there by natural agencies of dispersal.

III.  Each Government shall prohibit the killing, wounding, capturing or 
molesting of any native mammal or bird, as well as all attempts to kill, wound, 
capture or molest them, except as provided in paragraph IV of these proposals.

IV.  (1) Notwithstanding the provision of paragraph III above, and 
subject to the provision of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, any appropriate 
authority may expressly permit the killing, wounding, capturing or molesting 
of any native mammal or bird for the following purposes:

    (a) to provide food for men or dogs,
2.

(b) to provide scientific specimens, or to obtain scientific 
information, or to provide specimens for museums, zoological 
gardens, or other educational or cultural uses,

(c) to provide specimens for a private collection,

(d) to provide specimens or products for commercial purposes.

(2) The permission granted by the appropriate authority in accordance 
with subparagraph (1) of this paragraph must state the species and number of 
native mammals or birds affected by it, and the method or methods which may 
be employed to kill, wound, capture or molest them. No such permission, 
however, may be granted if to do so would infringe paragraphs VI or VII of 
these proposals.

(3) In this paragraph and in paragraph V, "appropriate authority" shall 
mean the Government of the country of which the person concerned is a national 
or which has organized or is responsible for the expedition or base of which 
that person is a member, or anybody or person nominated by such Government 
for the purpose in question.

V.      Within the area to which the provisions of these proposals apply,
each Government shall prohibit the private possession or control of, or the 
buying or selling of or attempts to buy or sell any native mammal or bird or 
product derived therefrom, unless the possession of or dealing in such mammals 
and birds has been authorized by the appropriate authority.

VI.     Species of native mammal or bird which merit special protection shall,
with the agreement of the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty whose
3.

representatives are entitled to participate in the meetings provided for 
under Article IX of that Treaty, be designated by them as "absolutely protected 
species", and once thus designated each Government shall prohibit the 
killing, capturing, wounding or molesting of such mammals and birds except 
for purposes of scientific study or in an emergency.

VII. Areas which are of outstanding scientific interest shall, with the 
agreement of the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty whose representatives 
are entitled to participate in the meeting provided for under Article IX of that 
Treaty, be designated by them as "absolute sanctuaries", and within areas 
thus designated each Government shall prohibit the killing, capturing, 
wounding or molesting of any native mammal or bird except for scientific purposes 
or in an emergency. They shall furthermore prohibit the interference with 
installations, the overflying of aircraft or helicopters at low altitudes, 
the passage of vehicles or persons on foot, or any other activity likely to 
disturb or alter the habitat, other than for purposes of scientific research 
or in an emergency.

VIII. Each Government shall prohibit the importation into the Antarctic 
of any species of vertebrate animal which does not naturally occur there, 
apart from:

(a) Sledge dogs,

(b) domestic stock or other animals to be kept under controlled 
conditions for scientific research or for food.
4.

They shell completely prohibit any alien specics thus imported to range 
without restriction in any part of the Antarctic.

IX. The Governments nay make such arrangements as they consider necessary 
for:

        (a) collecting records of the numbers of each species of native 
bird and memral killed or captured annually in the Antarctic;

        (b) obtaining information as to the status of native birds and 
animals in the Antarctic, and the extent to which any species 
needs protction;

        (c) obtaining advice as to the permissible harvest of native 
birds or mammals for food, commercial exploitation, or other 
uses, in various regions;

        (d) obtaining advice as to the species which should be designatcd 
'absolutely protected spccies' under paragraph VI above, and 
the areas which should be designated 'absolute sanctuaries' 
under paragraph VII above;

        (e) preparing and circulating to organising authorities, expeditions, 
and bases, lists of absolutely protected species, lists of 
absolute sanctuaries, a brochure explaining the aims of those 
proposals, and other literature relevent to the conservation of 
wild life.
