Antarctic Treaty                                                    
XXII Consultative Meeting                                            
Traité sur L’Antarctique                                              
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                                         
Tratado Antartico                                                     
XXII Reunión Consultiva                                               
Договор об Антарктике                                                 
XXII-ое Консультативное Совещание                                    

                                                                      XXII ATCM/IP57
                                                                      May, 1998
                                                                      Original: English

                                                                      Agenda item 15

                                 Scientific Priorities
                                 of the Antarctic
                                 Programme of Ukraine

                                                                      Submitted by
                                                                      Ukraine
7
Scientific Priorities 
of the Antarctic Programme of Ukraine

Ukrainian scientists and engineers took part in almost all Soviet 
Antarctic expeditions. They conducted research in various fields of natural 
sciences - geology, geophysics, glaciology, meteorology, physics of 
atmosphere, biology. The most representative results are related to 
investigations of biological resources of the Antarctic pelagic ecosystem 
performed in the course of 18 expeditions by the Azov-Black Sea Research 
Institute of Fishery and Oceanography. Even today this continuous research 
cycle is the most revealing and important for estimation of the state and 
dynamics of the pelagic ecosystem.

In 1996, after adoption of the State Programme of Antarctic Research, 
Ukraine started its original work as a member of the Antarctic scientific 
community. This step was strongly favored by the Memorandum between the 
Government of Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland and the Government of Ukraine about transfer of the British 
Antarctic station Faraday to Ukraine which was signed in 1995. On 6th 
February 1996 the state flag of Ukraine was hoisted at the station and it got 
the new name "Akademik Vernadsky" in honour of the famous Ukrainian 
scientist. In the season of 1996-97 years the First Ukrainian Antarctic 
expedition conducted experiments on meteorology, magnetism, physics of 
atmosphere, and ozonometry which continued series started by British 
researchers several decades ago. This year the Third Ukrainian Antarctic 
expedition was dispatched on the board of the research vessel Ernst Krenkel.

Meteorological survey carried out according to the State Programme 
provides whether data for the region of the Antarctic peninsula. During next 
five years the survey will be supplemented by the research on distribution of 
clouds and precipitation in the systems of atmospheric fronts and cyclones. 
This will serve as a basis for working out two- and three-dimensional 
diagnostic models of atmospheric fronts and cyclones of the region and 
computation of evolution characteristics of cloud systems.

Special attention is paid to studies of the state and dynamics of the 
ozone layer as well as factors which cause its depletion.

The general increase of planet atmosphere temperature which has been 
observed since the beginning of this century is definitely corroborated by the 
data obtained at the station "Akademik Vernadsky". In its turn the 
correlation between the average temperature of air and the level of Ocean is 
established which shows the importance of complex meteorological, 
oceanographical, and glaciological investigations.

It is well known that state, dynamics, and supply of glaciers depend on 
climate changes, particularly related to the atmospheric processes. Data 
obtained by Ukrainian scientists show that chemical characteristics of ice can 
be a reliable basis for investigation of natural and anthropogenic pollution,
particularly, by chlorftorhydrocarbons which are responsible for ozone 
depletion.

Geophysical studies are developed in two directions. The first one is 
investigation of geomagnetic field space-time structure  and its local 
anomalous variations which are determined by contemporary geodynamic 
processes in the lithosphere and its geologic inhomogeneity. The second 
direction includes interdependence processes of meteo-, seismo-, and 
technogeneous phenomena in the troposphere and low atmosphere as well as 
their influence on the ionosphere through the system "troposphere - 
stratosphere- mesosphere". The role of these processes in formation of long-
term changes of environment is also revealed.

Geological investigations on the islands of the Argentine archipelago 
and the adjacent part of the Antarctic peninsula are conducted in the summer 
period. They are directed at geologic and tectonic structure, petrographic 
composition of bedrock and it paleomagnetic characteristics. At the same 
time survey of the sea floor  and the archipelago's shelf is conducted with 
sampling of floor sediments in different dynamic zones. Determination of the 
pollution degree with technogeneous waste is also provided.

Biological studies at the station are aimed at observation of coastal 
communities of sea animals and birds, their numbers, population structure, 
seasonal dynamics, food characteristics, and competition between species. 
Also the effect of pollution on benthos organisms in adjacent aquatoria is 
studied in order to propose concrete actions for protection of coastal groups 
of animals and birds.

Implementation of medical-physiological  investigations makes it 
possible to establish various mechanisms of short-time adaptation of human 
organism to conditions of Antarctica and to work out methods providing 
normal state of expedition members, especially, winterers.

Alongside with work of seasonal teams at the station the complex 
oceanographic studies are carried out on the board of the research vessel used 
for logistic purposes. These studies are, firstly, directed at current state of 
marine living resources and prospects of their development. Preliminary 
results show that there are changes in the Antarctic ecosystem, particularly, 
with respect to the increase of cryl reserves. Three main factors are taken into 
account — meteorological, hydrological, and glaciological when studying the 
state of the pelagic ecosystem as a whole.

Wide range of ecosystem investigations are aimed at analysis of 
biological, geochemical, and ecosanitary functions of environment. The 
results of preliminary environmental assessment of the region (with respect to 
the station living activities) showed that the separate program of 
geoecological investigations of the Antarctic shelf zone should be worked out 
in the nearest future.

Such is the general outline of the Ukrainian State Programme of 
Antarctic Research.
