Information Paper submitted by Australia
AGENDA ITEM 7c — MATTERS COVERED BY ANNEX II
INTRODUCTION OF DISEASES TO ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE: 
PROPOSED WORKSHOP
 
At ATCM XXI Australia presented an information paper on the introduction of diseases to indigenous birds in the Antarctic. The meeting noted that Australia intends to convene a workshop on further research into this issue.
The workshop will be held from 25 to 28 August 1998, at the headquarters of the Australian Antarctic Division in Hobart, Tasmania.
The objective of the workshop is to identify the potential for disease incursion into Antarctica's wildlife, and to identify and develop proposals, which may include a series of recommendations to the ATCM to reduce the risk of such introductions and limit the consequences of the establishment or spread of disease.
The scope of the workshop will embrace penguins, flying birds and seals breeding within the Antarctic Treaty area. In formulating a direction for responding to these concerns in Antarctica, the workshop will take into account scientific information relating to wildlife in the subantarctic. The workshop will include consideration of both endemic and exotic diseases as little is known of either.
The workshop will undertake reviews of the following topics: 
    • the status and epidemiology of disease in birds and seals in Antarctica, taking into account prevailing Antarctic environmental conditions and the ecology and characteristics of the biota that might influence the introduction and spread of disease (such as migration, scavenging, overlap of habitat, discrete or interbreeding populations) 
    • identifying the risks of introduction of disease (such as tourism, global climate change) 
    • mechanisms to control the introduction and spread of disease including preparedness and response plans 
    • relevant current and future research of nations working in Antarctica to address the issues 
    • international treaties and the legal framework for the control of introduction and spread of disease in Antarctica. 
The workshop also will consider a series of relevant case studies on the outbreak of disease in wild populations of non-Antarctic seals and birds.
Invited review papers on these topics will be presented. Additional papers are invited.
It is intended that the proceedings of the workshop will be published.
A brochure to advertise the workshop is in preparation and details of the workshop will also be notified in relevant veterinary, microbiological and Antarctic scientific journals, and posted on the internet at http://www-aadc.antdiv.gov.au/human_impacts/disease_workshop.
Parties are invited to send relevant representatives to the workshop, including those with appropriate scientific expertise who can contribute to formulating plans for future research, and persons with expertise to contribute to the development of practical measures for responding to the risk of introduced diseases.
A registration fee of $Aus100.00 will be levied to cover the cost of refreshments and documents.
For further information, the contact at the Australian Antarctic Division is:
Dr Knowles Kerry
Australian Antarctic Division
Channel Highway
Kingston Tasmania 7050
Australia
Phone:    +61 3 6232 3363
Fax:        +61 3 6232 3351
E-mail: knowle_ker@antdiv.gov.au
 

