Antarctic Treaty                                                    
XXII Consultative Meeting                                            
                                                                     
Traité sur L’Antarctique                                             
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                                        
                                                                     
Tratado Antartico                                                    
XXII Reunión Consultiva                                              
                                                                     
Договор об Антарктике                                                
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание                                   
                                                                     
                                                                     

                                     XXII ATCM/IP70                  
                                     May, 1998                       
                                     Original: English               
                                                                     

                                                                     

                                     Agenda item 8                  



                              Oil Spill
                              Contingency Plan
                              for Chinese
                              Xuelong Vessel
                              in Antarctica



                                                                     


                                     Submitted by                     
                                     China                           
4.Actions to be taken to avoid oil spill

The most effective way is to train the operators efficiently and let them know clearly about the reasons the oil spill happened.

4.1 The best way is to eliminate the hidden danger of oil spill.
Every people should keep it in mind that oil spill will happen if wrong operation is taken.
Once there is an oil spill, the adopted measure must based on the following:
1) The type and quantity of the spilled oil. The probable area will be to spill.
2) Is there any problem which will threaten human, such as fire?
3) Oil spill will have environmental pollution. Check this area to see if there is any large number of active organism.
4) Record the environmental factors, such as wind speed, air temperature, sea condition etc., when oil spill happened.

4.2 Avoid oil spill during fuel transportation.

1). Captain is the executive person in charge of emergency plan. He is responsible to all the work during the fuel transportation. Professional person should oversee the key part of transportation, for instance, sites of the pump, the valves and the pipes.

2). Captain has to check the operators whether they have known clearly about the operative procedure and points for attention before operation. Operation should not start when the operators are not sure whether or not everything is under control.

3). Manual of oil transportation procedure should be prepared, in which the location and operative direction of fuel tanks, pipe and pump should be marked.
4). Before operation, captain should have someone to check the facilities, to assure they are in good conditions. If anyone has questions about operative procedure and process of oil transportation, responsible person has to solve the problems before the operation beginning.

5). Before operation, actions should be taken to prevent oil spill form risk areas. For instance, separating and surrounding materials should be prepared around possible pumps and valves. The barge should be separated by boom before oil unloading.

6). Captain should have persons to check the tanks and its subsidiary facilities everyday, report immediately if there is any problem. And check all the pumps, valves and other facilities every month, to assure they are in good conditions. Any trouble should be resolved, bad parts should be mended or replaced, and everything should be written on the record.

7). captain should keep all the records about oil transportation, spill and actions, and summit them to the archives in Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration.

8) . If oil spill happened, the first action is to shut down the valves and stop the process. Spilled oil should be cleared out immediately. On land, spilled oil will be taken back by oil-absorb materials. In sea, mainly near the dock, at first, boom should be used to prevent the oil from spreading to the sea, then take the oil back by using oil-absorb machine, and afterwards, treat the remains with dissipater.

4
5.Emergency Facilities for Cleaning Spilled Oil (types under selecting and more adding):

5.1 oil-absorb materials: cotton yarn, oil-absorb carpet

5.2 oil-absorb machine

5.3 boom

5.4 drum for the wasted oil recovered

6.Operation Guide

6.1 Captain calls on a meeting to discuss and check the facilities before action

1) Is the pipe in good condition?

2) Is the pump in good condition?

3) Is there any drip in the valves?

4) Is there any safety problem?

5) Are the facilities for taking back spilled oil prepared?

6.2 Check the communication equipment and the frequency

6.3 Discuss with meteorological personnel, to see if the weather will turn bad.

6.4 Find out the change of sea tide.

6.5 Take preventing actions against possible spill place, for instance, preparing oil-absorb material, empty fuel drums etc.

6.6 Check the oil recovery equipment whether or not in good conditions.

6.7 There must be a special person on duty when operation. Also the machinist and the environmental officer must be there.

6.8 If oil spill occur, operator should be shut down the spill point immediately.

6.9 Environmental officer and machinist should make report to captain and station leader on time and adopt measure.

6.10 For oil spill in different cases, the first consideration is to collect oil by mechanical method or leave itself natural volatilizing; usually, chemical dissipater is not the first consideration to use, especially at the sea ,to prevent from the second round pollution, if safety is threatened by the oil spill. But in the later case it is the recommended method to use.

6.11 Captain is responsible for direct the clean-up operation for the sea area.

5
6.12 Environmental officer should collect evidence of the accident by sampling on spill site and take video or photo as well.

6.13 After clean-up, captain along with environmental officer and machinist should check the spill area carefully.

6.14 Captain along with environmental officer and machinist must analyze the oil spill and make special report to the Chinese Polar Administration, State Ocean Administration.

7. Personnel Training

Skilled operators are important for preventing oil spill. So, operators should be trained and let them understand oil spill is extremely harmful to the Antarctic environment, fauna and flora.

7.1 The Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration should educate the expeditioner on Antarctic environmental protection before going to Antarctica, providing each one with a brochure of environmental protection regulations.

7.2 At least a pre-exercise should be arranged so as to check how well the operators grasp equipment. Unqualified personnel should be trained further. Do not arrange unqualified people to operate equipment.

7.3 Operator personnel must grasp the following:
      1) type of oil on the vessel and the stations;
      2) operator procedure of oil pump and valve;
      3) usage of HF telephone and communication channel;
      4) storage location of recovered equipment for oil spill;
      5) method to deploy oil-round-fence by boat for collecting spilled oil;
      6) how to use oil absorber;
      7) property and usage of anti-oil agent

8. Organization And Personnel

8.1 The Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration, State Oceanic Administration is responsible for preventing and clearing of oil spill, and is also in charge of making, supplementing and revising oil spill contingency plan, providing with updating contingency equipment, and personnel training.

8.2 The captain or dedicated persons are responsible for oil delivery from "Xuelong" to barge , conducting clearance of oil spill around "Xuelong".

8.3 The captain assigns a mechanic to be responsible for oil delivery, his main responsibilities are:
      1) check oil pumps and valves, keeping them in good state;
      2) check whether the pipeline joints right or not;
      3) check whether the operators can keep in good communications each other
6
while loading or unloading oil;

4) check whether necessary measures for preventing oil from spill have been taken;

5) take measures to shut down the source of oil spill immediately in the event of oil spill;

6) report to the captain immediately in the event of oil spill

8.5 The captain designates an environmental officer to be responsible for clearance of oil spill, his responsibilities are:

1) decide on practical measures for disposal of oil spill;

2) be in charge of deploying boom by boat;

3) operate oil absorber properly;

4) give instructions on how to use anti-oil agent

5) report to the captain about clearance of oil spill;

6) take video or photos of oil spill area;

7) collect samples of water, flora and organism (if any) around oil spill area;

8) monitor impact to the environment due to the oil spill.

9. Communication

The captain and each operator must be provided with a HF telephone before oil delivery, with communication channel on 12. While refueling, all HF telephone should be always kept ON in order operators can get in touch with each other at any time. Once oil spill occurs, operators must be notified immediately, taking measures to shutdown the source of oil spill.

10. Reporting about Oil Spill Incident

The operators should report to the captain as soon as possible in the event of oil spill. The leader must report to the Chinese Arctic  and  Antarctic Administration within 24 hours. The report is to describe:

1). time, place and cause of oil spill;

2). location, type of oil, estimated quantity of fuel spilled (in liter);

3). local meteorological condition when oil spill occurs;

4). response action taken, clean-up techniques used for clearance of oil spill and results;

5). primary assessment of oil spill harming to the Antarctic environment.

11. Oil Spill Waste Treatment

11.1 treatment of recovered waste oil: Load recovered waste oil into designated oil tanks for later treatment.

11.2 Combustible absorbents to be burnt in incinerator.

11.3 Put incombustible absorbents' material into containers, to be shipped
7
back for treatment.

11.4 Pile all waste material in designated containers, avoiding second round 
contamination.

Appendix 1: Xuelong Specification
L.O.A M              167.0           
L.B.P M              142.2
BREADTH. MAX. M      22.6
DEPTH M              13.5
GROSS TONNAGE        14997
NET TONNAGE          4499
TOTAL PEOPLE         145
ECONOMIC SPEED KNOT  14-15

Appendix 2: Schematic diagram of oil delivery

Xuelong____→Barge____→Tank Car____→Oil Storage Tank

Appendix 3: Schematic diagram of organization


The Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration
                  ↓
┌────────────┐       ┌────────────┐
│The Captain of "Xuelong"│       │  Station Leader  │
│or dedicated people    │       └────────────┘
└────────────┘                  ↓
                  ↓               ┌────────────┐
┌────────────┐       ┌────────────┐       │   Mechanic   │
│The Captain of │       │Environmental Officer│       └────────────┘
│ Tank Barge   │       └────────────┘
└────────────┘                  

Appendix 4: Operation procedure for oil delivery

1. Oil is transferred from ice-breaker Xuelong to barge-tank first by pump, then 
   carried to the station. The barge -tank volume is 40 cubic meters.
2. Oil is shipped to the dock by barge, refilled into tank-car by pump, then 
   transported to main oil tanks in the station area. There are two types of tank-
   cars by volume 20 and 4 cubic meters.
