 
Nordic co-operation in matters pertaining to the protection of 
the Antarctic environment 
  
Background 
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty states that the 
protection of the Antarctic environment shall be fundamental considerations in the 
planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area (Article 3). 
Through the Protocol a number of provisions as to how this is to be accomplished are 
specified. Thus, the Parties are challenged to find effective and appropriate manners 
in which to interpret the provisions of the Protocol.  
The Protocol furthermore requests Parties to "co-operate in the planning and conduct 
of activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area" (Article 6). For those working with the 
environmental issues on a day-to-day basis, co-operation has become an essential part 
of the work. 
  
AEON 
In August 1996 a network of Antarctic environmental officers was established. The 
network which is organised through the Council of Operators of National Antarctic 
Programs (COMNAP) was named "Antarctic Environmental Officers Network" 
(AEON). The objectives of the network are to:  
1. Exchange information and ideas about practical and technical environmental 
issues in Antarctica 
2. Promote the mutual understanding and practical application of the 
Environmental Protocol 
3. Respond to requests from COMNAP for advice on environmental issues 
  
Nordic co-operation 
Subsequent to the establishment of AEON in the fall of 1996, the (Nordic) 
Environmental Officers of Finland, Norway and Sweden (Finnish Ministry of the 
Environment, Norwegian Polar Institute and Swedish Polar Research Secretariat) 
found the need to initiate a closer co-operation amongst themselves. The following 
points illustrate some of the reasons for initiating such co-operation:  
• 
There is already a considerable co-operation established concerning the 
logistical aspects of Nordic Antarctic expeditions through the Nordic Antarctic 
Research Program (NARP). Due to the extensive common effort relating to 
transport and other logistics of the Nordic Antarctic research expeditions, it is 
natural that the co-operation also is extended to the environmental aspects.  
• 
Co-operation is also established between scientists of the three countries, 
which in turn affects the Environmental Impact Assessment procedures. 
Having a common framework for these procedures would simplify the work 
significantly.  
• 
The size and tasks of the Nordic scientific expeditions are quite similar, and 
the research stations of the countries are located in similar geographic regions. 
As a consequence, the environmental problems, as well as solutions, are often 
the same.  
• 
The Nordic scientific operations in Antarctica are relatively small (normally 
around 10-20 people per country, sometimes a bit more) and only take place 
during the summer season. The support and inspiration we can gain from each 
others experience is therefore very valuable in our effort to find the most 
suitable way to run the Nordic expeditions within the framework of the 
Environmental Protocol.  
  
Objectives of Nordic co-operation 
Based on the above the Nordic Antarctic environmental officers met in Stockholm, 
Sweden in October 1996, and established a working relationship with the following 
goals:  
• 
Develop common procedures and products for all three countries in the 
implementation of the Environmental Protocol (such as developing common 
questionnaires for EIA-procedures) within the framework of the three 
countries’ national Antarctic legislation. 
 
• 
Based on common logistic framework and similar types of stations, also 
initiate co-operation on the environmental aspects of the Nordic programs 
(environmental monitoring, strategies for waste management, fuel handling 
routines, training).  
• 
Find a sensible level of interpretation of the Protocol based on the size of 
Nordic activity in Antarctica. 
Following the initial meeting the AEOs have met once more, in June 1997 in Tromsø, 
Norway. Most of the co-operative work has been carried through by e-mail or phone.  
  
Nordic Environmental Work Program  
The co-operative effort has so far focused on the following work program: 
• 
Develop a common waste management handbook for the Nordic Antarctic 
Research Programme.  
With this information paper is distributed one copy of the current version of 
the "Waste Management Handbook for the Nordic Antarctic Research 
Programme" to each delegation to ATCM. 
• 
Develop common Nordic environmental contingency plans 
• 
Common meeting with the logistics, scientific and environmental personnel 
after expedition to evaluate the environmental aspects of the last expedition. 
• 
Develop a Nordic Environmental Handbook (contains waste management 
hand-book, contingency plans, guidelines, etc.) 
• 
Discuss and develop common papers to ATCM 
• 
Develop common EIA procedures, questionnaires, reporting forms 
• 
Develop common helicopter guidelines 
  
Evaluation of Nordic co-operative effort 
• 
The co-operation has been very successful and is appreciated by the three 
Nordic Antarctic organisations.  
• 
Co-operation gives good support in the daily work of the environmental 
officers, i.e. with regards to permit procedures and other Antarctic 
environmental issues. 
• 
The Nordic environmental officers will proceed in the same manner and 
continue the work to produce common products for the three countries.  
• 
There is agreement that the co-operation constitutes effective use of resources, 
is in accordance with Nordic logistic and scientific co-operation and simplifies 
handling and distribution of requests/ information. 
  
Webmaster  
 
Home   Back
 
