Antarctic Treaty                                                    
XXII Consultative Meeting                                            
                                                                     
Traité sur L’Antarctique                                             
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                                        
                                                                     
Tratado Antartico                                                    
XXII Reunión Consultiva                                              
                                                                     
Договор об Антарктике                                                
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание                                   
                                                                     
                                                     XXII ATCM/IP91  
                                                     May, 1998       
                                                     Original: English
                                                                     
                                      Agenda item 15             
                                                                     
                              Scientific Research                    
                                   in the Antarctic              
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                      Submitted by                   
                                      SCAR                           
. 

. 

. 
.
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC

Information Paper submitted by SCAR to XXII ATCM

Agenda Item 12

INTRODUCTION

The purpose of this paper is to provide a broad overview of some of the scientific research that is currently being undertaken in the Antarctic but which does not focus specifically on global change research. Global change research and the management of Antarctic data are the subjects of two other Information Papers submitted to this meeting. Much of the research described involves considerable international cooperation and in many cases SCAR exerts a guiding influence or a coordinating role.

For convenience, the paper considers the research under the three broad headings of Biological, Earth and Physical sciences.

BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES

The Working Group on Biology currently has two sub-committees: on Bird Biology and on Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms.

The Bird Biology Sub-committee is a well-established group that has been active in promoting research on many aspects of Antarctic birds. Bird banding is a continuing programme and the Central Data Bank for Antarctic Bird Banding that holds and collates all banding data on Antarctic birds is currently held in the University of Cape Town, South Africa. SCAR is providing financial support to the university to ensure its continued operation. Predator-prey relationships form an important area of research that provides essential data on the marine ecosystem that is of particular relevance to the work of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).  A recent workshop on this topic focused on research undertaken in the Magellan region during three research cruises. The purpose of the workshop was to summarize, analyse and compare the results from these cruises and to use them to identify and develop future research programmes. One special area of concern has been the incidental mortality of seabirds during fishing operations in the Southern Ocean. CCAMLR is instituting proposals to reduce this loss.

The Sub-committee on Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms was formally established at XXIV SCAR during August 1996. The Sub-committee organized an inaugural workshop in Italy to determine the current status of research on evolutionary biology and biodiversity. The main purposes of this workshop were to review the current status of research in this field and to identify new trends and techniques. The workshop also looked to the future of this research and aimed to determine how this could be best coordinated through SCAR.
The Group of Specialists on Seals has a major international programme on 
Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS). The principal aim of the programme is to make a 
coordinated census of seals in all pack ice regions, particularly the crabeater and 
Ross seals. The census of seals is planned to be performed from ships, with and 
without helicopter support, and by fixed-winged aircraft during the 1998-99 
Antarctic field season.In addition to the census, data on ice characteristics, as 
well as the other biological components of the ecosystem, will also be collected. 
Some of these data will used in the SCAR global change programme.

Two other biological programmes, Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-ice Zone (EASIZ) 
and Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems (BIOTAS), are 
currently operating under the umbrella of the SCAR Global Change Programme

The 7th SCAR Symposium on Antarctic Biology will be held at Canterbury 
University, Christchurch, New Zealand, 1-5 September 1998. The theme for the 
symposium  is "Antarctic ecosystems: models for wider ecological 
understanding". There are five principal sub-themes to the symposium:

1. Processes at the organism level;
2. Adaptive evolution;
3. Large scale patterns and processes;
4. Long term change; and
5. Human impact.

EARTH SCIENCES

The Cape Roberts Drilling Project is a multi-national programme organized by 
New Zealand, Britain, Italy, United States, that aims to investigate the history of 
uplift of the Transantarctic Mountains and the climatic history of the last 100 
million years The first season was planned for the 1996-97 but the early 
disintegration of the sea ice off Cape Roberts meant that drilling operations had 
to be postponed. The first practical season was 1997-98 when, once again, the 
condition of the sea ice dictated an early curtailment of operations for safety 
reasons. Nevertheless, 148 m of core were recovered and analysis of the core is 
now in progress. A workshop will be held in London during June 1998 to review 
the results to date.

The Working Group on Solid-Earth Geophysics has a project to develop a 
comprehensive magnetic anomaly map of the Antarctic continent. Many 
national programmes undertake aeromagnetic surveys and contribute data to the 
project. A workshop was held in 1997 to review progress and plan future work. 
This project has important implications for geological research, particularly in 
correlating areas of rock exposure separated by ice sheet cover.

The Working Groups on Geology and on Solid-Earth Geophysics have joint 
responsibility for the Antarctic Off-shore Stratigraphy (ANTOSTRAT) 
Programme. The Steering Group for the project is currently providing advice on 
site selection to the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP), based on existing marine 
seismic data in the target areas. During the 1997-98 season, ODP drilling leg (No 
178) in the Antarctic Peninsula area successfully recovered cores from nine sites.

2
Analysis of the cores is in progress and is expected to yield valuable data on climatic and structural evolution of the region. Plans are also well-advanced for a second Antarctic season in the Prydz Bay region, off the Amery Ice Shelf, provided that a suitable ice-picket ship can be obtained.  The ANTOSTRAT group is continuing to maintain the Seismic Data Library System (SDLS) by overseeing the submission of marine multi-channel seismic data for reproduction on CD-ROM.

The Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information has completed the first draft of a comprehensive gazetteer of Antarctic Place names. This will be presented at XXV SCAR and further revisions incorporated into a final version. The gazetteer will be an essential data resource for all Antarctic research workers by helping to reduce the ambiguity that frequently arises in the use of Antarctic place-names.  The Antarctic Digital Database, the first seamless digital topographic map of the Antarctic, was published under SCAR auspices on CD-ROM in 1995.  The database is being continually revised and up-dated and publication of a new version is being planned. It is anticipated that, rather than issue a new CD-ROM, the new version will be available on the World Wide Web for general research and educational purposes but that there will be restrictions on commercial use. Publication in this form will facilitate on-going revision.

SCAR continues to maintain its interest in the research developments at Vostok Lake. Drilling for the extraction of ice cores has ceased at 3,200 m which is estimated to be about 100 m above the ice-water interface. More data are needed to characterize exactly the extent and internal structure of the lake, estimated to be at least 400,000 years old. US scientists from NASA are planning a programme to probe the lake waters remotely without introducing contaminants to the lake. This programme will form a pilot scheme for the proposed investigation of the Europa moon of Jupiter where the ice surface of the moon may form a solid cover to a liquid ocean. SCAR will continue to urge caution and recommend that a full environmental impact assessment be undertaken. Nothing is known of any ecosystems that may be present and full precautions should be taken to guard against possible adverse effects.

The Sixth International Symposium on Antarctic Glaciology will be held in Lanzhou, China, 5-9 September 1998.

Physical Sciences

The First Regional Observing Study of the Troposphere (FROST) project, of the Working Group on Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere, is nearing completion. The project examined three periods of meteorological observations to cover the Antarctic summer, winter and the transitional period between these two. Critical analysis of the weather forecasts for these periods have identified ways in which the forecasts may be improved. Similarly, the Global Telecommunications System of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has been monitored during these observation periods and a number of problems with the system have been recognized.  The results of the analyses and monitoring have been passed to the relevant organizations which have implemented the findings so that the overall quality of forecasting has been 
3
improved. At its forthcoming meeting the Working Group will be seeking to 
identify new lines of research, possibly in the field of climate assessment in 
Antarctica. Key variables, such as near-surface temperatures and wind velocities, 
could be used to produce high quality climatological analyses with estimates of 
uncertainties and with good time control for the validation of models.

The monitoring of stratospheric ozone at several stations in the Antarctic is 
continuing to record major depletion each spring. The level of depletion, both 
vertically and areally, has fluctuated during the last few years but the dramatic 
annual increases in depletion of earlier years have not been repeated. At the 
present time it is not possible to determine a clear trend and it would be 
premature to suggest that the tide of depletion has turned.

The work of monitoring the various parameters that contribute to the study of 
geospace is continuing.  The Antarctic Geospace Observatory Network 
(AGONET) programme, under the Working Group on Solar-Terrestrial and 
Astrophysical Research, is coordinating various projects in the Antarctic to 
provide a degree of detail in spatial and temporal dimensions that was not 
possible in the past. The programme is supported by the AGONET database that 
is currently hosted by Italy. The study of geospace is essential for understanding 
the forces acting on satellites that have crucial roles to play in communications, 
navigation, remote-sensing and many other aspects of modern technology that 
are now an accepted part of everyday life.

It is now known that the high plateau of Antarctica provides a viewing platform 
for infrared and submillimetre astronomy that is up to an order of magnitude 
better than at other sites in the world. It is anticipated that in the future this will 
be a growth area in Antarctic scientific research.

Acronyms and Abbreviations

AGONET         Antarctic Geospace Observatory Network
ANTOSTRAT      Antarctic Off-shore Stratigraphy Programme
APIS           Antarctic Pack Ice Seals
ATCM           Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
BIOTAS         Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems
CCAMLR         Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
               Resources
CD-ROM         Compact Disc - Read Only Memory
EASIZ          Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-ice Zone
FROST          First Regional Observing Study of the Troposphere
NASA           National Aeronautical and Space Administration
ODP            Ocean Drilling Program
SCAR           Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
SDLS           Seismic Data Library System
US             United States
WMO            World Meteorological Organization
                                                                                 4
