Antarctic Treaty                                                    
XXII Consultative Meeting                                            
                                                                     
Traité sur L’Antarctique                                             
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                                        
                                                                     
Tratado Antartico                                                    
XXII Reunión Consultiva                                              
                                                                     
Договор об Антарктике                                                
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание                                   
                                                                     
                                     XXII ATCM/IP85                  
                                     May, 1998                       
                                     Original: English               
                                                                     
                                     Agenda item 15                 
                                                                     
                        Antarctic Data                               
                        Management                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                     Submitted by                    
                                     SCAR/COMNAP                     

Antarctic Data Management
SCAR-COMNAP Information Paper for XXII ATCM
(Agenda item 15)

Introduction

Article III (1) (e) of the Antarctic Treaty calls on Parties to exchange and make freely available scientific observations and results from Antarctica.  A number of ATCM recommendations have resulted from this political context and these have provided the driving force for current initiatives on data management.

SCAR and COMNAP are addressing data management issues through the Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management (JCADM). JCADM comprises the manager of each National Antarctic Data Centre, or a relevant national contact if a national Antarctic Data Centre has not yet been nominated, and one nominee from each of SCAR, COMNAP and the Antarctic Master Directory host. JCADM has implemented an Antarctic Data Directory System (ADDS) to make information about Antarctic scientific data readily available. The ADDS is composed of an Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) containing information on Antarctic scientific data, and a network of National Antarctic Data Centers (NADCs). XVIII ATCM endorsed this proposal, and the new system was demonstrated at XXI ATCM.

The first meeting of the Joint Committee for Antarctic Data Management took place in Christchurch May 20-23 1997. Nations represented were Australia, Chile, China, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, United Kingdom and the United States of America. Written submissions were received from SCAR, COMNAP and the AMD host were Argentina and Japan. Representatives from SCAR, COMNAP and the AMD host were also in attendance. Lee Belbin (Australia) was elected to the position of Chief Officer of JCADM.  It was recommended that elections should be held every two years in conjunction with SCAR meetings.

JCADM Roles and Responsibilities

·  To promote, coordinate, and support the development of NADC's by developing establishment and operational guidelines.

·  To increase active national participation, with a first focus on South America to coincide with XXV SCAR in Concepción, Chile.

·  To provide direction and feedback to the AMD host.

·  To provide linkages to other relevant groups such as the SCAR Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic (GLOCHANT), the Global Change Master Directory (GCMD/CEOS-IDN), the Arctic Data Directory (ADD), and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

Progress since Christchurch 1997

·  A JCADM web site has been established at the Australian Antarctic Data Centre (http://www-aadc.antdiv.gov.au/JCADM/).

·  'Guidelines for National Antarctic Data Centers' have been written and are available on the above web site.

·  Additional contacts for JCADM have been made with Canada, Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea and Japan.

·  A listserver has been established by Germany to link all JCADM contacts.  This server has been significant in facilitating effective communications with NADCs.
- NADCs have concentrated this year on the establishment of their infrastructure 
so as to enable the efficient collection of Antarctic metadata records.

- Approximately 600 metadata records are included in the AMD.

- Effective working relationships between JCADM and GLOCHANT, CEOS, the 
ADD and CCAMLR have been established.

- An inclusive definition of ‘the Antarctic’ has been adopted to include the Sub-
Antarctic islands and the Southern Ocean.

Areas of Concern

- A major concern of NADCs is the difficulty in getting Principal Investigators to 
accept data management as an important aspect of scientific programmes.

- Many Treaty Parties have still not nominated their NADCs.

- Despite Article III(1)(c), access to data can be hindered by a wide range of 
different national policies on access to Antarctic scientific data.

- Location and curation of historic datasets is likely to prove difficult in many 
countries.

List of Acronyms and Abbreviations

ADD                  Arctic Data Directory
ADDS               Antarctic Data Directory System
AMD                Antarctic Master Directory
ATCM               Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
CCAMLR           Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
                     Resources
CEOS                Committee on Earth Observation Satellites
CEOS IDN          CEOS International Directory Network
COMNAP          Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
GCMD              Global Change Master Directory
GLOCHANT        Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic
JCADM             Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management
NADC                National Antarctic Data Centers
SCAR                Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research

2
[^o]
1
