OPENING ADDRESS BY MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY  
DR. EMMANUEL GOUNARIS HEAD OF THE 
DELEGATION OF GREECE 
 
 
Mr. Chairman,  
 
On behalf of the Greek Delegation, I would like to 
congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the XXIIth Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting. May I also through you Mr. Chairman, 
express my gratitude to the Government of Norway for hosting this 
meeting in the beautiful  city of Tromso and also my thanks for its 
warm hospitality.  
 
Mr. Chairman, Greece believes that it is in the interest of all 
nations to preserve Antarctica and its waters, for peaceful purposes 
only and to guard against their becoming the scene of object of 
international discord.  
 
 Mr. Chairman, Greece as a state party of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991, likes to 
express its gratitude,  for the entry into force of this Protocol: 
 
Mr. Chairman, the question of the location of the Antarctic 
Treaty Secretariat; is always a very important matter. All of us need 
this Secretariat, especially the Non-Consultative Parties. My 
delegation deeply regrets that no official consensus has yet been 
reached regarding this issue. The “intermediary solution” regarding 
this matter, is neither good nor practical and it will have, in our view, 
non positive effects as far as the exchange of information about 
Antarctica is concerned. At the same time Mr. Chairman, I like to 
express my deep satisfaction regarding the establishment of the Final 
Draft of the Rules of Procedure for the Committee for Environmental 
Protection and the considerable progress, which has been made 
regarding the Liability Annex. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Greece is also particularly concerned about 
the ozone layer over Antarctica and support in this matter, any action 
and suggestion of SCAR and the non-governmental organisations 
ECO and ASOC, necessary to ensure the earliest possible recovery of 
the ozone layer. 
 
Finally Mr. Chairman I would like to inform this meeting, that 
Greece, in particular the National Centre for Marine Research, in 
collaboration with other Greek Institutions, has already started to 
implement the National Program of Greece for Antarctica. 
 
 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman 
