OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. R. TUCKER SCULLY 
HEAD OF DELEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
I take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election 
to the Chair of this meeting.  It is a great pleasure to see 
you, who have contributed so much to the Antarctic Treaty 
System, once again guiding our work. 
 
On behalf of my delegation, I want to thank the Government 
of Norway and the Municipality of Tromsø for the warm 
hospitality which has been shown to us during this XXIInd 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 
 
As representative of the Depositary Government, it is with 
great pleasure that I report that the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection together with Annexes I through IV 
entered into force on 14 January 1998.  We, the Parties to 
the Treaty, must now redouble our effort to ensure the 
effectiveness of the Protocol by encouraging all Parties to 
approve Recommendation XVI-10 containing Annex V, thus 
allowing this Annex to enter into force.  We must encourage 
additional Parties, and especially those from whose 
territory expeditions are organized or proceed to 
Antarctica, to ratify or accede to the Protocol.  Looking 
ahead, we must now turn our efforts from the negotiation of 
text of the Protocol to the implementation of the text to 
which we all agreed.  My delegation looks forward to working 
with others to this end. 
 
We welcome the establishment of the Committee for 
Environmental Protection to provide advice and formulate 
recommendations to the Parties for consideration at 
Consultative Meetings.  We are pleased to nominate Dr. Olav 
Orheim as Chairman of the Committee.  Dr. Orheim has the 
breadth of knowledge and experience to meet the challenge of 
guiding the CEP in its founding years.  He chaired the 
Transitional Environmental Working Group and has long 
experience with the Antarctic Treaty System, having 
participated in the negotiation of the Protocol. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to renew 
our continued support for the establishment in Buenos Aires 
of a modest, cost-effective Secretariat to assist the work 
of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
I also note that we need to give direction to our work on 
the issue of liability.  The Group of Experts on liability 
has prepared a report setting forth options for our future 
work and has identified key issues to be addressed by the 
Consultative Parties.  The ATCM will need to consider 
practical alternatives for this future work.  For our part, 
the United States has put forward a draft for a first annex 
on liability which we believe constitutes the best approach 
for achieving concrete progress on this important issue. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I wish to take this opportunity to thank the 
Government of Norway for the initiative it has shown in 
starting the process of establishing a system for the 
distribution of conference documents by electronic means.  
We found it very helpful to be able to find and read 
documents through the web site which the Norwegian 
Government established.  We are convinced – though we 
understand the limits of this technological revolution - 
that electronic exchange of information will help us to 
manage our work.  We believe that the electronic posting of 
documents will make information more readily available not 
only to the Parties, but to the public in general, thus 
promoting a better understanding of, and appreciation for, 
the Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
In conclusion, I want to thank again our Norwegian hosts who 
have arranged for us to meet in this fine Polar Circle 
environment which Tromsø has offered us. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
