Antarctic Treaty                                       XXII ATCM/IP109
XXII Consultative Meeting                             May, 1998
                                                          Original: English
Traité sur L’Antarctique                              
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                         
                                                          Agenda item 15
Tratado Antartico                                     
XXII Reunión Consultiva                               

Договор об Антарктике                                 
XXII-ое Консультативное Совещание                     

                        Climate Changes and
                        Antarctica

                                                          Submitted by
                                                          ASOC
5
May 30, 1998

ASOC Information Paper
Climate Change and Antarctica

Agenda Item 15

Over the past year there has been increasing evidence that climatic changes may be
impacting Antarctica's systems. The consequences of climate change may be most
evident in the physical geography of the Antarctic, where seemingly small changes in
temperature have already contributed to, for example, the breaking up of various ice
shelves. The apparently imminent disintegration of the Larsen B shelf was referenced
in last year's ASOC report, following an investigative trip by ASOC member
Greenpeace.

Over the past 50 years, the Antarctic Peninsula climate has warmed by about 2.5
degrees C, which is one of the fastest rates on the planet. Comparable increases also
have been measured in the Arctic. This continuing warming trend has been measured
at Marambio and Esperanza Stations on the Antarctic Peninsula, where the mean
decadal temperatures have shown a temperature increase of about 0.5 degrees C for
each of the last two decades.

The frequency of cold years has decreased as well. Prior to the past 20 years,
particularly cold years were recorded four of every five years, while in the past 20
years the number of cold years has decreased to only one or two of every five years.
Summer melting on four ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula has been shown to
increase by one day per year over the period of 1978 -1991, and rainfall has been
observed on several occasions.

Rising mean temperatures, fewer cold years and longer summer melting have
resulted in the warming of Antarctica's waters. This in turn has resulted in a decrease
in sea-ice extent. These changes may also accelerate climate change. With the loss
of sea-ice, the reduction of albedo causes a change in the absorption of heat and
carbon dioxide. Warmer oceans also increase basal melting of ice shelves, which
could increase the flow of grounded ice into the ocean. If these trends continue, it
could produce a "positive" feedback loop that could continue for decades.

An indication of the likely consequences of human-induced climate change can be
seen most dramatically in the geography and species of the Antarctic.

IMPACTS ON ICE SHELVES

Ice shelf instability is affected by the increases in sea-water and air temperatures. The
sudden collapse of the Larsen A Ice Shelf in January 1995 provided evidence to
substantiate arguments that there exists an abrupt thermal limit on ice shelf viability
that is being driven southward by regional warming trends. The ice shelves currently
north of the minus 5 degree C isotherm, i.e., Wordie, Larsen A, Muller, Prince Gustav
Channel, and Larsen Inlet Ice Shelves, have shown significant retreat, while those
1
South of and below the thermal limit have yet to show change. The Larsen B Ice 
Shelf, which is the closest ice shelf to the isotherm, had not shown signs of retreating 
until recently. However, significant calving in early 1995 seemed to produce rifts 
behind the new ice front which indicated signs of retreat. Last year, Greenpeace 
documented the existence of deep holes and cracks several kilometers long in the 
Larsen B Ice Shelf, suggesting its imminent collapse. The British Antarctic Survey 
recently reported further signs of that imminent collapse.

With the decrease in sea-ice and the rise of ambient air temperatures, more moisture 
is delivered into the atmosphere from the oceans, which then leads to increased 
precipitation and larger snowfall accumulations. Higher temperatures, increased snowfall 
and less ice have changed the habitats of numerous Antarctic species including the 
Adelie and Chinstrap penguins, southern fur and elephant seals, and invertebrates 
such as phytoplankton and krill. This has caused a change in their feeding and 
breeding patterns, and is particularly evident in those species which inhabit the ice 
edge. As the ice edge retreats, the inhabitants have moved with it.

IMPACTS ON PENGUINS

It is clear that penguins represent sensitive indicators of environmental change within 
their habitat. Along the western side of the Antarctic Peninsula, penguin populations 
are undergoing significant changes in their abundance and distribution. Researchers 
on King George Island and elsewhere have identified changes in climate and 
particularly sea ice as being a major driving force behind this ecological distribution. 
These observations are consistent with changes in penguin populations elsewhere on 
the Antarctic continent and with increasing and decreasing populations of other 
Antarctic Peninsula bird and mammal species.

Over the past 20 years Adelie populations on Torgensen Island near Palmer Station 
have decreased from 15,220 breeding pairs in 1975 to the current level of 9,200 pairs, 
and studies have indicated the disappearance of 21 Adelie colonies from five islands 
in the area. Until recently, Chinstrap populations on the Antarctic Peninsula have 
increased significantly.

The shift in these two penguin populations has resulted from changes in the amount 
of winter sea ice near the colonies. As the ice shelf moves southward, the Chinstraps 
have expanded southward down the Peninsula into the areas once dominated by 
Adelies. This reflects the preference of Adelies for breeding on sea-ice, while 
Chinstraps prefer the open sea.

These changes have resulted from an alteration of the Adelies' feeding and nesting 
sites: larger snowfalls have covered nesting sites longer into the season, while krill 
availability has decreased. Krill feed on the algae that grow on the bottom of winter 
sea-ice. As the sea ice decreases as a result of fewer cold winters, the algae and 
therefore the krill decline. The greatest changes in Adelie populations have occurred 
at the periphery of their habitat, consistent with predictions on how climate change 
might affect biodiversity and populations.

Between 1989 and 1993, both Chinstrap and Adelie penguin numbers on King 
George Island plummeted, by 35% and 40% respectively. This decline has been 
linked to declines in krill availability, as a consequence of reduced sea-ice cover and 
reduction in krill populations is the dramatic reduction in time available for adult birds 
to find food for their chicks.

2
OTHER REGIONAL IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

Other examples of how climate change is affecting the Antarctic Peninsula can be found in the increase and abundance of two Antarctic vascular plants and the increase in population of ice-avoiding seal species. In the Argentine Islands of the Antarctic Peninsula, the Antarctic pearlwort and Antarctic hair grass--the only two native vascular Antarctic plants--have experienced a rapid increase in population and abundance. Due to a longer and warmer growing season, the Antarctic pearlwort has increased by more than 5-fold and the Antarctic hair grass by nearly 25-fold in the areas studied on Skua, Winter, and Galindez Islands.

Changes in the population of the southern fur seal and the southern elephant seal have been noted at Palmer Station, which is consistent with observed changes in sea-ice extent. Both of these species prefer open water, and decreased sea-ice could have favored their expansion. The southern fur seals have increased from six individuals in 1975 to 2,000 in 1995/6 and the southern elephant seals have increased by 300 percent over the same period.

CONCLUSIONS

Rapid changes in the biodiversity of the Antarctic Peninsula pose a clear warning for the rest of the planet. Seemingly small increases in temperature have changed the physical aspects of this region, which then is leading to changes in the populations of penguins, seals, krill, and flora. Once these changes occur, it may take decades or longer to return to a former balance, and then only if governments agree to take the sorts of action that will lower CO2 emissions to an appropriate level.

Although the Third Meeting of Parties to the Climate Convention Meeting in Kyoto last December made some progress, the Kyoto Protocol agreed there is only a first step. It is apparent that governments still are very far away from making the necessary commitments to implement the new Protocol, much less making the far-reaching decisions needed to really address the threats posed by climate change.

One of the tools endorsed at the Rio Earth Summit Conference in 1992 was the "Precautionary Principle". That principle must be firmly applied in the case of global climate change. The steps that are required now in order to avoid large dangers later are achievable. All that is lacking is willpower on the part of the world's governments. In this context, what is happening in the Antarctic should be a wake up call to take the necessary actions.

We urge all Antarctic Treaty Parties to quickly ratify the Climate Change Convention and to take immediate steps to meet the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol. We also urge Parties to use their particular knowledge of Antarctica to raise awareness of the issues in appropriate fora, and to promote further action to ensure the long term protection of the Antarctic environment.

***

REFERENCES

Everett, J. T., Fitzharris, B. B., Maxwell, B., et al. 1998. The Arctic and the Antarctic, in Watson, R. T., Zinyowera, M. C. and Moss, R. H. (eds), The Regional Impacts of Climate Change, 85-104. Cambridge University Press.

3
Fowbert, J. A. and Lewis-Smith, R. I. 1994. Rapid Population in Native Vascular Plants in the Argentine Islands, Antarctic Peninsula. Arctic and Alpine Research 26-3, 290 - 296.

Fraser, W. R., Trivelpiece, W. Z., Ainley, D. G. and Trivelpiece, S. G. 1991. Increases in Antarctic penguin populations: reduced competition with whales or a loss of sea ice due to environmental warming? Polar Biology, 1992, 525-531.

Fraser, W. R. and Trivelpiece, W. Z.  1996. Factors controlling the distributionof seabirds: winter-summer heterogeneity in the distribution of Adelie penguin populations, in Hofmann, E., Ross, R., Quetin, L. (eds), Foundations for Ecological Research West of the Antarctic Peninsula, AGU Antarctic Research Series. Washington, D.C.

Fraser, W. R. and Patterson, D. L. 1996. Human disturbance and long-term changes in Adelie penguin populations: A natural experiment at Palmer Station, Antarctic Peninsula, in Battaglia, B., Valencia, J. and Walton, D. W. H. (eds), Antarctic Communities: Species, Structure and Survival. Cambridge University Press.

Greenpeace Expedition Report,1997. [Documents signs of climate change on the Antarctic Peninsulaj]

Loeb, V., Siegel, O. H., Hewitts, R., Fraser, W., Trivelpiece, W. and Trivelpiece, S. 1997. Effects of sea-ice extent and krill or salp dominance on the Antarctic food web. Nature 387: 897-900.

Santor, B. D., Taylor, K. E., Wigley, T.M.L., Johns, T.C., Jones, P.D., Karoly, D.J., Mitchell, J.F.B., Oort, A.H., Penner, J.E., Ramaswamy, V., Schwarzkopf, M.D., Stouffer, R.J., and Tett, S. 1996. A search for human influences on the thermal structure of the atmosphere. Nature 382, 39 - 46.

Skvarca, P. 1993. Last recession of the northern Larsen Ice Shelf monitored by space images. Glaciology, #17, 317-321.

Taylor, R. H. and Wilson, P. R.  1990. Recent increase and southern expansion of Adelie penguin populations in the Ross Sea, Antarctica related to climatic warming. New Zealand Journal of Ecology, Vol. 14.

Vaughan, D.G. and Doake, C.S.M.. 1996. Recent atmospheric warming and retreat on the Antarctic Peninsula. Nature 379, 328 - 330.

SCAR, 1992. The Role of the Antarctic in Global Change. 
                    4

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































```
