Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                                                                                  XXII ATCM/IP32
                                                                                  April, 1998
                                                                                  Original: English

                                                                                  Agenda item 7a

Protection
of Antarctica Act

Submitted by
The Netherlands
Upper House of the States-General

1997-1998 No. 248

25 211

Rules for the protection of the Antarctic environment implementing the 
Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protection 
of Antarctica Act)

Amended Bill

29 January 1998

We Beatrix, by the grace of God Queen of the Netherlands, Princess of Orange-Nassau, etc., 
etc., etc.

Greetings to all who shall see or hear these presents! Be it known:

Whereas we have considered that it is necessary to lay down rules to protect the Antarctic 
environment, to implement the Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

We, therefore, having heard the Council of State, and in consultation with the States-General, 
have approved and decreed as We hereby approve and decree:

§ 1. General provisions

Section 1

1. The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Act and the provisions 
pursuant thereto:

    a. Antarctic Treaty area:  the area south of latitude 60° South;

    b. Treaty:              the Antarctic Treaty (Netherlands Treaty Series 1965, 148, last 
                            amended 1987, 68);

    c. Protocol:            the Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic 
                            Treaty (Netherlands Treaty Series 1992, 110);

    d. activity:            an activity within the meaning of article 3 of the Protocol, 
                            being a complex of related actions performed in the Antarctic 
                            Treaty area;

    e. organiser:           a natural or legal person that organises an activity from the 
                            Netherlands;

    f. specially protected 
       Antarctic area:      parts of the Antarctic Treaty area designated as such in 
                            accordance with article 3 (1) or (3) of annex V to the Protocol;
g.      specially managed 
        Antarctic area:     parts of the Antarctic Treaty area designated as such in 
                            accordance with article 4 (1) of annex V to the Protocol;

h.      historic sites or 
        monuments:          sites or monuments designated as such in accordance with 
                            article 8 (2) or (3) of annex V to the Protocol;

i.      mineral resources:   abiotic, non-renewable natural resources, including fossil fuels 
                            and ore-bearing and non-ore-bearing minerals;

j.      native:              indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area;

k.      living resources:    mammals, birds and the eggs of birds, invertebrates and 
                            plants living in fresh water or on land, at any stage of their life 
                            cycle;

l.      to remove from the 
        population:         to kill, injure, capture, handle, remove or damage;

m.      harmful interference: harmful interference as referred to in article 1 (h) of annex II to 
                            the Protocol;

n.      waste:              waste as defined in section 1.1 (1) of the Environmental 
                            Management Act;

o.      hazardous waste:    hazardous waste designated as such pursuant to section 1.1 (1) 
                            of the Environmental Management Act;

p.      wastewater:         wastewater within the meaning of the Environmental 
                            Management Act;

q.      Our Ministers:      Our Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning & Environment 
                            and Our Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management & 
                            Fisheries.

2.      For the purposes of this Act and provisions based thereon, the Antarctic environment 
        shall include:

        a.      the ecosystems dependent on and associated with the Antarctic environment;

        b.      the intrinsic value of the Antarctic Treaty area, including the wilderness of 
                Antarctica, the aesthetic value and the value of Antarctica as an area for 
                conducting scientific research, especially research that is essential to understanding 
                the global environment;

        c.      the value of the Antarctic Treaty area for conducting scientific research;

        d.      the climate and the composition of the atmosphere.

Section 2

1.      The provisions of this Act shall not apply to:
a.  the storage of waste on board and its discharge from ships into the marine environment or from aircraft in flight;

b.  matters that ensure safety at sea: in any event, the design, construction, equipment and seaworthiness of ships, their crews, the conditions of employment and proficiency of crews, the use of signals, communications and the prevention of collisions;

c.  matters that ensure air safety: in any event, the design, construction, equipment and airworthiness of aircraft, the conditions of employment and proficiency of the crews of aircraft or the prevention of collisions between aircraft.

2.  The provisions of this Act, except for section 3, shall not apply to shipping and aircraft not connected with an activity.

Section 3

1.  Each individual in the Antarctic Treaty area shall take maximum care with regard to the Antarctic environment.

2.  Care as referred to in subsection 1 shall in any event mean that anyone who knows or may reasonably suspect that his actions or omissions may have adverse effects on the Antarctic environment shall refrain from such actions, in so far as such may reasonably be demanded of him, or shall take every measure that may reasonably be demanded of him to prevent such effects or, if such effects cannot be prevented, to limit or reverse them as far as possible.

3.  The provisions of subsections 1 and 2 shall not affect liability arising from the provisions of civil law or the possibility of legal persons as referred to in article 1, book 2 of the Civil Code acting as such in law.

Section 4

In exercising their powers pursuant to this Act, Our Ministers shall take account of the fact that the importance of protecting the Antarctic environment in any event requires that:

a.  the generation of waste in the Antarctic Treaty area is prevented or limited as far as possible;

b.  when producing substances, preparations and other products to be used in the Antarctic Treaty area, use is made of substances and materials that, after being used for the purpose for which they were intended, have no adverse effects on the Antarctic environment;

c.  substances, preparations or other products to be taken into the Antarctic Treaty area are used more than once if possible;

d.  waste is disposed of as far as possible in the Netherlands or in another country where arrangements have been made for the waste to be dumped or incinerated in accordance with international agreements;

e.  the removal from their population of living resources is prevented as far as possible and, in so far as this cannot be avoided, causes minimum pain and suffering;
f.  when planning and implementing activities, priority is given to scientific research that assigns central importance to preserving the value of Antarctica as an area for conducting scientific research, especially research that is essential to understanding the Antarctic environment and the global environment;

g.  activities are not carried out in a manner that is otherwise in conflict with the principles laid down in article 3 of the Protocol.

Section 5

Rules may be laid down by order in council to implement a measure as referred to in article IX (1) of the Treaty.

§ 2. Prohibitory provisions

Section 6

1.  The following shall be prohibited in the Antarctic Treaty area:

    a.  the disposal of hazardous waste or other solid and nonflammable waste;

    b.  the disposal of waste other than that referred to in point a. which is flammable and the holder of which cannot dispose of it outside the Antarctic Treaty area, except by means of incineration in a low-emission incinerator;

    c.  the disposal of waste other than that referred to in points a. and b. by:

        1.  depositing them in fresh-water systems, or

        2.  depositing them on or in the soil in an area that is ice-free in the Antarctic summer;

    d.  the detonation of nuclear explosions or the disposal of radioactive waste;

    e.  damage to or removal of historic sites and monuments;

    f.  the introduction of plants and dead animals not belonging to a species designated in appendix B to annex II of the Protocol and not intended as food;

    g.  the introduction of living animals not belonging to a species designated in appendix B to annex II of the Protocol;

    h.  exploration for or exploitation of mineral resources.

2.  The following shall also be prohibited in or from the Antarctic Treaty area:

    a.  the conducting of research into the presence of mineral resources;

    b.  the removal of flora and fauna from their population or harmful interference with flora and fauna;

    c.  the removal of dead flora and fauna or remains thereof from the Antarctic Treaty area;
d. the introduction of animals and plants belonging to a species designated in appendix B to annex II of the Protocol;

e. the introduction of plants and dead animals intended as food;

f. the introduction of pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, non-sterile soil, chips, polystyrene balls or similar packaging materials;

g. entering specially protected Antarctic areas;

h. the disposal of wastewater generated inland by depositing it on or in ice or snow;

i. the discharge of wastewater into the sea.

3. The prohibition referred to in subsection 2 shall not apply to participants in an activity organised from another country that is party to the Protocol, provided the permission given by that country by means of a permit or otherwise for the carrying out of the activity explicitly includes permission to perform the action in question.

§ 3. Environmental impact assessment

Section 7

1. An environmental impact statement shall be drawn up before a decision is reached on an application for a permit to conduct activities that may have more than a minor or transitory effect on the Antarctic environment.

2. Parts 7.4, 7.5, 7.6 and 7.7, except for sections 7.36 and 7.37 (2), and part 7.9 of chapter 7 of the Environmental Management Act shall apply mutatis mutandis, provided that the term "environment" is understood to mean the Antarctic environment.

3. The environmental impact statement shall be accompanied by an English translation.

§ 4. Permits

Section 8

1. An organiser may not implement an activity without a permit issued by Our Ministers.

2. Participation in an activity for which a permit within the meaning of this Act is required but has not been granted shall be prohibited.

Section 9

Our Ministers may, notwithstanding section 6 (2), grant permission in a permit for the actions prohibited in that section if an application explicitly relates thereto, in so far as such actions:

a. serve an important scientific purpose that cannot be served elsewhere and provided the survival or restoration of a plant or animal species or local population is not endangered and the local ecosystem is not damaged or threatened;

b. are actions as referred to in section 6 (2) (f), for hygienic or medical purposes;
c.	are actions as referred to in section 6 (2) (e), for the food supply of the organiser, participants in an activity and persons implementing the activity.

Section 10

1.	Rules shall be laid down by order in council concerning the way in which applications for permits are to be submitted and the information to be provided by the applicant with a view to reaching a decision on the application.

2.	Advisers may be designated by order in council who must be given the opportunity to provide advice on the draft decision on permit applications.

3.	The recommendation for an order in council as referred to in subsection 1 or 2 shall be made by Our Ministers.

Section 11

Part 3.5 of the General Administrative Law Act and part 13.2 of the Environmental Management Act shall apply to the issuing of decisions on permit applications.

Section 12

1.	Our Ministers shall in any event give consideration to the following when reaching decisions on permit applications:

	a.	the extent, duration and intensity of the activity in relation to the area in which it is to be conducted;

	b.	the cumulative effects of this activity in combination with other activities;

	c.	the adverse impact of the activity on other activities;

	d.	the availability of technology, procedures and other means for preventing the potentially adverse effects of the activity on the environment, or for minimising those that cannot be prevented;

	e.	the proficiency of the organiser or the persons implementing the activity.

2.	Our Ministers shall in any event take the following into account when reaching decisions on permit applications:

	a.	the rules applicable to them laid down pursuant to section 5;

	b.	if the permit allows access to or the implementation of an activity in a specially protected Antarctic area or specially managed Antarctic area: the provisions pursuant to article 5 of annex V to the Protocol.

Section 13

1.	A permit may be refused in the interests of protecting the Antarctic environment.

2.	A permit may be refused if there are grounds to fear that the permit-holder will not act in accordance with the provisions laid down by or pursuant to this Act.
3.    A permit shall in any event be refused if:

      a.    the Consultative Meeting appointed in accordance with article IX (1) of the 
            Antarctic Treaty reaches a negative decision on the environmental impact 
            statement in question;

      b.    there is insufficient certainty that serious adverse effects on the Antarctic 
            environment can be prevented.

Section 14

1.    A permit shall clearly indicate the activity to which it relates. The application for the 
      permit shall form part of the permit, in so far as indicated in the permit.

2.    A permit may be granted subject to restrictions if this is in the interest of the protection of 
      the Antarctic environment.

3.    A permit shall be granted subject to the conditions necessary for the protection of the 
      Antarctic environment. If the attaching of conditions to the permit cannot prevent the 
      activity in question from having adverse effects on the Antarctic environment, conditions 
      shall be attached to the permit that offer maximum protection against those effects.

Section 15

The conditions to be attached to a permit shall in any event specify the following:

      a.    in cases in which the permit relates to the removal from their population or harmful 
            interference with living resources, as referred to in section 6 (2) (b):

            1.    the action permitted and when, where and by whom it may be performed;

            2.    that no more animals, birds or plants shall be removed from their population than 
                  is strictly necessary for the scientific purpose referred to in section 9 (a);

            3.    that the survival or recovery of a plant or animal species or local population must 
                  not be endangered and the local ecosystem must not be damaged or threatened;

            4.    that the removal of living resources must cause minimum pain and suffering and 
                  that non-lethal techniques must be used as far as possible;

      b.    in cases in which the permit allows the introduction of animals or plants belonging to a 
            species designated in appendix B to annex II of the Protocol:

            1.    the species, number, age and sex and the precautions to be taken to prevent them 
                  from escaping or coming into contact with native flora and fauna;

            2.    that they must be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area before the permit 
                  expires or be disposed of by means of incineration or with the aid of equally 
                  effective methods so as to eliminate any risk to native flora and fauna;
3.    that precautionary measures must be taken, including those referred to in 
      appendix C to annex II of the Protocol, to prevent the introduction of 
      microorganisms such as viruses, parasites, bacteria, yeast and fungi, which are not 
      present in native flora and fauna.

c.    in cases in which the permit allows the introduction of plants and dead animals intended 
      as food:

      1.    that slaughtered poultry is checked for signs of disease, such as Newcastle disease, 
            tuberculosis and yeast infection, before being packaged for dispatch to the 
            Antarctic Treaty area;

      2.    that the parts of animals and plants that are not consumed must be stored under 
            carefully controlled conditions and removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or 
            disposed of by means of incineration in a low-emission incinerator or with the aid 
            of equally effective methods, so as to eliminate any risk to native flora and fauna;

      3.    that measures must be taken, including those referred to in appendix C to annex II 
            of the Protocol, to prevent the introduction into the Antarctic Treaty area of 
            microorganisms not present among the native fora and fauna, such as viruses, 
            bacteria, parasites, yeasts and fungi;

d.    that if a permit-holder is permitted to dispose of wastewater generated inland by 
      discharging it onto or into the ice, such disposal shall be permitted only in deep ice pits 
      which are not located on known ice-flow lines which terminate in ice-free areas or in areas 
      of high ablation;

e.    that wastewater may be discharged into the sea only if:

      1.    it has passed through a septic tank; and

      2.    it is discharged where conditions exist for immediate dilution and dispersal;

f.    that waste awaiting disposal must be stored in such a way as to ensure that it cannot enter 
      the Antarctic environment;

g.    if the permit allows access to or the implementation of an activity in a specially protected 
      Antarctic area:

      1.    the size and location of the part of the specially protected Antarctic area in 
            question, and the activity for which permission has been granted,

      2.    that the organiser must carry a copy of the permit on his person or ensure that the 
            persons implementing the activity carry a copy of the permit on their person when 
            in the specially protected Antarctic area in question,

      3.    the conditions which must be attached to the permit to implement the provisions 
            laid down pursuant to article 5 of annex V to the Protocol.

Section 16

1.    The conditions attached to the permit may also, in any event, specify the following:
a.      measurements, calculations and counts that must be performed to determine the extent of the adverse effects of the activity on the Antarctic environment;

b.      that, to an extent to be indicated in the conditions, research must be conducted into the scope for more extensive protection of the Antarctic environment than is provided for in other conditions attached to the permit;

c.      that the results of the measurements, calculations and counts or research must be recorded and kept or must be reported to or placed at the disposal of Our Ministers;

d.      that the requirements relating to the proficiency of the organiser or the persons implementing the activity must be met;

e.      that participants and persons employed by the organiser in implementing an activity shall be issued with written instructions to prevent their acting in contravention of the provisions of the permit or the conditions attached to it and that compliance with such instructions shall be monitored;

f.      that the person to whom the permit was granted shall provide financial security for compliance with the obligations imposed on him pursuant to the permit and to cover his liability for any damage arising from the adverse effects of the activity on the Antarctic environment.

2.      In provisions as referred to in subsection 1 (f), Our Ministers shall specify the amount of the security and the period for which it must be maintained, together with the conditions to be met before the obligation may lapse. Section 8.15 (3) and (4) of the Environmental Management Act shall apply mutatis mutandis.

Section 17

A permit may stipulate:

a.      that conditions specified therein shall not enter into force until a time specified therein or until a circumstance specified therein occurs;

b.      that conditions specified therein shall apply only until a time specified therein or until a circumstances specified therein occurs;

c.      that conditions specified therein shall remain in force for a time specified therein once the permit has expired.

Section 18

A permit shall stipulate that it applies only for a period determined therein.

Section 19

1.      A permit shall apply to the person to whom it has been granted. That person shall ensure that the conditions attached to the permit are complied with.

2.      The permit-holder shall present all participants in the activity concerned with a copy of the permit, accompanied by an English translation.
Section 20

1.    If required in the interests of the protection of the Antarctic environment, Our Ministers shall amend, supplement or withdraw restrictions subject to which a permit has been granted and conditions that have been attached to the permit or attach restrictions or conditions thereto.

2.    Any person, except for the permit-holder, may request Our Ministers to amend a permit in the interests of the protection of the Antarctic environment, subject to subsection 1.

3.    Sections 12, 14 (3), and 15 to 19 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the decision on the content of the restrictions and conditions.

4.    Division 3.5.6 of the General Administrative Law Act and part 13.2 of the Environmental Management Act shall apply to the issuing of the decision.

Section 21

1.    At the request of the permit-holder, Our Ministers may amend, supplement or withdraw restrictions subject to which a permit has been granted and conditions attached to the permit, or attach restrictions or conditions thereto.

2.    Sections 12 to 19 shall apply mutatis mutandis with respect to the decision on and the content of the restrictions and conditions.

3.    Part 3.5 of the General Administrative Law Act and part 13.2 of the Environmental Management Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the issuing of the decision.

Section 22

1.    Our Ministers shall withdraw a permit for an activity in whole or in part if the activity has or threatens to have impermissibly adverse effects on the Antarctic environment, and the occurrence of the effects cannot be averted sufficiently by amending the permit.

2.    Our Ministers shall withdraw a permit in so far as this is required by rules laid down pursuant to section 5.

3.    Any person may request Our Ministers to withdraw a permit in accordance with subsection 1.

4.    Sections 13 to 19 shall apply mutatis mutandis to a decision as referred to in subsection 1.

5.    Division 3.5.6 of the General Administrative Law Act and part 13.2 of the Environmental Management Act shall apply to the issuing of the decision pursuant to subsection 1.

Section 23

If the application for a permit concerns an activity prior to the decision for which an environmental impact statement has been drawn up, Our Ministers may, notwithstanding sections 3:19 (1) and 3:28 of the General Administrative Law Act, extend each of the time limits referred to in section 3:19 (1), second sentence, and section 3:28 of the General Administrative Law Act by a reasonable period to be determined by them, but not exceeding 20 months after the submission of the application.
§ 5. Measures in special circumstances

Section 24

If during the implementation of an activity an unusual incident occurs or has occurred which endangers human lives, ships, aircraft or other materiel and facilities of high value, or which has had or threatens to have adverse effects on the Antarctic environment, the conditions laid down by or pursuant to this Act, except for section 3, shall not apply to any measures urgently needed to avert the effects of the incident or, in so far as the effects cannot be averted, to limit or remedy them as far as possible.

Section 25

1.    If an unusual incident occurs or has occurred during the implementaion of an activity, the organiser of the activity or the persons implementing it shall inform Our Ministers of this incident without delay.

2.    The organiser or persons implementing the activity shall also provide Our Ministers with information, as soon as it is available, relating to:

      a.    the causes of the incident and the circumstances in which it occurred;

      b.    the substances emitted as a result of the incident and the properties thereof;

      c.    other information of significance in assessing the nature and gravity of the effects of the incident on the environment;

      d.    the measures that have been taken or are being considered to avert, limit or remedy the effects of the incident;

      e.    the measures that are being considered to prevent the recurrence of such an incident during an activity.

3.    Our Ministers may, in the interests of the protection of the Antarctic environment, issue instructions relating to the measures referred to in subsection 2 (d) and (e).

§ 6. Appeals

Section 26

Appeals may be lodged with an administrative court in accordance with chapter 20 of the Environmental Management Act.

§ 7. Enforcement

Section 27

Our Ministers shall be empowered to apply executive coercion to enforce the obligations laid down by or pursuant to this Act.

Section 28
Sections 18.4 to 18.11, 18.12 (1) and (3), 18.14 (1), 18.15 and 18.16 of the Environmental 
Management Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the enforcement of provisions laid down by or 
pursuant to this Act.

Section 29

Everyone shall be obliged to lend every assistance on request to international observers as 
referred to in article 14 (2) of the Protocol and to provide all the information they may reasonably 
require for the performance of their duties.

Section 30

Conduct in contravention of a condition attached to a permit granted pursuant to section 8 shall 
be prohibited.

Section 31

1.	The following shall be inserted in alphabetical order in section 1a, point 2, of the Economic 
Offences Act: the Antarctica Protection Act, sections 3 (1), 5, 6 (1) and (2), 8, 25 (1) and (2), 
29 and 30.

2.	The following shall be inserted in alphabetical order in section 1a, point 3, of the Economic 
Offences Act: the Protection of Antarctica Act, sections 19 (2) and 33.

Section 32

1.	The provisions laid down by or pursuant to this Act shall apply to Dutch nationals located 
in Antarctica.

2.	Dutch criminal law shall apply to Dutch nationals who contravene provisions laid down 
by or pursuant to this Act in the Antarctic Treaty area.

§ 8. Further provisions

Section 33

1.	Within six weeks of the end of the activity, the organiser shall draw up a report, which he 
shall make available to Our Ministers without delay.

2.	The report shall contain an accurate description of the activity implemented and shall in 
any event include the following:

    a.	an indication of the areas in which the activity was implemented, the times at 
        which these areas were entered and the time spent there;

    b.	a description of the waste generated during the activity and how it was stored and 
        disposed of;

    c.	a description of the adverse effects of the activity on the Antarctic environment;
d.	a description of the measures taken to supplement the conditions laid down by or pursuant to the provisions of this Act to prevent adverse effects on the Antarctic environment or, in so far as these effects could not be prevented, to limit or remedy them as far as possible.

3.	The report shall be drawn up in Dutch and accompanied by an English translation.

Section 34

1.	Our Ministers shall present an annual report to the States-General on important developments regarding the implementation of the Protocol. The forwarding of the report shall be announced in the Government Gazette at the same time.

2.	Information which must be made available to the public pursuant to the Protocol shall be announced in the Government Gazette.

Section 35

The Environmental Management Act shall be amended as follows:

a.	the full stop at the end of section 13.1 (2) shall be replaced with a comma and the following shall be added: the Protection of Antarctica Act,;

b.	in section 20.1 (3), the following shall be inserted after "the Soil Protection Act,": the Protection of Antarctica Act,.

Section 36

1.	The State may recover the costs - subject to reduction by the courts - incurred in remedying the adverse effects of the activity on the Antarctic environment or in preventing such effects from the person whose unlawful acts led to the costs being incurred.

2.	For subsection 1 to apply, it is not necessary for an unlawful act to have been committed in respect of the State at the time the activity was being carried out.

§ 9. Concluding provisions

Section 37

This Act shall enter into force on a date to be determined by royal decree.

Section 38

This Act shall be cited as the Protection of Antarctica Act.
We order and command that this Act be published in the Bulletin of Acts and Decrees and that all ministries, authorities, bodies and officials whom it may concern shall diligently implement it.

Done

Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment

Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
