COMNAP Report
to the XXII ATCM

INTRODUCTION
1.	This report provides an overview of the activities of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP).

2.	Government Antarctic operations, under the umbrella of the ATCM, are changing as global environmental issues increasingly drive science directions and technology developments offer new ways to do science and make the region more accessible. Antarctic science is increasingly focusing on global change issues. We are seeing more integrated research projects gathering specialist information from different areas and countries to address major scientific issues such as ozone depletion, ice sheet changes, studies of past glaciations, sea levels and atmosphere, sea ice dynamics and ocean and atmospheric circulation studies. There is more integration of Arctic and Antarctic science to enhance our understanding of the global ecosystem.

3.	Southern Ocean research is a key component of the activities of most Antarctic agencies. Knowledge of southern ocean and atmospheric circulation makes a valuable contribution to global change models. Better knowledge of southern ocean ecosystems is also being demanded for management of southern ocean fisheries and the potential impacts of fishing on Antarctic and associated ecosystems. Much of this work contributes to the CEMP program of CCAMLR.

4.	To address these issues effectively, international and multi-disciplinary science are essential, as are efficient and effective operational management. Whilst SCAR provides a forum for the development of scientific co-operation, COMNAP continues to provide opportunities for logistic co-operation and the exchange of ideas and information. A joint workshop is planned at the SCAR/COMNAP meetings in Concepcion, Chile in July to explore ways of enhancing scientific and logistics co-operation.

OPERATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS AND ISSUES

5.	Antarctic operations are expensive. The search for improved effectiveness and efficiency, and technology development is resulting in changes to government activities in the region.

6.	Inter-continental air access is improving. The 1997/98 season saw national program personnel being flown from South Africa to Dronning Maud Land by a commercial operator. Preliminary investigations have been conducted on the construction of a compacted snow airstrip in the Prydz Bay region of East Antarctica. These developments will significantly extend the ability to fly personnel to the Antarctic for short stay visits beyond the traditional air access points into McMurdo Sound and the Antarctic Peninsula, increasing scientific opportunity and productivity. There is an increase in contracting by national Antarctic agencies of logistics and infrastructure support by the private sector. Also tour ships are being used to support scientific activities in some instances.

7.	Remote sensing technology offers valuable opportunities for Antarctic science, particularly glaciology studies, despite limited satellite coverage of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean, and limited access to some satellite imagery. Automated observation and data recordings are also increasingly used to cost effectively extend the information range.

8.	The ratification of the Protocol on Environmental Protection has been anticipated with an increase in the level of human impacts research over the last decade. Human impacts research now seems to be reaching a plateau, recognising a balance between research into global change and local human impacts. Environmental monitoring is receiving attention from operators. The Environmental Monitoring Handbook being developed by COMNAP in consultation with SCAR will provide useful standardisation of methodologies to allow complementary data to be collected around the Antarctic region.

9.	These examples demonstrate an increased awareness of the value of the Antarctic region in contributing to our knowledge of the global environment. They also show the impacts of technology, particularly on the accessibility of the region, which can only be expected to speed up even more over the coming decade. This will provide opportunities for science, but also challenges for the future management of the region as it becomes more accessible to a wider range of interests.

KEY ACTIVITIES
Scientific and Operational Cooperation
10.	An Information Paper has been submitted to the ATCM to illustrate the extent to which national Antarctic programs undertake cooperative scientific and logistic activities.
COMNAP 1998 Meeting in Cape Town
11.	The ninth annual meeting of COMNAP and SCALOP took place in Cape Town during 25-29 August 1997. Some 57 representatives from 23 national programs attended the meeting. In addition to progressing and reviewing the tasks of the various working groups, including requests for COMNAP action from ATCM XXI, the COMNAP meetings continue to provide a valuable opportunity for planning cooperative scientific and logistics activities.
12.	Professor Anders Karlqvist (Sweden) completed his term as COMNAP Chairman and Ms Gillian Wratt (New Zealand) was confirmed as Chairperson for the next three years. Following the retirement of Executive Secretary, Mr Al Fowler, the COMNAP Secretariat has been transferred from Washington DC to Hobart, Australia. Mr Jack Sayers, formerly SCALOP representative of the Australian Antarctic Division, has been appointed Executive Secretary for a six-year term.
Antarctic Air Networks
13.	In 1995 a SCALOP Workshop on Antarctic Air Transport Networks was held in Washington DC. As a result of the workshop a SCALOP sub-group was formed to pursue the development of an inter-continental East Antarctic Air Network (EAAN) that could potentially serve those stations located in Antarctica between 10º West and 140º East.

14.	In March 1998, the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR) of Japan hosted a special meeting of the EAAN sub-group to review progress to date and plan cooperative work on establishing an ice/compacted snow runway in the Prydz Bay region, subject to an Environmental Impact Assessment. The meeting was attended by COMNAP/SCALOP representatives from Australia, China, Japan and Russia as well as a number of technical experts and commercial aircraft operators.
Emergency Contingency Planning
15.	ATCM XXI (Resolution 1, para 4) requested COMNAP and IAATO to submit Information Papers to the ATCM XXII on the extent to which contingency plans have been put in place. A COMNAP Information Paper has been submitted to the meeting although the response rate was disappointing. Twenty national programs responded to the questionnaire. Nine programs declined to respond consequently it is not possible to fully assess the extent to which contingency plans have been implemented in accordance with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. The results from those that responded indicate that contingency plans have been developed for most year-round stations and ships, and that the COMNAP Guidelines have generally been followed in developing these plans.

16.	While COMNAP has promulgated guidelines to assist national operators to develop and implement contingency plans, COMNAP has no authority to require individual agencies to produce plans in accordance with the guidelines. Such responsibility rests with the individual agencies and their national administrations. It is suggested, however, that the ATCM consider how the development and implementation of contingency plans by all nations operating in the Antarctic can be encouraged.

17.	At its 1997 meeting in Cape Town, COMNAP established an Emergency Response and Contingency Planning Working Group that has been tasked to:
    • review the 1992 COMNAP Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning and the status of the plans developed by national operators; 
    • review the Guidelines with a view to including plans to deal with other incidents which may have potential adverse impacts; and 
    • establish sub-groups to develop multi-operator oils spill contingency plans for King George Island, Ross Sea and Prydz Bay. 
Polar Shipping Code
18.	Noting the discussion on the development of the draft Polar Code by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) at ATCM XXI (Final Report of ATCM XXI, paras 19 & 98), COMNAP has considered the technical aspects of the Code and issues of relevance to national Antarctic operators. This work is submitted as a Working Paper to the ATCM summarising matters that COMNAP considers need to be taken into account in relation to Antarctic shipping in the further development of the Code.
Education and Training
19.	ATCM XXI proposed that a survey be conducted to determine the range of educational and training programs undertaken by national Antarctic programs and tour operators for people visiting or working in the Antarctic (Final Report of ATCM XXI, para 133). An Information Paper has been submitted to the ATCM summarising the results of the survey of national Antarctic operators. A comprehensive range of training is provided including Antarctic legislation, environmental requirements and safety.
Environmental Management
20.	The ratification of the Environmental Protocol this year places increased responsibilities on Antarctic operators to factor environmental considerations into the planning and conduct of all activities. Within COMNAP, an Environmental Coordinating Group provides a link to the Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON). The network’s primary function is to encourage the sharing of environmental management information between environmental officers of national Antarctic programs. In this role AEON can provide valuable expert input to environmental issues from a practical perspective, including guidance on aspects of the Protocol’s implementation. 

21.	AEON’s work over the past year has concentrated on improving information links between members through AEON and the AEON web site, providing input to the IUCN document on cumulative impacts and coordinating the publication of the COMNAP Monitoring Summary and the development of a monitoring handbook. The monitoring handbook will provide detailed methodologies for specific parameters used to monitor the environmental impact of human activities in Antarctica. The monitoring summary provides a country by country outline of recent and ongoing Antarctic monitoring activity and associated references. The document will also be available on the COMNAP web site. 
Electronic Information Exchange
22.	COMNAP has requested its Electronic Information Working Group (ELINF) review and initiate improvements to its WWW Home Page especially with regard to the advance exchange of operational information. The COMNAP Executive Committee has provided ELINF with the following guidelines to consider when undertaking the review, namely:

    • The COMNAP Home Page should not duplicate information that is more effectively updated on the national Home Pages. Links should be provided on the COMNAP Home Page that would facilitate the user accessing the data. 
    • The advance exchange information should be on the respective national Home Pages with a link to that information from the COMNAP Home Page. ELINF should develop the recommended format for the advance information to ensure common presentation. 
    • ELINF should define what information could usefully be contained on the COMNAP Home Page. The Home Page should provide information to the general public on the role of COMNAP and also basic information on each national program including stations, etc. 
    • It is probably unnecessary for national programs to be able to directly update information on the COMNAP Home Page. 
    • The Russian proposal for detailed information on individual Antarctic stations should be considered by ELINF however it is believed that the best approach would be for a model to be developed for presenting this information on national Home Pages where it can be more easily updated. 
    • In effect the COMNAP Home Page would be the "meta data" reference for information available on national Home Pages. 
SCAR/COMNAP 1999 Meetings
23.	The meetings of COMNAP X and XXV SCAR will be held in Concepcion, Chile from 20-31 July 1998. The COMNAP meetings will take place during the first week.

SCAR/COMNAP Workshop on Facilitating International Science Projects
24.	A joint SCAR/COMNAP Workshop on Facilitating International Science Projects will be held during the Concepcion meetings, on Saturday 25 July 1998. The objectives of the workshop are to:
gain a mutual understanding of the expectations and capabilities of COMNAP and SCAR; 
identify ways of enhancing scientific/logistics cooperation; and 
seek a way forward on specific projects. 
Education and Training Forum
25.	It is planned to conduct a Forum on Education and Training during the COMNAP meeting in Concepcion. The aim of the forum will be to review the results of the COMNAP survey on education and training and decide what further action, if any, is necessary.
