 IAATO OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANNING  PAGE 1 
 
 
Oil Spill Contingency Planning - IAATO 
 
Following discussion at ATCM XXI in Christchurch, and especially Resolution 1 
(1997), IAATO is pleased to report on its progress on contingency planning to the 
Meeting. 
 
IAATO-members adopted an Emergency and Medical Evacuation Response 
(EMER) contingency plan in 1996 whereby medical evacuation from member ves-
sels is coordinated through a central 24-hour emergency contact office in Punta 
Arenas. The plan has been used successfully for the past two seasons. This current 
report focuses on additional efforts in the area of oil spill contingency planning. 
 
With the exception of one land-based tour operator, IAATO members organize 
ship-based Antarctic activities. Such activities are governed by international mari-
time law in addition to any requirements of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
In accordance with international maritime law, all IAATO vessels carry a Ship-
board Oil Pollution Emergency Plan (SOPEP) satisfying Regulation 26 of Annex 1 
of MARPOL. Such a plan is also required under provisions of Article 3 of the In-
ternational Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Cooperation, 
1990. In addition, the OPRC convention includes articles addressing oil pollution 
reporting procedures and other requirements. IMO has presented the text of the 
convention to this meeting as XXII ATCM/IP96. 
 
All IAATO member vessels are flagged from states requiring SOPEPS. 
 
Recognizing the importance of self-sufficiency and the particular challenges of the 
Antarctic in regard to emergency response, IAATO engaged an outside contractor 
to advise on emergency response and established a sub-committee on Oil Spill 
Prevention and Response at its annual meeting in 1996. 
 
At its annual meeting in July 1998, IAATO intends to discuss -- and potentially 
adopt -- a Special Antarctic Appendix to the SOPEPs carried by IAATO-member 
vessels. Before adoption, IAATO must seek outside advice on the specific legal 
status of such a special appendix but it is anticipated that the current SOPEPS 
would be further amended with a cover sheet containing language such as: 
 
“This Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plan (SOPEP) contains a Special 
Antarctic Appendix. When the vessel is operating within the Antarctic “Spe-
cial Area” south of 60°S the vessel master shall refer to such requirements 
and procedures contained in this Special Appendix. Upon annual review, the 
vessel owner/operators may choose to incorporate such changes contained in 
the Special Appendix into appropriate SOPEP sections or appendices. This 
Appendix has been developed in accordance with …” 
 
 
 
 IAATO OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANNING  PAGE 2 
 
1. Introduction 
 
This paper outlines the draft recommendations developed by the IAATO sub-
committee on Oil Spill Response and Prevention that will be presented to the 
IAATO membership for action at its annual meeting in July 1998. The draft is here 
presented in the interest of transparency. Any comments should be directed to the 
IAATO Secretariat. Please note that these recommendations have not yet been re-
viewed in detail by IAATO members or by ship owners.  
 
The measures recommended include procedures on risk assessment, notification 
and reporting requirements, effective response, preventative planning, coordina-
tion, implementation of contingency plans and the training of staff.  
 
2.  Committee recommendations  
 
The sub-committee on Oil Spill Prevention and Response has developed a number 
of recommendations in regard to oil spill pollution. Particular emphasis has been 
placed on prevention in order to minimize the risk of potential oil spills. To assist 
all members, flow charts were designed as a guideline on the preparation of oil 
spill contingency plans. Some of the recommendations from the committee include 
the following topics: 
 
• Storage of fuel on board the vessel and risk assessment; 
• Navigation experience and training of ship’s officers; 
• Use of non-persistent fuels; 
• Shipboard contingency plans; 
• Use of absorbent mats for refueling helicopters and zodiacs; 
• Co-ordination of a fuel spill response; 
• Equipment available for oil spill response; 
• Reporting requirements and procedures; 
• Notification of Parties and the CEP; 
• Legal issues with regard to marine pollution. 
 
 
2.1 Storage of fuel on board the vessel 
 
Maximum and average capacity of bunker fuel tanks differs from ship to ship, de-
pending on the itinerary for a particular voyage, anticipated weather conditions 
and final destination. The sub-committee took into consideration the varying speci-
fications of each operator and considered the following:  the type and maximum 
amount of fuel to be carried on each voyage; the storage of all fuels on board the 
ship; the refueling of zodiacs; spill kits used; and the current training of staff re-
garding handling of fuel.  
 
IAATO notes that no Antarctic tour vessel refuels in the Antarctic or is involved in 
the transfer of fuel. Refueling of vessels is done outside of the Antarctic Treaty 
Area and, by world shipping standards, the amount of fuel carried is small. 
 IAATO OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANNING  PAGE 3 
 
 
 
2.2 Use of non-persistent fuels 
 
A preliminary questionnaire was distributed among the IAATO members to de-
termine the type, density and maximum amount of all fuels carried by IAATO ves-
sels operating in Antarctica. Most operators use light diesel fuels. A few of the 
Antarctic ships use medium/heavy fuel oils, although the use of these oils appears 
to be decreasing as newer vessels are brought into service. Results of this prelimi-
nary survey of some Antarctic tour vessels is presented at the end of this report. 
 
The amount and type of fuel is a key consideration in contingency planning. Stan-
dardization on the use of lighter, non-persistent fuels by IAATO members and 
their vessels would also facilitate standardization of oil spill response equipment. 
The wider availability of standard response equipment, the greater the potential to 
respond effectively to oil spill incidents. 
 
The definition of non-persistent fuel is not fully elaborated. It is believed that fuel 
and oils which may be considered non-persistent in moderate climates may be-
come persistent oils at Antarctic temperatures.  
 
The International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund describes non-persistent oil as 
“oil which, at the time of shipment, consists predominantly of non-residual frac-
tions and of which more than 50% by volume distills at a temperature of 340°C 
when tested by the ASTM Method D86/78 or any subsequent revision thereof.” 
 
 
2.3 Navigation Experience of ship’s officers 
 
The seas surrounding Antarctica are considered among the most inhospitable in the 
world.  Mid-summer storms occur with little warning, fog and poor visibility is 
commonplace and drifting ice is a regular threat to shipping. 
 
Because of the unique environmental hazards encountered by Antarctic shipping it 
is essential that there are officers on board the vessel who have experience and 
knowledge of Antarctic meteorology, ice conditions, tides and currents in the in-
tended region of operation.  
 
At the present time, IAATO-operated ships use a variety of policy standards for 
determining the navigation experience of deck officers.  In practice, officers and 
crew aboard IAATO member ships often have decades of experience. The Sub-
committee recommends that IAATO adopt guidelines in keeping with SCALOP 
recommendations that “Masters and/or Chief Officers of vessels operating under 
charter or in support of Antarctic operations shall have at least one season of ice 
navigation experience in the Antarctic.” According to IAATO standards, members 
must ensure that 75% of staff has previous Antarctic experience. Further guide-
lines will be developed in regard to the experience and training of officers and 
crew. 
 IAATO OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANNING  PAGE 4 
 
 
 
2.4 Shipboard contingency plans 
 
In 1989 the Exxon Valdez disaster highlighted the need to develop a global net-
work to coordinate pollution response resources. The 1990 International Conven-
tion on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Cooperation (OPRC) comple-
mented already existing IMO conventions relating to marine pollution.  The OPRC 
Convention requires, in part, that vessels shall carry shipboard oil pollution emer-
gency plans. The OPRC Convention also includes provisions for signatories to as-
sess the consequences of marine oil spills and report the incident to states whose 
interests are likely to be affected.  The requirement for vessels to carry shipboard 
oil pollution emergency plans has been incorporated in Annex IV of the “Protocol 
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.” 
 
From the information gathered by the sub-committee and the research conducted 
to date, a draft paper will be prepared for review by all IAATO members with sug-
gestions on the proposed Antarctic appendix to current SOPEPs. If accepted by all 
members at their annual July meeting, then the Special Antarctic Appendix for 
IAATO ships operating in the area south of 60°S, will be  printed. 
 
Taking into consideration the Antarctic’s extreme climate and remote location, the 
following topics were covered in detail: 
 
• Pre-spill planning and risk assessment; 
• The size and type of oil spill and the probability of its occurrence; 
• Notification procedures; 
• Movement of the spill considering weather, location and amount of fuel spilled; 
• Response organization; 
• The environmental effects depending on amount and type of fuel spilled; 
• Proximity to SSI’s and other protected areas under the Antarctic Treaty system; 
• Options available for oil spill response; 
• Knowledge of the response equipment; 
• Experience of staff using the equipment; 
• Problems associated with response and support in Antarctic conditions; 
• Safety of passengers and staff; 
• Termination of response activities; 
• Post spill monitoring. 
 
 
 
 
The IAATO sub-committee has sought advice from COMNAP, Jamestown Marine 
in Connecticut, U.S., the Office of Polar Programs at the U.S. National Science 
Foundation, and Oil Spill Response (OSRL) in Southampton, UK, in order to pre-
pare this report.  
 
 IAATO OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANNING  PAGE 5 
 
In addition, members of the sub-committee and operators are planning to attend an 
Antarctic Oil Pollution Control Course in August of this year at OSRL’s headquar-
ters. IAATO wishes to thank all those who provided assistance and advice. 
 
 
2.5 Use of absorbent pads during the refueling of helicopters and zodiacs 
 
The committee will suggest a specific make of absorbent mat which would be suit-
able for all refueling purposes and make recommendations regarding standardiza-
tion of the equipment used by IAATO vessels.  
 
 
2.6 Co-ordination of an oil spill 
 
The intention is to develop a multi-operator plan to encompass an area where a co-
ordinated and compatible response by two or more IAATO members may be fea-
sible. Such a plan will have to be examined carefully in regard to both its practical 
and legal ramifications. Such a plan would apply only where it would be effective 
and practical to pool and deploy equipment, support and supplies.  
 
A recommendation under consideration by the sub-committee is the development 
of a central coordinating office, similar to that used by IAATO for the Emergency 
and Medical Evacuation Response (EMER). The subcommittee notes various re-
quirements for land-based coordination of oil spill response and will study the im-
plications of such coordination for operators in the Antarctic.  
 
A designated office could coordinate with all other IAATO members for additional 
back-up, response, supplies, and possible evacuation of passengers. The procedure 
would be comparable to the EMER and would allow the vessel and staff to con-
centrate on the problem at hand and be assured that all other member vessels, 
bases and authorities were regularly appraised of the situation and their assistance 
sought as required.  
 
In practice, IAATO member vessels are in regular and ongoing contact to coordi-
nate itineraries, report on local conditions and discuss other matters related to op-
erating in the Antarctic. The contact information for IAATO member vessels (pre-
sented as an appendix to XXII/IP88) is compiled and circulated to members and 
COMNAP. The collection and distribution of program and contact information to 
its members provides IAATO with a self reliant back up and support service. 
 
 
 
 
2.7 Equipment available for oil spill response 
 
The committee will propose recommended equipment for individual ships which 
may be required to manage an oil spill. Consideration is given to equipment al-
 IAATO OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANNING  PAGE 6 
 
ready carried by most vessels. A detailed inventory of all oil spill response kits 
carried by each ship would be held at IAATO and distributed as required.  
 
In addition the sub-committee will research the practicality of storing supplemen-
tary response equipment, at an agreed location, to be used in the event of a major 
oil spill. The option of storing equipment in Punta Arenas, Chile which could be 
air-dropped to a stricken vessel, by an Adventure Network International aircraft,  
will also be included.  
 
 
2.8 Training and Exercises 
 
The Subcommittee recommends that IAATO survey current training of company 
environmental officers and especially vessel masters and crew in oil spill emer-
gency response and develop a set of recommendations. Additionally, some regular 
oil pollution emergency exercises, perhaps in cooperation with a national program, 
would be useful in improving emergency preparedness. 
 
 
2.9 Reporting and monitoring requirements and procedures 
 
Article 8 and Protocol 1 of MARPOL 73/78 requires the Vessel Master to make an 
incident report to the nearest coastal state whenever there is an actual or probable 
discharge of oil into the sea from a vessel. The procedures contained in the Report-
ing Requirements section of the current SOPEP are based on guidelines developed 
by the IMO. Any discharge of oil from a vessel will be recorded in the ship’s Oil 
Spill Log Book.  
 
The Sub-committee recommends the Special Antarctic Appendix to IAATO-
member vessel SOPEPs include a contact list of Antarctic research stations with a 
requirement to contact any national program facility in the area that may be ef-
fected. Additional recommendations on reporting will be developed in consultation 
with COMNAP. The Appendix would also include a regional map with facilities 
clearly indicated. 
 
Further requirements for notification will be elaborated in the Special Antarctic 
Appendix, which shall include notification of Parties and the Committee for Envi-
ronmental Protection as provided for in Annex I, Article 7 and Annex IV, Article 
7. Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency are to be circulated imme-
diately to Parties and to the Committee. 
 
 
2.10 Legal issues with regard to marine pollution 
 
As cruise operators to the Antarctic, the sub-committee believes it is important that 
IAATO and its members be fully aware of legal issues surrounding marine pollu-
 IAATO OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANNING  PAGE 7 
 
tion. Among other issues, the status of the Special Antarctic Appendix and legal 
implications of coordinated response must be studied carefully.  
 
 
3. Fuel Survey 
 
NOTE: This partial survey of some IAATO member vessels is presented for discussion 
only. Please note that refueling of member vessels is done outside the Antarctic 
Treaty Area at ports of departure and none of the tour vessels are involved in trans-
port of bulk fuel to vessels, stations or other facilities within the Antarctic. 
 
 
1. Kapitan Dranitsyn and Kapitan Khlebnikov. 
 
TYPE OF FUEL 
MAX. (mt) 
MIN. (mt) 
IFO 40 
3,200  
300  
MGO 
300  
100 
Lub. Oil 
200  
50  
Outboard gas 
6,000 ltrs 
1,000 ltrs 
 
2.  Shulyekin, Shokalskiy, Multanovskiy, Molchanov 
 
TYPE OF FUEL 
MAX. (mt) 
MIN. (mt) 
MGO 
320  
50 
Lub. Oil 
20  
5  
Outboard gas 
2,000 ltrs 
600 ltrs 
 
3. Hanseatic, Bremen 
 
TYPE OF FUEL 
MIN. (mt) 
MAX. (mt) 
HFO 
480 
519 
MDO 
10 
45  
For lifeboats 
 
500 ltr 
Emergency Diesel Eng.  
1m3 
Outboard Engines 
3 
14 
 
4. Akademik Ioffe, Akademik S. Vavilov 
 
TYPE OF FUEL 
Max. (mt) 
Min. (mt) 
MGO - DMA 
Mobilguard 412 
Gasoline 
1100 
18 
1.8 
60 
1 
0.2 
  
