 
 
 
 
1 
ITEM 11b: RELEVANCE OF DEVELOPMENTS IN THE ARCTIC AND ANTARCTICA 
 
 
 
ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE CANADIAN DELEGATION 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
As noted in the address by the Head of the Norwegian Delegation at 
ATCM XXI in New Zealand, the Arctic Council was inaugurated in 
Ottawa, Canada on September 19, 1996. Members of the Arctic 
Council are the eight countries that have territory north of the 
Arctic Circle. The Arctic Council is a high level forum which was 
established 
to 
provide 
a 
means 
of 
promoting 
cooperation, 
coordination and interaction among the Arctic States with the 
involvement of the Arctic indigenous communities, through their 
Permanent Participant status, and other Arctic inhabitants, on 
common Arctic issues.  In particular, the Arctic Council deals 
with issues of sustainable social and economic development and 
environmental protection. It does not deal with matters related to 
military security. 
 
The Development of Rules of Procedure for the Council as a whole 
and of Terms of Reference for a Sustainable Development Program 
were two of the priority tasks set out in the 1996 Joint 
Communiqué of the Governments on the Establishment of the Arctic 
Council.  Although it has taken some time, and a great deal of 
work, I am pleased to advise you that ad referendum Rules of 
Procedure for the Arctic Council and Terms of Reference for a 
Sustainable Development Program have been completed for adoption 
at the first Arctic Council Ministerial Meeting.  Subject to 
confirmation of final arrangements, the first Arctic Council 
Ministerial Meeting will be hosted by Canada at Iqaluit, Northwest 
Territories, on September 18-19, 1998 at which time future 
activities of the Council will be approved. 
 
In accordance with the Declaration on the Establishment of the 
Arctic Council, the Council oversees and coordinates the programs 
established under the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy 
(AEPS) including the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program 
(AMAP), Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF), Protection 
of the Arctic Marine Environment (PAME), and Emergency Prevention, 
Preparedness and Response (EPPR).  Draft Work/Strategic Plans 
outlining activities for the next two years were presented for 
each of these programs at the most recent meeting of Senior Arctic 
Officials (SAO) in Whitehorse, Yukon from May 9 to 11, 1998.   
 
At this meeting, the SAOs asked PAME to continue to develop the 
Regional Programme of Action for Protection of the Arctic Marine 
Environment from Land-based Sources of Pollution for approval at 
the Ministerial Meeting in 1998, which as you know, is the United 
 
 
 
 
2 
Nations International Year of the Ocean.  In addition, Norway was 
asked to continue the lead in the on-going work to develop (for 
consideration by SAOs) the advancement of an overall and 
complementary plan of action and cooperation in pollution 
prevention and remediation.   
 
These developments related to the environmental protection of the 
north polar ocean and seas have a counterpart in the issues of the 
Southern Ocean that are being discussed at this meeting, also in 
connection with the International Year of the Ocean. 
 
I am pleased also to bring to your attention that Mr. Olli Pahkala 
of Finland has been confirmed as chair of the programme for 
Emergency Prevention, Preparedness and Response (EPPR). 
 
Two major reports on Arctic pollution have now been completed by 
the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme. One is “Arctic 
Pollution Issues: A State of the Arctic Environment Report”, which 
was mentioned by Norway at the last ATCM, and was presented to 
Ministers at the 1997 meeting referred to above, and presented 
also to the UN Special Session on Environment and Development 
later in the year. A copy of this report has now been distributed 
to each delegation. The other is a fully referenced technical 
document “The AMAP Assessment Report”, which will be available 
shortly. These reports are the subject of IP 40, submitted by 
Norway. I believe that the Head of the Norwegian delegation will 
say something about this report in a moment. These reports provide 
information and raise issues of pollution and the dynamics of 
pollution processes in polar regions that will be of interest to 
those concerned with pollution in Antarctica. 
 
At the Whitehorse Meeting last month the SAOs also agreed to the 
creation of a Task Force on Sustainable Development to be chaired 
by Canada.  Proposals for sustainable development projects were 
submitted for further consideration by the United States, Canada 
and two of the Permanent Participants:  the Inuit Circumpolar 
Conference and the Saami Council. 
 
It is imperative that the work already started with respect to the 
degradation of, and threats to, the Arctic environment be 
maintained and strengthened and related to the Sustainable 
Development Program of the Arctic Council.  The Sustainable 
Development Program will also have to address economic, social and 
cultural issues to ensure that those who live in the North, 
especially the indigenous peoples, enjoy the best possible living 
conditions and are able to maintain their cultures and social 
values.  In this regard, the active involvement and participation 
of the Indigenous peoples of the North is instrumental in the 
Council's work.   
 
In order to deal with the threats that affect the safety and well 
 
 
 
 
3 
being of northern populations, it is essential that national 
authorities make active efforts to implement the recommendations 
and 
activities 
of 
the 
Arctic 
Council. 
 
The 
support 
and 
participation of non-Arctic States, and global and regional 
organizations, in the implementation of these recommendations 
should also be welcomed.  Systematic exchange of information on 
policy, scientific and operational developments between the Arctic 
and Antarctic regions is of obvious mutual value. 
 
Further information on the Arctic Council is available on the 
following Website:       http://www.nrc.ca/arctic. 
 
In addition to the developments directly involving the Arctic 
Council, I will note very briefly some other developments in the 
Arctic Regions that have relevance to the Antarctic and the 
concerns of the ATCM. 
• the International Code of Safety for Ships in Polar Waters (Code 
of Polar Navigation) developed by an international committee of 
the International Maritime Organization (IMO) received its 
initial impetus because of safety and environmental requirements 
for Arctic shipping, but has bi-polar relevance, although there 
are of course differences between the two regions. It will 
receive further consideration in the Antarctic context under 
Agenda item 10. 
• Developments 
in 
the 
Arctic 
with 
respect 
to 
achieving 
internationally compatible, practical but effective guidelines 
and procedures for identifying, establishing and reviewing 
environmentally protected areas, as exemplified by the arctic 
Circumpolar Protected Areas Network (CPAN), the evaluation of 
northern Biosphere Reserves and sites for protection of 
migratory birds have relevance to south polar issues of a 
similar kind. These examples contributed to our ATCM Workshop 
here in Tromsø two days ago and will be mentioned under Agenda 
item 7 f. 
 
On the scientific and technical side, delegations may be 
interested that: 
• International and technical arrangements were completed in the 
last year so that the sophisticated mapping satellite, RADARSAT, 
which was initially configured for Arctic regions, can be 
“turned over” and it now can provide first-class imagery of all 
of Antarctica on a basis equal to that available for the Arctic 
and presently used by scientists in Alaska, Canada, Norway and 
Sweden. This improved technical data-gathering capacity will 
help coordinated scientific study of polar regions. 
• Cooperative work continues between the International Arctic 
Science Committee (IASC) and SCAR on the climatic, chemical, 
glaciological and biological response of the respective polar 
regions to global change. An example is the symposium on global 
change in polar regions to be held in Tromsø next August. Recent 
 
 
 
 
4 
world-wide evaluations of the Global Change research programmes 
around the world have emphasized even more the need for 
scientific information from polar regions if we are to 
understand the significant changes that may be happening to our 
planet in the next few decades. 
• In that connection, Mr. Chairman, on behalf of all high-latitude 
scientists 
both 
South 
and 
North, 
I 
should 
note 
the 
foresightedness of the Government of Denmark in establishing and 
providing long-term support for the fundamental research station 
Zackenburg and its basic research programme ZERO on the 
northeast coast of Greenland. Zackenburg is as far as we know in 
the part of the northern hemisphere that has been least affected 
by human activities and is least threatened to be disturbed; 
with good fortune, it can for a long time into the future 
provide an invaluable reference point for circumpolar Arctic 
studies and a very useful northern hemisphere reference for 
Antarctic studies. 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I should mention that both the Arctic and 
the Antarctic are facing new problems and new opportunities 
related to the growth of tourism in polar regions. Several new 
policy and guideline developments in the Arctic in this subject 
may be of interest to Antarctic policies and operations. The two 
regions, although quite different, have much to benefit from 
communication and exchange of information. 
