INTRODUCTION OF NON-NATIVE SPECIES IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA: AN INCREASING PROBLEM
Information Paper presented to the XXII ATCM
Tromso, Norway, May 1998
By IUCN (The World Conservation Union)
In spite of a climate relatively inhospitable to most of the Earth's species, the introduction of alien (i.e non-native) organisms poses an increasing threat in the Antarctic. For instance the introduction of pathogens could have devastating effects on previously unexposed wildlife populations. Acclimatization of introduced plants, animals or micro-organisms could affect ecological integrity. All introductions, even those that may not directly be harmful to natives, detract from Antarctica’s scientific and intrinsic values. Increasing potential for translocations from one Antarctic area to another adds to the problems.
A recent IUCN planning meeting on invasives identified three major processes that are helping the spread and establishment of aliens worldwide. These are: Globalisation of trade, including tourism, degradation of ecosystems, and climate change. The global processes that are putting other countries at increasing risk from the destructive impacts of alien species are also going to affect Antarctica to an increasing extent. Therefore discussion, planning and preventative action is appropriate NOW, while there is still time.
 
INTRODUCTION OF MICRO-ORGANISMS INTO ANTARCTICA
The term micro-organism, as used in this paper, includes but is but not limited to viruses, bacteria, yeasts, fungi, and micro-algae. Any introduction of micro-organisms into the Antarctic environment has several detrimental effects. First there is a potential disturbance at the population level or at the ecosystem level to native micro-organisms. In addition, any introduction affects pristineness and wilderness values as well as scientific values. On a world scale, more than 90% of species diversity is found in the microbial world – hence, micro-organisms are tremendously important in the context of biodiversity. 
Pathogens
Recently, serological evidence of Infectious Bursal Disease Virus (IBDV) was discovered in Adelie and emperor penguins in the vicinity of Australia’s Antarctic Mawson Station ("Nature" 15 May 1997). The biological significance of IBDV in those species is not known at this stage. In poultry it is a serious disease, causing immune deficiency and / or death in chicks. The presence of seroreactors in the population near Mawson station and their absence in the chicks from a remote colony suggests that the introduction is related to human activity. 
In the past, antibodies for Newcastle disease have also been found in Antarctic penguins. Several avian pathogens can contaminate poultry meat or eggs, as well as food products containing these substances. Cooking or freezing does not necessarily kill the pathogen.
The Australian Antarctic Division has already taken practical steps, including recommending that its researchers and visitors not take poultry products into the field, and that they thoroughly clean all footwear, clothing, and field gear before going from one site to another.
In a more general context, SCAR resolution XXIII-18 urges against the rehabilitation of indigenous seals and seabirds, especially penguins from captivity back into the Antarctic Treaty Area or Subantarctic islands. This resolution had been prompted by well meaning attempts to carry out such rehabilitation, raising concerns about the risk of introducing disease. 
Following an offer made and accepted at the XXI ATCM, Australia has agreed to host a meeting on 25-28 August 1998 in Hobart to consider options for monitoring and managing responses to the disease. The workshop will focus on diseases of birds and seals breeding in the Antarctic Treaty Area and will consider both endemic and exotic diseases. It aims to develop a series of recommendations to be presented to the 1999 ATCM. IUCN very much welcomes this initiative by Australia and urges Parties to contribute to the Workshop.
 
INTRODUCTIONS OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS (MACRO-ORGANISMS) INTO THE ANTARCTIC
Pets and houseplants
Recent anecdotal information confirms that pets on stations may include a dog, budgerigars and tropical fish; apparently, even a cat has been noticed. Cats or dogs, even as pets, can damage native wildlife. Pet birds could be vectors for disease. The presence of pot-plants may lead to problems due to the importation of soils - this is especially a concern on ships going in and out of the Antarctic Treaty area, where the requirements to sterilise all soils may not have been applied. Using native growing material may also lead to impacts. For instance a few years ago native mosses were reportedly used as part of the growth medium for vegetables at a government station. 
Strict implementation of Annex II is required. Ships traveling into the Antarctic area may need increased scrutiny for compliance. The presence of alien plants or animals without a permit anywhere in the Antarctic would usefully be one of the issues covered by inspection teams.
"Accidental" introductions
Accidental introductions into the Antarctic Treaty Area have included insects (e.g. cockroaches), invertebrates carried in vegetables, and rats and mice on ships or stations. More surprising, and even more disconcerting, is the increasing evidence of alien organisms found in the "wild" able to survive and reproduce. Of particular concern are grasses and other plants reported growing in the vicinity of several stations on King George Island, and also on continental Antarctica (e.g. near Syowa and Progress stations). Live invertebrates, including earthworms, potworms, mites and fly-larvae were discovered in imported soil discarded by a station in the Schirmayer Oasis. 
Removal of introduced aliens
Art 4 of Annex II makes it clear that no species of animal or plant, not native to the Antarctic Treaty area shall be introduced onto land or ice shelves, or into water in the Antarctic Treaty Area except in accordance with a permit. It is not clear what should happen to alien fauna and flora that are already in the Antarctic without such permit. They are not specifically mentioned, except for dogs (who should all have been removed by 1 April 1994 or at the latest by the time the Protocol came into force). In Annex II, Art 4(4), the first half of the paragraph refers to introductions under permits. The second half of the paragraph states: "Any other plant or animal introduced into the Antarctic Treaty area not native to that area, including any progeny, shall be removed or disposed of, by incineration or by equally effective means, so as to be rendered sterile, unless it is determined that they pose no risk to native flora or fauna." It is not clear whether this refer to all introductions, whenever they took place, or to introductions after 4 October 1991 when the Protocol and Annexes I-IV were adopted and Parties agreed to implement the Protocol on a voluntary basis, or only to those introductions made after 14 January 1998 when the Protocol and the first four annexes entered into force.
Regardless on the exact legal interpretation of Art 4 (4) of Annex II, it seems clear that the spirit of the Protocol would require the removal of introduced non-native plants and animals unless their presence is in accordance with a permit. This should include non-permitted pets and houseplants, but even more importantly, it should include "escaped" alien plants or animals that have been found in the wild. In practice this is likely to be only possible for macro-organisms.
 
INCREASED NEED FOR PREVENTION
If alien organisms manage to establish themselves in the Antarctic, removal will only be possible very locally and only for the larger, visible organisms, like grasses and maybe invertebrates if the medium they are living in can be removed . While elsewhere in the world we have government or local departments of agriculture, forestry, conservation or customs as well as private sector interests that have the organisational capacity, mandate and interest to attempt control and management of alien species, there are no equivalent forces at work in Antarctica. In any case, removal of micro-organisms and pathogens, would be quasi impossible once they have been introduced. This means that the priority needs to be placed firmly on PREVENTION of the introduction of non-native organisms. 
Preventative action will have to include actions taken at points of departure (airports, ports, headquarters where expedition is organised) but will also need to cover the transport of goods and people between Subantarctic islands and Antarctica, and between different areas within Antarctica. 
 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ACTION
The planned Australian workshop to consider options for monitoring and managing responses to diseases of birds and seals breeding in the Antarctic Treaty Area is a much welcome initiative.
In view of the increasing recognition of the risk caused to Antarctic values by the introduction of micro-organisms (including those that are not pathogens) further practical measures need to be identified and implemented to avoid any accidental introductions. The emphasis needs to be on preventative action.
Translocation of pathogens or other non-natives between different areas or sites within the Antarctic needs to be addressed with the same urgency as the issue of introductions into the Antarctic area from elsewhere.
Strict implementation of Annex II is required, and especially the presence of animals or plants on ships visiting or passing through the Antarctic area may need increased attention.
Introduced individuals of non-native animals and plants (i.e. macro-organisms) already present in Antarctica should be removed unless their presence is in accordance with a permit. This should include "escaped" plants or animals, found in the "wild". 
 
Paper prepared by
Dr Maj De Poorter
(IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee member)
11 Okura River Road
RD2 Albany
New Zealand
ph/fx +64 9 4730872
 

