Information Paper presented by Bulgaria 
(Items 15- 16 of the Agenda) 
 
 
 
PLANNED BULGARIAN ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES  AND SCIENTIFIC CO-
OPERATION (1998-2003) 
 
Bulgaria plans to continue and intensify its Antarctic research programme in 
the forthcoming years. The Bulgarian National Programme for Antarctic 
Research is the framework for the organization and co-ordination of the 
future Antarctic campaigns.  
Several scientific project have been presented for aproval to the Programme 
Council and they will be the basis of  the future Bulgarian Antarctic 
Scientific activities. The programme will concentrate on earth and life 
sciences, and also on aspect of human medicine. 
 
EARTH SCIENCES 
 
Title: Geodynamic system: rock-ice-water. Structure, dynamic, 
paleoclimatical and geodynamical features. 
 
Project leader: Dr. Stefan Shanov - Institute of Geology, Bulgarian 
Academy of Science 
Title: Studies on the desintegrated mineral fractions in the Bulgarian 
Beach, South Bay, Livingston Island. 
Project leader: Dr. Oleg Vitov - National Museum of Natural History, 
Bulgarian Academy of Science 
Title: Mineralogical and geochemical studies on rocks in the region of 
the Bulgarian base “St. Kl. Ohridski” (Litogeochemical primary dispersion 
haloes of the elements) 
Project leader: Dr. Nikola Petkov - Bulgarian Antarctic Institute 
Title: Hipergeneous mineragenetic processes in the region of the 
Bulgarian base “St. Kl. Ohridski” 
Project leader: Dr. Zlatil Vergilov - Sofia University 
Title: Stratigraphical, structural and sedimentological studies on the 
sedimentary rocks in the eastern Hurd Peninsula, Livingston Island 
Project leader: Dr. Christo Pimpirev - Sofia University 
Title: Estimation on the balance line of the unnamed glacier close to 
the Bulgarian Antarctic base 
Project leader: Dr. Kroum Veltchev - National Institute of 
Meteorology and Hydrology, Bulgarian Academy of Science 
Title: Studies of  the temporal ice layers in the Perunika Glacier and 
Balkan Plateau, Livingston Island with nuclear physical methods 
Project leader: Dr. Ivan Mandjukov - Sofia University 
Title: Studies of the dynamics in the snow-ice massifs in the 
Livigston Island 
Project leader: Dr. Nikolay Mihnevsky - National Institute of 
Meteorology and Hydrology, Bulgarian Academy of Science 
Title: Magnetic and paleomagnetic studies on rock samples from 
Antarctica 
Project leader: Dr. Vasil Karlukovski - Institute of Geophysics, 
Bulgarian Academy of Science 
 
Title: Seismical studies on the geophysical profiles in the Livingston 
Island 
Project leader: Dr. Alexander Velev - Institute of Geology and 
Geopysics,  
Title: Detail topographical mapping in the region of the Bulgarian 
base 
Project leader: Dr. Dimitar Dimitrov - Central Laboratory of High  
Geodesic, Bulgarian Academy of Science  
 
LIFE SCIENCE 
 
Title: Ecologycal and community peculiarities of epiphytic lichenes 
and their patern of distribution on Livingston Island 
 
Project leader: Dr. Krasimira Staneva - Institute of Botany, Bulgarian 
Academy of Science 
          Title: Studies of the penguin population for persisting viral strains 
 
Project leader: Dr. Stoyan Shishkov - Sofia University 
          Title: Peculiarities of the soil formation in the region of the Bulgarian 
base under the influence of contemporary ecological factors 
 
Project leader: Dr. Maria Sokolovska - Forest Institute, Bulgarian 
Academy of Science 
 
HUMAN MEDICINE 
Title:  Valuation of the bioclimatic risk in the antarctic environment. 
Project leader:  Dr. Zoya Mateeva - Institute of Geography, Bulgarian 
Academy of Science 
 
Scientific co-operation 
 
The Bulgarian base ”St. Kliment Ohridski” was chosen as a GPS point 
within the SCAR 98/GAP 98 campaign and Mr. Mathias Teichart from 
Hanover University was the observer at the base. 
 
At present the Bulgarian Antarctic Programme is implemented in close co-
operation and assistance with the Spanish Antarctic Programme. We are 
planning to extend the existing colaboration through joint scientific projects 
which are agreed to be carried out in the framework of the Bulgarian- 
Spanish Commission for scientific and technical co-operation. 
 
The geological study on the sedimentary rocks in Livingston Island by 
Bulgarian and Korean researchers that started this year will cotinue during 
the next several seasons. 
 
A new scientific project on the Quaternary volcanics in Livingston Island 
between Bulgarian and German geologists is planned for a three year period. 
 
The National Antarctic Programme and the Bulgarian antarctic base on 
Livingston Island are open for fruithful co-operation with scientists from 
other nations  
 
 
 
 
 
 
