Speech by the Norwegian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Knut Vollebæk, 
at the Opening of the 
XXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
Tromsø, 30 May 1998 
 
Madame  Mayor,  Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
On behalf of the Government of Norway, it is a great pleasure for me to welcome 
you all here to Tromsø. We are honoured to host the XXII Antarctic Treaty  
Consultative Meeting just here, in the capital of Northern Norway. I hope you will 
agree with me that the choice of Tromsø as the venue for this meeting is an apt one. 
No other town in Norway is so closely linked with polar exploration and with our 
long traditions as a bipolar nation. These traditions include exploration, whaling 
and sealing, research and mapping in both the Arctic and the Antarctic. Roald 
Amundsen and Fridtjof Nansen, our two best-known polar explorers, and many of 
their Norwegian and foreign colleagues and competitors, have walked the streets of 
Tromsø. This city on the coast of the Arctic Ocean has been the point of departure 
for many a daring expedition. Roald Amundsen, the first explorer to reach the 
South Pole, the first  to sail the Northwest Passage and the first to cross the North 
Pole in an airship, set out from Tromsø seventy years ago to search for the Italian 
explorer Umberto Nobile and his crew. He never returned from that voyage. You 
have probably already seen the statue of him in the harbour looking out over the 
sea. The memory of Umberto Nobile, who survived the crash of his airship, is also 
honoured in Tromsø. 
 
However, our polar history is not the only reason why we have chosen Tromsø for 
this year's consultative meeting. We are proud of this lively town situated at 70 
degrees North, well above the Arctic Circle. If it does not immediately strike you as 
a freezing Arctic town, this is due to the Gulf Stream, which brings warmth to our 
northern shores and makes the land habitable. I think both habitants and guestes 
would like a little more of warmth these days, but it will come.  Actually we like to 
refer to Tromsø as the "Paris of the North" because of its vibrant cultural life and 
many cafés and restaurants. I hope you already have found or will find time for 
some extracurricular exploration of the fascinating things Tromsø has to offer. I see 
from the programme that you have already had an opportunity to acquaint 
yourselves with Tromsø as a modern centre of learning, accommodating our newest 
university, founded in 1968. Many of its scientists are involved in research on 
subjects related to polar areas. This spring the new Polar Environmental Centre has 
been established here, bringing together a number of institutions under one roof for 
environmental and polar research. The Norwegian Polar Institute constitutes the 
core of the centre and is the flagship of this research, embodying our long traditions 
in this field both in the Arctic and Antarctic regions. The institute has made a major 
contribution to the preparations for this meeting, for which I would like to express 
my gratitude. 
 
 
1
I have already used the adjective bipolar to describe Norway's involvement in polar 
affairs.  The reason should be quite clear, since we are gathered here north of the 
Arctic Circle to deliberate Antarctic issues. To Norwegians, the Arctic and the 
Antarctic are two sides of one and the same  coin. To keep before you this 
perspective of bipolarity we are using both the massive  polar bear of the north and  
the elegant penguin of the south as a logo for the XXII Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting. Coming from the opposite ends of the earth, they represent 
the differences between these two polar regions as well as the wonderful variety of 
life which it is our responsibility to safeguard for future generations, be it in the 
Arctic, Antarctic or elsewhere on our shrinking globe. The polar bear and the 
penguin - may they symbolize our joint commitment to the conservation of the 
unique and pristine nature of the polar regions which has such a strong attraction 
for all of us.  
 
In a year’s time we will be celebrating the 40th anniversary of the signing of the 
Antarctic Treaty in 1959. This will be an opportunity for us to assess cooperation 
under the treaty in a long term perspective. Since its inception during the Cold War 
period, the parties have managed to put to one side conflicts over sovereignty 
issues and safeguard Antarctica as a continent of peace and scientific research, and 
to keep it free of military involvement and nuclear weapons. This was a historic, 
unique and enduring achievement to which all parties have held true. The key to 
this achievement lies in Article 4 of the Treaty, which - one might say most 
appropriately in this context - laid on ice disagreements over claims and 
sovereignty. This formula - which was not a solution, but an agreement to disagree 
- has been and remains at the very core of Antarctic diplomacy. Throughout its 
existence Antarctic cooperation has met and survived the challenges posed by 
pressures for resource exploitation. The Convention on the Protection of Seals was 
concluded at an early stage and was followed by the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. It took a major effort to 
negotiate the Convention for Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources, which did 
not enter into force. But then in course of only one year,  the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection was negotiated and signed in Madrid in 1991. Today 
Antarctic cooperation is broadly based on three pillars - peace, science and 
environmental protection. These are the achievements of a continuous cooperative 
process and consensus diplomacy. Of course, the consultative meetings have been 
at the core of this process, and its basis has been the Antarctic Treaty. It is not at all 
surprising that the process  has had its ups and downs. It is more astonishing that it 
has survived so many serious challenges,  and continued to evolve. In preparing for 
the Tromsø meeting we have had before us these longer term perspectives as well 
as future opportunities. 
 
Like so many earlier hosts of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, we have 
been looking for ways to deal with  the question of establishing an Antarctic Treaty 
secretariat on which consensus has so long eluded us. As host to this meeting we 
have experienced the lack of practical support from a permanent secretariat as an 
additional burden. I understand, however, that there is agreement in principle on the 
 
2
need for a permanent secretariat. I sincerely hope that you will take a fresh look at 
this question for  the sake of the Antarctic cooperation, to which we all attach such 
great importance. We believe that the establishment of a permanent secretariat is 
essential both to the functioning of the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole and to 
the implementation of the Environmental Protocol in particular. We are concerned 
that the location question may continue to distract Parties from other key issues. 
The resolution of this issue would be an appropriate step as we approach the 40th 
anniversary of  the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
This is the first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting since the entry into force of 
the Treaty’s Protocol on Environmental Protection. This marks a major 
development of the Antarctic Treaty System, and has brought the negotiation and 
signing of the Madrid Protocol in 1991 to its conclusion. The effective 
implementation of the Protocol is now  the overriding priority. I would like to 
congratulate you on the fine start made by the Committee on Environmental 
Protection at its inaugural meeting here in Tromsø. It is essential that the 
Committee concentrate on its important tasks without delay. With the establishment 
of the Committee, a new, significant and, I hope, dynamic structural element has 
been added to Antarctic cooperation. With the Environmental Protocol now in force 
and the Committee on Environmental Protection having started its work, I feel 
confident that the Tromsø meeting will take its place among the more successful 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings 
 
Norway is firmly committed to Antarctic cooperation, which we see as an 
important contribution to a more stable and better organized world. In view of our 
long-standing research and mapping activities, our territories in the Antarctic, and 
our active participation in most aspects of Antarctic cooperation, Norway thinks it 
has a contribution to make.   
 
We are determined that our role shall continue to be active, constructive and 
supportive of consensus solutions in  questions of importance to the future of the 
Antarctic. This is also why we hope that the Tromsø meeting will mark further 
progress in implementing the aims and principles of the Antarctic Treaty, which for 
so long has served peace, stability and cooperation on the seventh continent.  
 
I am also pleased to note that the agenda of this meeting includes an item dealing 
with the interrelationship of developments in the Arctic and the Antarctic. The 
history of international cooperation in the Antarctic is quite different from that in 
the Arctic region.  Cooperation in Antarctica has a long history, whereas 
multilateral cooperation in the Arctic region is of recent date. Arctic cooperation  
first started with the historic Rovaniemi process and was further formalised in 1996 
with the establishment of the Arctic Council. Since 1993 we have also been 
successfully developing the Barents cooperation with the Nordic countries, Russia 
and the EU as direct participants.  I just arrived from Murmansk and North-West 
Russia yesterday.  Earlier this week we signed an agreement with Russia that will 
open up for an important cooperation in the field of handling nuclear waste. 
 
3
 
I see that you are leaving for Svalbard this evening.  I am sure you will be greatly 
impressed by your journey to this northernmost Arctic region of Norway. 
 
The Svalbard archipelago is among the most accessible Arctic areas in the world, 
not only because of climate and geography, but also by virtue of the principles of 
equal treatment and access accorded to nationals of the parties to the Spitsbergen 
Treaty of 1920. The archipelago of Svalbard therefore offers unique opportunities 
for research on a wide variety of subjects related to the Arctic. Over the years 
scientists from a number of countries have done extensive work on these islands, 
and every year they are visited by a large number of scientific expeditions. The 
Norwegian Polar Institute has concentrated the main part of its research activities 
on the archipelago, and Norwegian universities and other research institutes are also 
active here. 
 
One important reason why Norway was granted sovereignty over Svalbard 
following World War I was the prevailing desire to keep the archipelago outside 
great power rivalry. The Spitsbergen Treaty prohibits the establishment of naval 
bases and the use of the archipelago for warlike purposes. In accordance with the 
provisions of the Treaty, Norway's overriding objectives are the maintenance of 
peace and stability in the area, and the orderly development of economic activities 
while preserving the unique environment of the region. 
 
If some of the clauses of the Spitsbergen Treaty remind you of the Antarctic Treaty, 
this is because it served in many ways as a model for the latter.  
 
Today the unique importance of the polar regions for life on earth is widely 
recognized. They play a key role in the development of the global climate, as the 
cooling system for the global weather machine and as the pumping station for water 
circulation in the oceans. We can read the history of the world climate in the polar 
ice of the Arctic and the Antarctic. Research in both regions is of fundamental 
importance to the understanding of our common physical environment. With all 
due respect to the members of this audience, I am not sure that even our scientists 
fully comprehend the overwhelming dimensions of Antarctica, the world's coldest, 
driest, highest and most icebound continent. We may find it difficult to accept the 
frightening calculation that if all the ice in Antarctica were to melt, the sea level 
would rise 70 meters and flood most of the larger cities of the world. On the other 
hand, a thirsty world may take comfort in the fact that the ice in Antarctica 
constitutes three-quarters of all fresh water, and the amount of ice calved each year 
exceeds the total annual consumption of water throughout the world. I have been 
told that one iceberg alone could supply a city like Los Angeles with fresh water 
for a thousand years. Given these facts, it is easy to see the vital importance of 
research and cooperation in Antarctica, and the wide perspectives this opens up. In 
the future, cooperation  and new technology may allow new research projects on an 
unprecedentedly large scale.  
 
 
4
 
5
We can safely predict that the next century will increase even further the 
importance of Antarctica to life on our planet. However, we must also be prepared 
for scenarios which are less desirable. A growing world population, limited space, 
scarce water, food and other resources may put greater pressure on Antarctica and 
the Southern Ocean area. This underlines the importance of having in place 
efficient regimes for the sustainable management of living resources and for the 
protection of the unique environment of the Antarctic. The Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the Environmental 
Protocol represent historic achievements. It is of the utmost importance that we 
have the will and the capacity to make them work in practice. We have before us 
the example from the Southern Ocean of overfishing of the Patagonian toothfish, 
which is threatening to decimate this species, a fate that befell the great whales 
some decades ago. I hope we shall have learnt from history, and act in time to save 
the Patagonian toothfish and other species and ensure that resource utilization takes 
place only in a sustainable manner in conformity with international management 
regimes. 
 
Looking ahead, I am confident that our Antarctic Treaty System of cooperation will 
successfully meet future challenges as it has in the past. However, we should not 
neglect any possibility of strengthening and furthering our cooperation, basing 
ourselves on the long-standing tradition of seeking solutions through consensus. 
And in this endeavour we should not underestimate the importance of securing 
public understanding and support. Antarctic affairs cannot be the exclusive domain 
of scientists and other experts. The importance of Antarctica to everyday life and to 
the future of mankind makes it essential that the public as a whole should have an 
informed basis for making judgements about what is at stake in research and 
cooperation on the seventh continent. That is why it is important to secure openness 
and transparency in Antarctic affairs. Antarctic cooperation has much to gain from 
greater interest on the part of an informed public. In my view, Antarctic 
cooperation also deserves greater attention from the media. It might be well worth 
time and resources for Antarctic Consultative Treaty Meetings to look for ways and 
means of using modern information technology, to increase the flow of information 
and stimulate public interest in Antarctic affairs. 
 
Just a hundred years ago, Antarctica was largely unknown territory. Today, more 
than twenty-five nations are engaged in scientific research on this vast continent, 
and more than one million books have been written about the polar regions. 
Nevertheless, Antarctica is still the part of the world we know least about. There 
are plenty of unrevealed secrets and huge areas of unexploited land in Antarctica 
for future generations to explore.  
 
I hope that this XXII Consultative Meeting will build on the best traditions in the 
history of Antarctic cooperation. I wish you every success in your deliberations on 
the many important tasks on the agenda. 
 
 
