Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/IP66
May, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 14

"Minor or Transitory
Impact" Criterion for
EIA in Different
Regions ...

Submitted by
Russia

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Application of the «minor or transitory impact» 
criterion for EIA in different regions of Antarctica

After the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty has come now into force, this geographical region presents a vast 
virgin territory including several tens restricted in area, abandoned or 
populated regions with their own environment quite different from the 
pristine territory. According to Annex to the Protocol, Articles 2 and 3, 
the «minor or transitory impact» (MTI) criterion is a key criterion for 
determining the need for Initial Environmental Evaluation or 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation. It is obvious that the same 
type of activity produces different environmental damage in intact and in 
impact regions that were repeatedly exposed to such influence. It appears 
to be advisable to pay attention to the typical features of these regions 
and discuss the «minor or transitory impact» criterion used for the 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).

1. Impact nature (structure and essence)

In our opinion for successful identification of the «minor or 
transitory impact» criterion, adequately reflecting the extent of 
anthropogenic disturbance introduced to natural systems, it is important 
to take into account that:
- any consequence of anthropogenic influence can be considered as 
a result of interaction between human activity and natural system 
objects.
- the «minor or transitory impact» criterion is not abstract. Its 
absolute value (for example the numerical value of duration of the 
consequence) is determined for each specific case separately and should 
be within the corresponding scale range of the specific system properties 
exposed to influence.

Hence the specific value of «minor or transitory impact» will 
depend both on the character of influence and on the properties of the 
system exposed to influence.
Let us consider in more detail each of the premises.

1.1. A relative character of the «minor or transitory impact» 
criterion.

The ability of the system to withstand the external influence is 
characterized by the preservation of the system own parameters and its 
capability for recovery during a definite time interval. Different natural 
systems have different internal capabilities. Thus, influence of the same 
magnitude can be insignificant for one system and destructive for 
another. The flexibility of the system depends on its dynamic character 
and duration of the natural cycle.

Living nature objects: animals, plants and microorganisms are 
capable to recover their numbers and the range in case of a partial loss 
during a time interval comparable with the period of duration of
anthropogenic disturbance, i.e. human activity affecting natural
Antarctic systems. The time required for recovery will depend on the
reproductive abilities of the organisms and ecosystems on the whole.
Thus, all living nature objects belong to the category of dynamic objects.

The time of existence of non-living  nature objects is governed by
annual and geological cycles of development. By their dynamic character
and hence recovery ability, these objects can be subdivided into two
groups:
    -   Mobile (dynamic) objects, such as glaciers, firn fields and
lake systems are capable of recovery.
    -   Immobile (static) objects. Such objects as rock or
permafrost have their own cycles of development measured at the
geological time scale. The time required for recovery of local
damage of such objects exceeds by duration the time of influence
and even the time of human being existence as a species in
general to an extent that from the stand point of the latter the
geological objects are considered as static. In other words, their
recovery requires infinite time at historical chronology scales.
The scale of processes and duration of a geological cycle are
incomparable with the magnitude of potential human
development in the Antarctic. Nevertheless it is necessary to
take into account a possible damage for future research
activities, which may be carried out in the given region and
whose results can be distorted due to anthropogenic background
not recorded in respective documents.

Thus, it is important to stress that any scale for defining the «minor
or transitory impact» criterion proposed irrespective of a specific
exposed object/system is senseless.

1.2.  Concept of interaction of objects

With regard to the nature of genesis of impact, interaction between
man and natural Antarctic systems should be considered. It is important
to note that by character they can be subdivided into two drastically
differing categories:

I.      Similar to natural processes;
II.     Alien to natural processes.

The first category includes, for example, such types of
anthropogenic influence as:
    -   visual influence (natural analogue - large animals);
    -   mechanical influence on environment (analogues - erosion,
ground displacement as a result of glacier flow, etc.).
    -   thermal, electromagnetic and nutrient pollution (analogues -
climatic, geophysical and biological processes of local
importance),
    -   noise influence (analogues - noise induced by wind, sea
surf, animal cries);
    -   withdrawal of animals, plants or abiotic samples (analogue
- natural loss).
To determine the adequacy of natural and anthropogenic influences is the goal of scientists. Such activity can be normalized by the scale of influences corresponding to the natural processes and interactions.

The second category includes new in principle impacts for the natural system that do not have analogues qualitatively changing the environment. They are as follows:
- pollution by synthetic substance and spreading of alien material in the environment;
- introduction of alien biological objects (non-local animals, plants and microorganisms);

Such types of influence can disturb the equilibrium of the system owing to the absence of evolutionary formed adaptation mechanisms;

The second group of influence is most dangerous for natural systems since they are subjected to true cumulation, i.e. they are capable to accumulate in the environment continuing their influence even if the activity producing them has ended. In practice it means that any intact territory (they are still many in the Antarctic) exposed to alien influence loses forever its initial properties. The equilibrium resulting from the process of interaction in this case will bring the system to a qualitatively different level. Then could we consider that the initial (virgin) system has been damaged?

2.    Damage as an accompanying factor

The notion of damage should be very seriously discussed and be made most specific before the Annex on Responsibility is adopted. What is the environmental damage in the Antarctic? From a certain standpoint, this notion can include any environmental man-made changes during the human presence in Antarctica including forced environmental transformation caused by the need for practical activity. No activities can be carried out without it. Forced damage is «an inevitable harm» and is a peculiar payment for study and exploration of Antarctica.

Practical activity by definition contains an environmental transformation component. Its result in addition to an invaluable scientific and logistical experience is the environmental awareness of the last continent. The Protocol on Environmental Protection is also a result of this activity and experience gained. It was adopted almost after a century long man presence in the Antarctic regulating his practical activity.

It is important to note that in the nature protection principles of the Protocol (Article 3, para. 1) the significance of Antarctica as a region of scientific studies (including inherent practical activity) is one of the main factors taken into consideration in planning and implementing any activity in the Antarctic.

The damage inflicted to the initial environment is a payment for experience and knowledge gained in the Antarctic environment.
3. Features of the Antarctic regions

The territories of the Antarctic stations and adjacent regions have been in the main so transformed that they could never serve as reference virgin nature of the continent.

It follows that the MTI criterion values for the impact and intact regions should differ significantly. In view of the fact mentioned above the work planned in the intact region can be assessed as «having less than MTI» if it completely excludes the influence, which we include to the second category.

In our opinion it is advisable to create the Register of Antarctic territories where all types of activities should be given in the chronological order with the indication of routes, description of the types of work and potential damage. This Register will help to determine the most clean (intact) and polluted (impact) regions of Antarctica with the aim of their more sustainable use and will help to preserve the intact territories for future science.

For the purpose of more standard approach to defining the «minor or transitory impact» criterion in planning activity in Antarctica we propose to identify the following groups of regions differing in the extent of environmental transformation (environmental damage caused):

a) Irreversibly disturbed regions (ITR)
  - Territories of operating and abandoned stations and seasonal bases including the regions of servicing their activities.

Depending on the age and size of the station as well as on the environmental damage caused, the area of the region can be up to several square kilometers. The environment of these regions has been changed as a result of multiyear man activity and has lost its pristine character forever. If conservation has been properly done and excludes the possibility of causing further damage artificial landscape recultivation of such regions is not advisable due to the following reasons:
  - they are part of the historical process of man/environment interaction and have thus a certain historical value;
  - they have already been sufficiently studied, explored and adapted for man habitation;
  - in the ITR territory a dynamic equilibrium in interaction with the environment has set in;
  - measures for reconstruction of the disturbed landscape will induce additional environmental impact and the inflicted damage can exceed the existing levels;
  - reconstruction of the initial landscape may lead in the future to errors during research work.

Some regions of the former intense human activity, which we refer to the ITR category, have been already included to the regions of historical memorials, for example, the Historic Site at the former whaling base on Deception Island

The ITR are the regions of man habitation with the required
environment including the whole infrastructure. Knowledge stored in the ITR can serve as a basis for further studies. Within the ITR boundaries, there should be a program of monitoring the environmental impact and the region management plan where all activity will be regulated. The adopted norms and rules regulate any activity within the ITR.

The activity carried out in the ITR territory has resulted in adaptation of the environmental components to certain types of influence and a dynamic equilibrium was formed in a conventionally closed system man-ITR environment. The environmental components of such regions have attained stability to certain types of influence and continuation of similar activity within this system will not cause additional damage.

The notion damage applicable to this category of the Antarctic regions should mean an additional damage and be applied in those cases when a new adverse influence either significantly exceeds the existing levels or qualitatively differs from the already existing types of influence.

b) Reversibly transformed regions (RTR)
- regions of field work.
- territories along the routes of sledge-tractor traverses.
- regions of airborne and shipborne logistics operations beyond the station territories.
- buffer zones between the ITR and a conventionally intact region (up to 100 km long).

These are boundary (separating) regions between the regions of intense human activity and the intact regions. Any activity conducted here requires a preliminary EIA. The application of the notion damage is possible under the conditions similar to ITR.

c) Conventionally intact regions (CIR)
- Other regions of Antarctica (the territories situated outside the buffer zone).

These regions present the actual value of Antarctica due to their pristine (virgin) character and purity. The access to them should be strictly regulated and the values of the «minor or transitory impact» criterion should be determined for all types of assumed influence.

Conclusion

The notion «minor or transitory impact» is of a relative character and for determining its absolute value the following should be taken into account:
- an individual recovery ability of natural systems and objects, including duration of the natural cycle of development and the range of natural fluctuations;
- a character of anthropogenic influence regarding its similarity with the natural processes;
- the impact background of the region.

The values of the «minor or transitory impact» criterion and the requirements for justifying any activity for three indicated types of region should be different. Since the main activity is currently centered in the ITR, a more simplified EIA procedure for these regions appears economically reasonable not contradicting the main principles of the Protocol.

The main issues to be addressed in the near future are as follows:
- to assess damage which has already been caused to Antarctic environment;
- to make a list of the regions by the degree of impact;
- to develop the mitigation measures for further activity in the Antarctic.
