 
ANTARCTIC TREATY 
XXII CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT TO A PLENARY SESSION 
 
BY THE WORLD METEORIOLOGICAL ORGANISATION (WMO)  
IN RELATION TO ARTICLE III (2) OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
 
ATCM-XXII, TROMSO, NORWAY, 25 MAY – 5 JUNE 1998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agenda item 5b  
Submitted by WMO 
 
 
XXII ATCM/IP….. 
May, 1998 
Original:  English 
 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF WMO  
 
The United Nations was established in the aftermath of a devastating war to help stabilise international 
relations and give peace a more secure foundation. The United Nations, however became much more than 
peace-keeper. Often without attracting attention, the United Nations and its agencies are engaged in a vast 
array of work that touches every aspect of people’s lives around the world. The Convention of the World 
Meteorological Organization came into force in March 1950, transforming the previous non-governmental 
International Meteorological Organisation, which had existed since 1873, into the intergovernmental 
WMO which now serves as a Specialised Agency of the United Nations. 
 
WMO’s major activity, that of providing the international framework for meteorological observations and 
data exchange, has contributed decisively to the remarkable success story of weather forecasting. By 
providing the international framework for meteorological observations and data exchange, WMO has 
contributed to the remarkable improvement in weather forecasting. Weather forecasting has been able to 
evolve from a state in the early 1950’s, of being mostly art strengthened by science to its current status of 
being predominantly science, reliant on the steadily improving global numerical weather analysis and 
prediction models. 
 
In the last 45 years, much has been accomplished by WMO and its Members. For example, the beginnings 
of the Global Ozone Observing System date back to 1957. The measurements so painstakingly coordinated 
and standardised under the auspices of WMO were, just 30 years later, of utmost relevance to countries 
that, in 1987, signed the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. 
 
Through World Weather Watch (WWW) - a global system for the collection, analysis of weather and other 
environmental information - WMO has made a unique contribution to international cooperation. There has 
never been a better world-wide operational system similar to the WWW to which every country in the 
world contributes, every day of the year for the common good.  
 
In collaboration with the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), WMO has played a pioneering 
role in the global coordination of geophysical and meteorological experiments. Thus it may claim credit for 
laying down the operational foundations for the world-wide monitoring of the chemical composition of the 
atmosphere and of climatic change. These matters are assuming an even greater priority. 
 
The present world-wide concern about climate change has its roots in the changing chemical composition 
of the atmosphere. Measurements of the changes taking place are essential to diagnose these trends and 
their likely impacts and the sources of the polluting substances. The basic world-wide network for these 
observations is the Global Atmosphere Watch of WMO, initiated in 1989 to coordinate two long-standing 
measurement programmes: the Global Ozone Observing System and the Background Air Pollution 
Monitoring Network (BAPMON). These activities are providing vital information on the chemical and 
physical constituents and properties of the global atmosphere including the dispersion, transport, chemical 
transformation and deposition of atmospheric pollutants over land and sea, among other things. 
 
The World Meteorological Organization spearheaded the campaign on the potential effects of climate 
change such as global warming and sea level rise. The WMO was instrumental in the negotiations for a UN 
Convention on Climate Change, which was signed during the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit in 1992 and 
became international law in 1994. WMO and three other international organizations established the Global 
Climate Observing System (GCOS) which is in its planning stage. GCOS was formed to meet long-term 
meteorological observational requirements for a more enhanced description of the earth’s climate system, 
as envisaged by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), and its 
Agenda 21. GCOS is taking a comprehensive view towards these requirements, and will of necessity 
include observations from the ocean, in concert with the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS), in 
addition to the current operational meteorological observational programme of WMO.  
 
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE 
 
The World Meteorological Organization is a specialised agency of the United Nations, consisting of some 
160 Member States and Territories. It was created : 
To facilitate world-wide cooperation in the establishment of networks of stations for the making of 
meteorological observations as well as hydrological and other geophysical observations related to 
meteorology, and to promote the establishment and maintenance of systems for the rapid exchange of 
meteorological and related services; 
To promote the establishment and maintenance of systems for the rapid exchange of meteorological and 
related information; 
To promote standardisation of meteorological and related observations and to ensure the uniform 
publication of observations and statistics; 
To further the application of meteorology to aviation, shipping, water problems, agriculture and other 
human activities; 
To promote activities in operational hydrology and to further close cooperation between Meteorological 
and Hydrological Services; and 
To encourage research and training in meteorology and, as appropriate, in related fields and to assist in 
coordinating the international aspects of such research and training. 
 
World Meteorological Congress  
 
The World Meteorological Congress is the supreme body of WMO. It brings together the delegates of all 
Members once every four years to determine general policies for the fulfilment of the purposes of the 
Organization. It approves the Long-term Plan, authorises maximum expenditures for the following four-
year financial period, and adopts Technical Regulations relating to international meteorological and 
hydrological practice. Congress elects the President and Vice-Presidents of the Organization and members 
of the Executive Council (other than the presidents of the regional associations) and appoints the Secretary-
General. The 12th WMO Congress was held in Geneva in 1995 when Dr. John W. Zillman, Permanent 
Representative of Australia, was elected President of WMO. 
 
 
 
 
WMO Executive Council 
 
WMO EC is composed of 36 directors of national Meteorological or Hydrological Services. It meets at 
least once a year to conduct the activities of the Organization, to implement the decisions taken by its 
Members in Congress and to study and make recommendations on any matter affecting international 
meteorology and related activities of the Organization. The 50th session of WMO EC will be held in 
Geneva from 16 to 26 June 1998. 
 
WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology (WMO EC-WGAM) 
 
Research into many aspects of Antarctic climatology has been initiated by a number of international 
bodies. WMO and ICSU jointly initiated the World Climate Research Programme which has a significant 
Antarctic component, particularly with respect to sea ice as a climate “memory” and feedback system. The 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) extended the World Ocean Circulation Experiment 
(WOCE) in recent years to include atmosphere-ice-ocean interactions in high southern latitudes. WMO EC 
welcomed the invitation of IOC to establish closer links between WMO and IOC in the development of the 
coordinated plans for research and monitoring in the Southern Ocean. 
 
In carrying out its Antarctic activities, WMO collaborates with other international organizations, in 
particular with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), Scientific Committee for Antarctic 
Research (SCAR), Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP). This cooperation 
will be continued to ensure a coordinated and cost effective implementation of the scientific and technical 
programs in Antarctica.  
 
The EC-WGAM operates under clear terms of reference from the Executive Council of the World 
Meteorological Organization. The WGAM is composed of members nominated by the permanent 
representatives of countries that are a party to the Antarctic Treaty, and experts designated by permanent 
representatives of Members that have not yet acceded to the Antarctic Treaty but have active 
meteorological programmes in Antarctica. The WGAM has a role to provide suitable information on 
meteorological activities in Antarctica to the WMO Executive Council. 
 
Considering that there is a need for meteorological and other environmental data from Antarctica for the 
full implementation of the World Weather Watch and monitoring of climate change and depletion of the 
ozone layer over the Antarctic. The WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology 
(WMO EC-WGAM) is maintained with the following terms of reference: 
To promote the execution of the resolutions of Congress and the Executive Council in the area from 60oS 
to 90oS; 
To provide guidance in the development of the relevant parts of the WMO Long-term Plan; 
To coordinate programs of surface and upper-air meteorological observations in the Antarctic; 
To develop the most appropriate schemes for collection and dissemination of meteorological data for 
operational purposes; 
To develop and recommend regional coding practices which are to be applied in the Antarctic; 
To study problems relating to instruments and methods of observation peculiar to the Antarctic; 
To discuss questions and make recommendations on meteorological research and operations related to the 
Antarctic; 
To maintain active contacts with other groups or bodies such as SCAR, JSC, COMNAP, IOC, WMO’s 
technical commissions, etc., with regard to aspects of Antarctic meteorology of particular relevance to their 
functions; 
To provide, as necessary, to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, through its Chairman or other 
representative, information on meteorological activities in Antarctica. 
 
The WMO Executive Council requires its Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology to be able to provide 
suitable advice on future policy with respect to research, aircraft and shipping operations in Antarctica and 
the Southern Ocean. 
 
The 6th session of the WMO EC-WGAM was held 1-5 November 1993 in Geneva. During the inter-
sessional period, activities of the WMO EC Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology are mainly carried 
out by correspondence and Email. The chairman of the WMO EC-WGAM has maintained close 
cooperation with other international organizations, and bodies related to the Antarctic, through active 
participation in the meetings of SCAR, COMNAP and ATCM, and the presentation of the main aspects of 
the WMO Antarctic activities to those meetings. 
 
WMO, SCAR, the Australian Bureau of Meteorology, BAS, AMS and AMOS are to sponsor of an 
International Symposium on Operational Weather Forecasting in Antarctica to be held in Hobart 31 August 
– 3 September 1998. This will be followed by the 7th session of WMO EC-WGAM to be held in Hobart 7 
– 11 September 1998. 
 
Resolution 40 of the 12th WMO Congress in 1995   
 
A hallmark of the WMO activities is the free and unrestricted exchange of meteorological data and 
information products. Such free exchange of meteorological data and products is essential to the effective 
and efficient provision of meteorological services to protect life and property. The availability of weather 
forecasts and climate prediction is made possible by National Meteorological and Hydrological Services 
through this international free exchange of data and information, coordinated by WMO. 
 
It is appropriate to say that Resolution 40 at the 12th WMO Congress in 1995 - “WMO Policy and Practice 
for the Exchange of Meteorological and Related Data and Products, including Guidelines and 
Relationships in Commercial Meteorological Activities” reasserted the traditional position of WMO on this 
matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXV Meeting of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) 
 
WMO is to send a representative to participate in the XXV session of SCAR, in Concepcion, Chile, 20-31 
July 1998. Of interest to ATCM are the five recommendations drafted by the Physics and Chemistry of the 
Atmosphere (PACA) Working Group at XXIV SCAR, with assistance from WMO, namely....... 
 
Ship-borne meteorological observations. 
 
Noting the value of observations from all Antarctic shipping for Antarctic and global operational 
meteorological analyses; WMO urges National Operators to ensure that basic meteorological observations 
from research vessels are inserted at least six-hourly into the WMO Global Telecommunications System. 
 
Automatic weather stations. 
 
Noting that regular real-time data from the interior of Antarctica are essential for Antarctic and global 
analyses and research: WMO requests that national operators of Automated Geophysical Observatories 
(AGOs) and Automatic Weather Stations ensure that basic and regular meteorological observations are 
inserted at least three-hourly into the Global Telecommunications System via over-passing polar orbiting 
satellites. 
 
Upper air soundings. 
 
Noting the supreme importance of upper air observations from Antarctic in general, and the interior of the 
continent in particular now that only the Station at South Pole remains in operation; WMO requests 
National Operators to consider establishing a radiosonde program when any new station is built more than 
250 km from an existing station with an upper atmosphere sounding routine.   
 
Southern Oscillation and El Nino. 
 
Noting the substantial impact of the Southern Oscillation and El Nino phenomena on the climate of West 
Antarctica; WMO recommends that National Operators consider deploying Automatic Weather Stations on 
West Antarctica and drifting buoys in the Pacific Sector of the Southern Oceans where there is a huge data 
void. 
 
WMO Global Telecommunications System. 
 
Noting the progress being made by the WMO Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology in conjunction 
with the WMO Working Group on Antarctic Telecommunications; WMO recommends that National 
Operators collaborate to rectify the problems with the Global Telecommunications System identified by the 
SCAR FROST project. 
