Antarctic Treaty 
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique 
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico 
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике 
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/IP2
April, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 7f

Wilderness and 
Aesthetic Values in 
Antarctica

Submitted by
United Kingdom
(no text to extract)
PAPER PREPARED BY:

ROSAMUNDE CODLING
OPEN UNIVERSITY, UNITED KINGDOM
Wilderness and aesthetic values in Antarctica page 1

WILDERNESS AND AESTHETIC VALUES IN ANTARCTICA
AN INFORMATION PAPER BY ROSAMUNDE CODLING

'The protection of the Antarctic environment ... and the intrinsic value of 
Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values ... shall be fund .mental 
considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic treaty 
area.' 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3 (1).

'Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical 
framework,... areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.'
Annex V to the Protocol, Area Protection and Management, Article 3.

Introduction

Article 3 (1) of the Protocol states that protection of the wilderness and aesthetic values 
of Antarctica is one of the Protocol's fundamental objectives. Article 3 of Annex V requires 
Parties to give effect to this provision by designating areas within a systematic 
framework. Neither the Protocol nor Annex V elaborate on what is meant by the 
wilderness and aesthetic values of Antarctica, or on the systematic environmental-
geographical framework.

Wilderness and aesthetic values are often assumed to be notoriously subjective - one 
person's wilderness may be something to enjoy while to another wilderness may be 
frightening; one person's aesthetic heaven may be another's hell. The author's interest 
is to see to what extent it is possible to give an objective basis to the judgements that 
will be required when giving effect to Article 3 (2) (g). This paper sets out some 
fundamental considerations, based on a desk study and field work undertaken in the 
1996-97 season with the British Antarctic Survey.

Wilderness and aesthetic values

The Protocol and Annex V always use both terms - wilderness and aesthetic - together. 
There is no guidance as to whether the intention was a portmanteau term or whether 
they were to be considered as having different meanings. Outside Antarctica, however, 
they have come to have different meanings and it seems preferable to proceed 
accordingly.

Annex V, Article 3 (2) speaks of 'a ... framework' for the identification of widely differing
Wilderness and aesthetic values in Antarctica page 2

values, studied by a number of diverse disciplines (Article 3 (2) (a)-(i)). It is assumed 
that this provision for a single framework was not intended to be prescriptive and the 
outcome will be a composite of frameworks specifically designed for the different 
purposes set out in the sub-paragraphs of Article 3 (2).

Wilderness

Wilderness is a designator of land use, rather than a description of the land itself. It 
conveys no image of the character of the landscape. Wilderness is as applicable to rain 
forest or sand desert as it is to a mountain range or the inland ice of Antarctica. In 
connection with environmental planning, however, wilderness has come to have certain 
clear connotations relating to the absence of motorised transport and of permanent 
habitation. Translated into terms relevant to the Antarctic the following appears to be a 
reasonable working definition of wilderness:

Any part of the Antarctic in which neither permanent habitation nor any other 
permanent evidence of present or past human presence is visible.

Such a definition would allow field work to be pursued, using motorised transport and 
temporary accommodation, without prejudice to the longer term wilderness state of the 
area in which the fieldwork was done. While relatively simple and objective in its 
application this definition requires that any area which does not count as wilderness (eg 
scientific stations) be identified. Such identification would be based primarily on visibility 
at ground level, with further considerations given to the extent of noise and access 
routes.

The size of each area will differ greatly, mainly due to ground relief. At the simplest level, 
a study related to a base would result in a plan which answered the question: ‘How far 
away do I have to go away from this base to be unaware of human presence?’

Aesthetic values

The question implicitly posed by Annex V, Article 3 is whether it is possible to 
distinguish between areas of lesser or greater ( ‘outstanding’ ) aesthetic value. One 
thing is clear: it is necessary to compare ‘like with like’. It would be virtually impossible to 
distinguish between the values represented by areas of totally different character, for 
example the Transantarctic Mountains, the Ross Ice Shelf and the South Shetland 
Islands. To attempt to do so would be unsystematic - a way of proceeding which is 
forbidden by the requirement to identify areas of outstanding aesthetic value ‘within a
Wilderness and aesthtic values in Antarctica page 3

systematic environmental-geographical framework'.

The fieldwork was planned to develop a framework tailored to the need to accord value,
whether less or more, to Antarctic landscapes of similar character - which for this purpose
includes seascape, 'terrestrial' scape and ice-scape, and any combination of them. Such
a framework would, in the end, lead to a 'landscape assessment' - a description of the
whole of Antarctica at a level of detail which enable landscapes with a similar character to
be distinguished and categorised. Article 12 (1) (j) of the Protocol, describing the
functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection, requires the Committee to
provide advice on: 'the state of the Antarctic environment'. Whilst landscape
assessment stands in its own right, it should also be part of this collation of material to
provide the wider canvas into which studies, such as site-specific Environmental Impact
Assessments (EIAs, the subject of Annex I of the Protocol) may be fitted.

Many factors contribute to the concept called 'landscape'. In the Antarctic, inputs such
as the geology and glaciology of an area have to be considered, but there are also less
tangible factors such as historical connotations. It appears unlikely that designation will
ever be based on 'aesthetic values' alone. Lengthy definitions of concepts such as
'beauty' would serve no purpose, as it is believed that other, more objective factors
(such as presence of a variety of landscape features) would provide a basis to enable
comparisons to be fairly made.

Methodology

Various techniques have been developed to carry out landscape assessment, and the
procedure that was tested in the field is a composite method specifically adapted for
Antarctic use. Initially, the main physical features are described, before consideration of
landscape attributes such as scale ( ranging from 'intimate' to 'vast' ) and enclosure
( 'confined' to 'exposed' ). These attributes can be judged in a rational, if not wholly
objective way. A further stage of fieldwork covered perceptions/impressions, including
aspects such as diversity ( 'uniform' to 'complex' ) and rarity ( 'predominant' to 'unique' ).
These are more subjective, and as responses are likely to vary, the ideal is for survey
work to be carried out by more than one person.

The methodology of landscape assessment is reasonably clear from experience
elsewhere in the world - although it has never been applied to such a vast area as
Antarctica - and is intended to provide for objectivity in the process of description,
