Antarctic Treaty 
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/IP69
May, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 7a

Chinese Antarctic 
Environmental 
Report 
1997/1998 
Season

Submitted by
China
C
E
L
E
E
Chinese Antarctic Environmental Report
1997/1998 Season

Zhongshan Station

1. Environmental Level
a). The station was sensibly designed and all the goods are placed rationally. There is a dump in the station area, and the useful materials are sorted out and then relocated intentionally. The inflammable and unharmful solid waste is incinerated regularly and timely for avoiding piling for a time. The other solid waste is to be placed at the certain site before being removed to China by ship at a proper time. The station environmental officer handles the waste, which would be poisonous to the environment, and all the other station staff follows the environmental officer's advice and participates in the waste treatment in turn.

b). Each Saturday is designated as the day of clean off. On Saturday, all the station members are to do the cleaning as arranged by station leader and environmental officer. The living building, mechanic house, powerhouse, laboratories and station surroundings are all to be touched. A daily cleaning rule is in function since the inception of the station, which means that every day one person is due to do the cleaning covering the inside of all the buildings.

2. Environment Protection Project

During the 97/98 season, three specialists have set up a new sewage treatment system for 24 days. Before installation of the system, an IEE and CEE were made and it is confirmed that the project's impact upon the environment, such as necessary transporting, exercising construction and the noise, etc., is little and only for a limited period of time. And those influences arising from the installation would be eliminated as it came to the end.

The system functioning device is as the followings: Anaerobic bacteria are to be introduced into the warming tank where station sewage is stored for treating and then these bacteria are to reproduce while eating the feculence at the meantime. The purification procedure is divided into three stages. It has been monitored and proved that the treated water has reached the international standard.

New Sewage Treatment Device Specification
1
a)Structure: The treatment device is composed of eight water pools 
(each pool's dimension: 3 X 2 X 1.7 m³) and a fixed temperature-
control system. The sewage purification is processed in an active 
muddy biochemical way.
b)Quantum of water treated:
        20tons/day during the three months in summer
        10~15 tons/day during the nine months in winter
c)Water Quality of outflow: pH: 6~9
                                  SS≤70 mg/L≤
                                  BOD≤30 mg/L
                                  COD≤100 mg/L
d) Average flux: 0.5 ton/ hour

3. Environment Protection Measure and Rule
    • Every station staff is trained on environment protection for one week 
      before departure for the Antarctica and two days in the station and all 
      the staff should be environmentally sensed. The activity of 
      environmental day itself has been proved useful to increase and 
      strengthen the staff's environment awareness, which would assure 
      environmentally sensed operation.
    • The environmental officer is nominated to be in charge of inspecting 
      and monitoring the station environment and her vicinity.
    • The classification and treatment of waste: The waste is separated 
      into three sorts: inflammable but harmful, unharmful but 
      incombustible and harmful chemistry.
    • The Activity of "Environmental Day" on each Saturday is to keep 
      inside and outside of all the buildings and station area in good 
      environmental condition.
    • All the waste produced out of the station area are collected and 
      brought back station to be treated, especially during the Chinese 
      Inland Traverse from Zhongshan to Dome A.
    • The relevant measures have been taken to keep the natural scenes 
      from destroyed or damaged.

4. Scientific Activity Related to Environment
    • Ozone observation. The observation has been practiced for four 
      years as a large scale and long term project to monitor the global 
      environmental change.
    • Aerosol observation. Air sampling is made in the Antarctic air. With 
      the Antarctic atmosphere being used as references, this observation 
      is to study the medium and long term atmosphere environmental 
      change.
      
2
Great Wall Station

1. Environmental Level

All the station area is clean and tidy nowadays, especially from the end 
of 1997, for the accumulated solid wastes since her establishment and 
the obsolete equipment all have been put aboard MV Xuelong and 
returned to China. At present time, there is no waste pile and would be 
quite difficulty to find any more litters.

The environmental equipment has been installed and used for 
environmental protection. They are sewage treatment device, incinerator 
and compaction machine. The treated wastewater flowing into the sea 
meets the international standard. Since February 1998, the incinerator 
terminates the era of open-air burning in Great Wall Station. The tin 
boxes of beer and persevered food have been compacted by a machine 
and the volume of garbage has been decreased greatly.

It is the same case with Great Wall Station as Zhongshan station that 
each Saturday is used as "The Environmental Day". The staffs are often 
educated and trained to take care the environment and maintain the 
station in shape.

2. Environmental Protection Engineering
a) Sewage treatment: The sewage is to flow into two septic tanks (primary 
treatment); When the sewage passes through a filter, the filter would 
keep debris out of the flow and the sewage would then undergoes 
process of sedimentation. In the primary treatment, the sewage is 
purified with the following results:
    40% to 70% of suspended particles are to be removed from the 
    sewage;
    30% to 50% of the biochemical oxygen is to be reduced.
    70% to 90% of grease particles are to be eliminated.

After the primary treatment, the sewage will flow into the regulation 
tank. Grinding pump will smash the sewage in the regulation tank and 
then pump the sewage into the aeration tank. The sewage will then 
flow in turn into the sedimentation tank, chlorine tank and until finally 
being purified for discharge. During the process, most of the sludge in 
the sedimentation tank will flow back into the aeration tank and the rest 
will be discharged into the sludge tank.

3
After the secondary treatment, the following results are expected to be in place:
        Up to 85% of suspension solids are to be removed;
        Up to 95% of coliform bacteria are to be reduced;
        40% to 90% of the biochemical oxygen is to be eliminated.

The quality of effluent:
        BOD5 < 30 mg/L
        SS < 40 mg/L
        Coliform< 200 /100ml

This plant meets the regulations of IMO and approved by ZC and other classification societies as well as U.S. Coast Guard.

Flow Diagram

                Primary            
        Raw sewage  Treatment       Regulation       Smash
                                   Rag                  Pump
                                   Grit          
                                   Scum          

                Secondary treatment            
                  Aeration      Settling       Discharge
                                   Sludge

b) LZF2 Series re-combusting multipurpose incinerator
It has been confirmed by monitoring the effluent composition that all the emission indexes are below the national and the international emission standards. This two-chamber combusting temperature could reach 1000 ;æ and her disposing capacity is 60-1000kg/h. The reduction ratio
4
is up to 99% corresponding to the organic rubbish.

3. The Measures and Rules of Environment Protection
It is the same as Zhongshan station.

4. Scientific Activity Related to Environment
The observation of acid rain is carried out to monitor the environmental change.

5

