Status of Historic Site No. 25: Framnesodden, Peter I Øy. 
  
Background 
The Antarctic Treaty Parties adopted at the Sixth Antarctic Consultative Meeting 
(ATCM) in Tokyo in 1970 Recommendation VI-14 through which the Parties 
committed themselves to adopt adequate measures to preserve and protect from 
damage the historic monuments situated in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
Furthermore, Recommendation VI-14 required a list of historic monuments to be 
prepared. Consequently "a list of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the 
Proposing Government or Governments" was adopted through Recommendation VII-
9 at the Seventh Antarctic Consultative Meeting in Wellington in 1972. 
Article 10 (1) (b) in Annex V to the Protocol furthermore contains the following 
provision: 
The Parties shall make arrangements for obtaining and exchanging information on 
any significant change or damage to any Antarctic Specially Managed Area, 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area or Historic Site or Monument. 
  
Historic Site and Monument No. 25 
Site number 25 on the existing list of historic sites and monuments concerns the 
remains from the Norwegian Norvegia Expedition to Peter I Øy which took place in 
1929. The Norvegia Expedition effected the first known landing on Peter I Øy. The 
site is described as follows in the List of Historic Monuments: 
HSM No. 25: Framnesodden, Peter I Øy. 68º47’S, 90º42’W. Hut and plaque built by 
Norwegian Captain Nils Larsen in February 1929. The plaque is inscribed "Norvegia-
ekspedisjonen 2/2 1929". 
  
Current status of HSM No. 25 
No formal arrangements exist for the exchange of information on the status of 
Historic Sites or Monuments. Norway would, however, take this opportunity to 
inform the Treaty Parties of the current status of Site No. 25 on the Historic Sites or 
Monuments list. 
During the mapping operations on Peter I Øy by the Norwegian Antarctic 
Research Expedition it has been established that there no longer seems to be 
remnants of the hut (and plaque) at Framnesodden on Peter I Øy. It is 
considered likely that the hut has been destroyed and removed by natural forces. 
  
