Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                                          XXII ATCM/IP67
                                          May, 1998
                                          Original: English

                                          Agenda item 15

Environmental
Monitoring Works at
The Bellingshausen
Station
(King George Island)

Submitted by
Russia
4
Environmental monitoring works
at the Bellingshausen Station (King George Island)

Acknowledging the importance and necessity of environmental monitoring as a means
of early prevention and prediction of possible impact on the Antarctic environment as
a result of human activity, the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) makes the most
use of the scientific, technical, logistic and financial reserves for its realization. The
RAE has renovated research and monitoring works at the Bellingshausen Station
(Fildes Peninsula, King George Island) within the framework of actions according to
Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty and national State Research Program
"Anatractica", section 4 "Nature protection and environmental conservation according
to the Antarctic Treaty".

Fildes Peninsula is one of the most inhabited region in entire Antarctica. Baseline
data on the environment of the peninsula has been obtained in early 70s, studies
of populations of vertebrates have been conducted by German scientists in 80s.
These works provided good background information for establishing a
monitoring of populations of birds and mammals. The project is carried out in
close co-operation with Jena University (Germany). Species which are considered
to be the most sensitive to human impact including Southern Giant Petrel and
skuas were given a highest priority.

Monitoring of population dynamics in birds of Fileds Peninsula has been continued
during 1995-98 at the Bellingshausen Base. Mapping of seabird breeding colonies
and skua nesting territories on the Fileds Peninsula for the season of 1996/97 and
1997/98 has been carried out. Breeding biology studies of birds with emphases on
Giant Petrels and Skuas including population counts throughout breeding season,
phenology, breeding success, feeding ecology and predation. Studies of human
impact upon most vulnerable bird species including Southern Giant Petrel and
skuas (behavioural responses in birds, usage of base vicinities as feeding biotopes,
breeding success etc.) have been conducted.

First results of ecology of Southern Giant Petrel showed dramatic decline of
their population for almost 80% since 1980s. The breeding success in 1996/97 was
found to be as low as 9.7%. High disturbance level coupling with high numbers of
1
predators is believed to be responsible for low breeding success in Giant Petrels.
Main source of disturbance is low aircraft's flights, and frequent visits of colonies
by personnel. Predators including numerous skuas, and nonbreeding Kelp Gulls
are attracted by open disposal of eatable waste on Russian, Chilean and Chinese
stations.

                                                                          2
