TECHNOLOGICAL STUDY TO OBTAIN KRILL MEAL (EUPHASIA SUPERBA) 

The study was carried out experimentally, using the Organic Products Laboratory of Empresa SGS del Perú, S.A., the Laboratorio de Química y Productos Agropecuarios (CERPER), the Food Technology and Microbiology Laboratory of the Oceanographic, Fisheries and Food Sciences School of the Federico Villareal National University.

General objective

To develop a pilot technology in order to experimentally obtain krill meal, in such a way that the quality of the final product complies with market requirements.

Specific goals

- To sum up the standard principles relating to krill meal technologies and the like
- To systemize the notions and theories related to the species  biology
- To systemize the theoretical principles underlying krill meal technologies
- To evaluate the receiving and inspection parameters for raw materials
- To evaluate the process control parameters during the cooking, pressing, drying, milling and packaging stages.
- To establish the receiving and inspection parameters for raw materials
- To establish the process control parameters during the cooking, pressing,
drying, milling and packaging stages.
- To compare the experimentally set parameters with the standard principles governing krill meal or similar products within the hydrobiological products field.

Population and sample

In its habitat, krill reaches considerable volumes which remain stable in spite of the irrational catch levels of some industrialized countries. As such, it is considered an uncounted population.

For the purposes of research, Antarctic krill provided by the Sea Institute of Peru (IMARPE) has been used. It was brought on board one of its research cruisers sailing in the area.

The sample used was not obtained in accordance with known statistical techniques; it is thus considered as a random sample obtained from the fishing area.
 Conclusions

1. The pilot technology developed has shown that it is possible to obtain a market accepted product (Krill meal) on a large scale.
2. The raw material used was brought frozen from Antarctica. Its quality appraisal was deemed good and acceptable.
3. It was possible to develop the cooking, pressing, drying and milling technological process under standard production conditions, which provides a final product both competitive and of good quality.
4. The final product had organoleptic characteristics which were acceptable in terms of odor, color, flavor and consistency.
5. The approximate composition obtained from the final product analyses are quite similar to those presented by different authors.
6. The microbiological analyses are within accepted tolerances.
7. On the basis of this research, it will be possible to set raw materials, process control and final product parameters for the manufacturing of krill meal.

Recommendations

1. The experimental technological process used laboratory equipment. An equipment and machinery design study must be implemented specifically geared at this production line.
 
2. As far as product storage is concerned, studies must be undertaken on the use of preservatives, antioxidants and other additives to increase the shelf life of the product.
 
3. Studies must be carried out to increase the added value of the meal and its use in Peru; essentially for human consumption and animal feed. 

