 
 
REPORT OF THE CCAMLR OBSERVER TO ATCM 
XXII 
As part of the regular overview of the Antarctic Treaty System conducted in accordance 
with Recommendation XIII-2 of ATCM, CCAMLR is pleased to report on recent 
developments in areas of its competence. 
Membership 
Since ATCM-XXI there has been no changes in the CCAMLR Membership. 
Fisheries in the 1996/97 and 1997/98 seasons 
Fisheries in the CCAMLR Convention Area during the 1997 split-year (1 July 
1996 to 30 June 1997) targetted Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides), 
krill (Euphausia superba) and squid (Martialia hyadesi). The total reported 
catch of finfish was 10 562 tonnes, of which Patagonian toothfish comprised 
97%. The total reported catch of krill was 82 508 tonnes. A new fishery for 
squid in CCAMLR Statistical Subarea 48.3, initiated under a joint venture 
conducted by the Republic of Korea and the UK, yielded 28 tonnes in June and 
53 tonnes in July 1997. There was no fishing for crabs in the Convention Area 
during the 1997 split-year.  
Twelve new or exploratory fisheries were notified and agreed for the 1997/98 
fishing season. Most of these fisheries are conducted with longlines. The 
Commission decided that detailed fishery statistics and biological information 
should be collected for these fisheries, and a special data collection plan was 
developed (Conservation Measure 133/XVI).  
The Commission adopted conservation measures for each of the 1997/98 fisheries, 
as well as general measures for regulating fishing activities and reporting 
fisheries information within the Convention Area. These are published in the 
Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force 1997/98. 
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in the convention area  
CCAMLR is greatly concerned about the increasing amount of illegal and 
unregulated fishing in the Convention Area. For the 1996/97 fishing season, in 
addition to reported catch of about 33 000 tonnes, the catch from illegal, 
unreported and unregulated fisheries, particularly in fisheries for toothfish 
(Dissostichus spp) in the Indian Ocean sector of the Convention Area, was 
estimated to be between 74 000 and 82 000 tonnes.  
This issue was considered at CCAMLR-XVI under a separate Agenda item. 
The Commission considered the evidence of illegal, unreported and unregulated 
fishing in the Convention Area submitted by Members in accordance with 
Articles X and XXII of the Convention and with the System of Inspection, and 
also presented by the Chairman of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee as part 
of his report to the Commission. 
There was general agreement among Members of CCAMLR that: 
(i) the evidence of large-scale illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in the 
Convention Area submitted by CCAMLR Members during 1996/97 and in the 
beginning of the 1997/98 season seriously undermined the work of CCAMLR 
in achieving the Convention's objective; 
(ii) the extent of existing illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing posed a 
serious threat to the conservation of stocks of Dissostichus spp. in the 
immediate future and also to the survival of several species of seabirds in the 
Southern Ocean taken as incidental by-catch in longline fishing operations; 
(iii) all information received points to a blatant disregard by non-Contracting 
Parties of the CCAMLR conservation regime and of the sovereign rights of 
Coastal States in the Convention Area; 
(iv) not only vessels of non-Contracting Parties to CCAMLR, but also vessels of 
CCAMLR Contracting Parties were reported fishing in the Convention Area 
in contravention of CCAMLR conservation measures in force; and 
(v) the situation called for collective efforts within CCAMLR, measures by 
Flag States and Coastal States and steps vis-a-vis non-Contracting Parties to 
enhance enforcement and compliance with conservation measures regarding 
living resources in the Convention Area. 
CCAMLR has started developing an integrated set of political and legal measures 
for resolving this complex situation. The set of measures adopted by CCAMLR 
in 1997 includes new Conservation Measures 118/XVI (Scheme to Promote 
Compliance by non-Contracting Party Vessels with CCAMLR Conservation 
Measures) and 119/XVI (Requirement for Contracting Parties to Licence their 
Flag Vessels in the Convention Area), Resolution 12/XVI on Vessel Monitoring 
Systems, amendments to the text of the System of Inspection and mechanisms 
to address the actions of non-Contracting Parties. Some measures were drawn 
from the experience of other fisheries organisations, in particular NAFO and 
ICCAT; other measures took into account recent developments in 
international law. 
Bearing in mind Articles 19 to 23 of the 1995 UN Straddling Stock Agreement, the 
Commission agreed that CCAMLR should establish a system of exchange of 
information on all vessels known to have fished in contravention of CCAMLR 
conservation measures. 
With regard to concerted political action which may be taken by the Commission 
and by individual Members vis-a-vis non-Contracting Parties, the Commission 
decided to continue the existing procedure of drawing the CCAMLR 
Commission's concerns to the attention of non-Contracting Parties, by means 
of a letter from the Chairman of the Commission. 
The Commission also decided to invite the Governments of Mauritius and 
Namibia to participate as observers at the Seventeenth Meeting of the 
Commission with a view to encouraging these States to accede to the 
Convention and also to cease providing port or landing facilities for vessels 
which carried out unregulated fishing in the Convention Area. 
CCAMLR urged Members to consider the acceptance of the 1993 FAO 
Compliance Agreement, noting that it would contribute to the elimination of 
unregulated fishing by non-Contracting Parties. 
At the conclusion of CCAMLR-XVI a letter was sent, on behalf of the CCAMLR 
Executive Secretary, to all international and regional fisheries organisations 
with which CCAMLR cooperates, and some of which have jurisdiction over 
waters adjacent to the CCAMLR Convention Area, to inform them of all 
CCAMLR initiatives with respect to illegal, unreported and unregulated 
fishing in the CCAMLR Convention Area. CCAMLR has invited these 
organisations to cooperate in combating illegal, unreported and unregulated 
fishing activities on the high seas and to join in the exchange of information on 
the matter. 
In particular, CCAMLR is seeking the cooperation of these organisations in the 
implementation of CCAMLR Conservation Measure 118/XVI which relates to 
the refusal of landings and transhipment of fish caught in violation of 
CCAMLR Conservation Measures and other requirements under the 
CCAMLR Convention. CCAMLR would especially welcome any information 
about the international trade in Dissostichus spp (including where catches are 
landed, transhipped or imported and under what product names these fish 
species are being marketed); on the feasibility of imposing trade-restrictions on 
non-Contracting Parties, and also on any other measures to combat illegal, 
unreported and unregulated fishing activities. 
At this year's meeting in November 1998, CCAMLR will review the effectiveness 
of the adopted measures and, if necessary, develop additional measures. In 
particular, CCAMLR will further consider measures related to Port State 
control, as well as trade-related measures. 
Observation and inspection 
During the 1996/97 fishing season, 43 CCAMLR Inspectors were designated by 
five CCAMLR Members. Inspectors operated mostly in the Atlantic and 
Indian Ocean sectors of the Convention Area. A total of four inspections were 
undertaken off South Georgia. 
Also during the 1996/97 season, international scientific observers provided 100% 
coverage of all longline fisheries, including the new fisheries. This level of 
coverage will continue during the 1997/98 fishing season.  
At CCAMLR-XVI, the text of the System of Inspection was amended to include 
procedures for processing reports of inspection and the providing information 
on vessels harvesting in the Convention Area. The text of the Scheme of 
International Scientific Observation was also revised to improve the provision 
of information on observation programs. 
Ecosystem monitoring program 
Work under the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) continued on 
a conceptual model of ecosystem monitoring and management. CEMP 
continues to focus on developing of our understanding of the linkages between 
harvested species (e.g. krill), dependent species (e.g. penguins), the 
environment and fisheries. 
Data on dependent species continue to be collected annually from the following 
sixteen sites within the Convention Area in accordance with CEMP standard 
methods:  
Subarea 48.1:  Anvers Is, Esperanza Station, Cape Shirreff, Stranger Point, 
Admiralty Bay and Seal Island 
Subarea 48.2: Signy Island and Laurie Island 
Subarea 48.3: Bird Island 
Subarea 48.6: Bouvet Island and Svarthamaren 
Division 58.4.2:  Béchervaise Island and Syowa Station 
Subarea 58.7: Marion Island 
Subarea 88.1: Edmonson Point and Ross Island 
Progress has been made on the analysis of cemp indices. In particular, SC-
CAMLR endorsed the further development of maltivariate analyses, including 
studies to combine indices that summarise a large number of indices into a 
smaller set which can be more easily examined. Work is continuing on ways of 
incorporating CEMP indices into the CCAMLR for managing strategy for 
Antarctic marine living resources. 
Following substantial revision, a new edition of the CEMP Standard Methods was 
published in August 1997. It includes a number of new standard methods, 
observation protocols and techniques, as well as a set of reference materials. 
Intersessional activities during 1998 will include a workshop on Area 48, further 
planning for a synoptic survey of krill in Area 48, and a meeting of WG-EMM. 
The workshop on Area 48 will examine processes within the South Atlantic 
Sector of the Southern Ocean and, in particular, determine the extent of 
between-season and within-season variation in key indices of the environment, 
harvested species, and dependent species. The synoptic survey steering 
committee will meet in conjunction with the workshop on Area 48 to outline a 
survey for the plan is scheduled for the austral summer 1999/2000. 
Prevention of incidental mortality of seabirds during fishing operations 
In recent years, CCAMLR has pursued a major campaign to reduce the incidental 
capture and mortality of seabirds in longline fisheries. The species mainly 
affected are black-browed, grey-headed and yellow-nosed albatrosses, and 
white-chinned petrels. 
While the implementation of CCAMLR measures has already resulted in the 
reduction of incidental catch and related mortality of seabirds in longline 
fisheries, according to estimates about 6 600 seabirds were killed in longline 
fishing operations off South Georgia, and Prince Edward and Marion Islands 
during 1996/97. Much of this seabird mortality reflects a lack of full 
compliance of some vessels of CCAMLR flag-states with adopted measures. In 
order to improve compliance these measures were clarified and some 
inconsistencies were removed. The Commission adopted a revised 
Conservation Measure 29/XV "Minimisation of the Incidental Mortality of 
Seabirds in the course of Longline Fishing or Longline Fishing Research in the 
Convention Area". 
In addition, during 1996/97, the incidental mortality of seabirds was estimated to 
be at least 20 times greater, in the unregulated fisheries for toothfish, mainly 
due to the large number of vessels fishing and their disregard for CCAMLR 
conservation measures. CCAMLR Members agreed to take the strongest 
possible action to eliminate unregulated fishing, which, if left unchecked, is 
likely to cause the collapse of the populations of several species of albatross and 
white-chinned petrel. 
Data collected by scientific observers designated under the CCAMLR Scheme of 
International Scientific Observation confirmed that interactions between 
seabirds and longline fishing peaked during the austral summer. Importantly, 
it was concluded that incidental catches may be further reduced by delaying 
the start of the longline fishing seasons (from March to May). As a result, it 
was agreed that the opening date for longline fisheries, in areas of high risk to 
seabirds, will be moved progressively towards May over a period of two years, 
allowing Members to adjust their fisheries legislation as necessary. 
As in previous years, work on the reduction of incidental mortality continues 
intersessionally, steered by the Working Group on Incidental Mortality of 
Seabirds Arising from Longline Fisheries (WG-IMALF). 
As part of CCAMLR's campaign to reduce the incidental mortality of seabirds in 
longline fisheries, the book Fish the Sea not the Sky was published in 1996 in 
all four languages of the Commission. In addition, a flier and stickers 
promoting the message of the book were produced in 1998. CCAMLR 
Members have undertaken to make every possible effort to ensure that this 
book, fliers and stickers will be made available on board every vessel fishing 
under their flags in the Southern Ocean. This educational material has been 
also sent to many international fisheries organisations as well as international 
and national agencies with a vested interest in the protection of seabirds and 
fisheries management. 
CCAMLR decided to initiate the exchange of information on incidental mortality 
with a number of international fisheries and conservation organisations. Such 
information exchange has been already established with the Commission for 
the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT). CCAMLR also informed 
the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals 
(CMS) and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) of CCAMLR's work 
on the prevention of incidental mortality of seabirds during fishing operations, 
and drew their attention to the interactions between albatrosses and longline 
fisheries as an example of harmful biological effects caused by anthropogenic 
factors. FAO was also approached with a proposal that it would be very 
appropriate and useful for experts within CCAMLR to be able to comment on 
the draft Guidelines and Plan of Action that is developed during the meeting of 
the FAO Technical Group on the Reduction of Incidental Catch of Seabirds in 
Longline Fisheries (STWG) held in March 1998 in Tokyo. 
MONITORING OF MARINE DEBRIS AND ITS IMPACT ON MARINE 
ANIMALS 
ATCM-XXI took note of CCAMLR's initiatives aimed at preventing and assessing 
the level of marine debris in Antarctic waters and its impact on marine biota. 
In particular, CCAMLR, was requested to report on progress in assessing and 
dealing with the problem of marine debris. This is summarised below. 
Since its inception, CCAMLR has introduced measures to monitor and assess the 
level of marine debris and its impact on marine living resources in Antarctic 
waters. These include requirements to collect and report flotsam debris from 
vessels, to conduct surveys of marine debris on beaches near seal and seabird 
colonies, and to report instances of entanglement in or ingestion of marine 
debris by marine animals. Conservation Measure 63/XV "Regulation of the use 
and disposal of plastic packaging bands on fishing vessels" prohibited from the 
1995/96 season the use of plastic packaging bands to secure bait boxes and also 
prohibited from the 1996/97 season the use of other plastic packaging bands on 
fishing vessels not equipped with on-board incinerators. An educational leaflet 
on the environmental impact of marine debris pollution and a placard 
describing ways of dealing with waste generated by fishing and other vessels 
operating in Antarctic waters were published and widely distributed. 
CCAMLR has encouraged all its Members to ratify and implement Annex V to 
MARPOL 73/78. 
Long-term surveys of beached marine debris have been initiated at several Sub-
Antarctic and Antarctic sites by Australia, Brazil, Chile, UK, USA and South 
Africa. Marine debris surveys are aimed at monitoring levels of marine debris 
and its impact on marine living resources in the CCAMLR Convention Area.  
In order to standardise the collection of data, in 1993 CCAMLR prepared and 
adopted the Standard Method for Surveys of Beached Marine Debris. 
Monitoring at Bird Island (South Georgia), Cape Shirreff (Livingston Island, 
Antarctic Peninsula) and the Prince Edward Islands has already been carried 
out in accordance with this method for three years.  
All data are submitted to the CCAMLR Data Centre and stored in a specially 
designed database for future analysis. Once a series of datasets have been 
accumulated for a number of years it will be possible to put an exact figure on 
the current level of marine debris pollution in the area of that time and to 
statistically evaluate any trends in this level. It will also enable scientists to 
determine how effectively measures adopted to prevent the pollution of 
Antarctic waters have been implemented. Examples of such measures are 
CCAMLR Conservation Measure 63/XV, provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, 
MARPOL 73/78 (Annex V) and the London (Dumping) Convention, 1972.  
Since the beginning of studies initiated by CCAMLR, a decreasing trend in the 
amount of marine debris and in the level of entanglement of marine mammals 
and birds has been observed at several monitoring sites in the Convention 
Area. Reports received by CCAMLR in 1996 and 1997, however, indicate that 
this decreasing trend has not been sustained. 
There is much evidence, particularly from studies carried out at South Georgia, 
that the recent three-fold increase in the amount of debris removed from 
beaches there relates directly to increased fishing activity in the area. Nylon 
lines, mainly identical to those used in the longline fishery, comprised 80% of 
fishery-related debris found at Bird Island, South Georgia. The increased 
fishing activity around South Georgia has also resulted in an increase of 
fishery-related items, most notably longline hooks, found in or near the nests of 
albatrosses. The number of sightings of fur seals entangled in marine debris is 
also again on the increase. 
In order to counteract the current trend of increasing pollution from marine 
debris in the CCAMLR Convention Area, most of which appears to originate 
from fishing vessels, CCAMLR decided to undertake a new educational 
initiative. The proposed educational brochure will include references to the 
international (including CCAMLR) regulations in force, explanations of the 
ecological and environmental reasons for avoiding marine debris pollution and 
advice on all appropriate procedures to avoid the discharge of such debris at 
sea. This brochure will be published and distributed in June 1998. 
CCAMLR constantly reviews the topic of marine debris pollution. The evaluation 
of the incidence of marine debris and its impact on marine biota is a 
permanent item on the agendas of the CCAMLR Commission and Scientific 
Committee.  
Issues of cooperation with elements of the antarctic treaty system 
The complementary nature of the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Parties (ATCP) and CCAMLR in protecting the marine environment was 
enhanced by the coming into force of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The Commission noted that the Chairman 
of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee would participate as an observer in the 
work of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP). 
CCAMLR is aware that, in the future, under the provisions of Annex V of the 
Protocol, CCAMLR would receive draft management plans from the Antarctic 
Treaty for Antarctic Specially Protected and Managed Areas (ASPAs and 
ASMAs), with requests for advice and approval by the Commission.  
CCAMLR endorsed the definition of 'marine area' as provided by ATCM-XXI. 
CCAMLR also took note of the list of nine Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSIs) which include such marine areas. It was understood that, in accordance
with Annex V, Article 6(2) of the Protocol, the draft management plans for 
these areas will be, submitted to CCAMLR for approval. 
In the past, CCAMLR took note of SCAR's intention to consult CCAMLR, among 
others, with a view to providing a proposal to ATCM-XXI on how to prepare a 
report on the state of the Antarctic environment. The draft SCAR proposal 
indicated that substantial input would be required from CCAMLR and from 
scientists associated with its work. CCAMLR therefore agreed that no action 
on this matter should be taken by ccamlr until it had been clarified by the 
ATCM. 
Following established cooperation with SCAR, CCAMLR observers continue to 
participate at meetings of the latter's various bodies and CCAMLR receives 
information about SCAR programs of relevance to CCAMLR's objectives. 
SCAR continues to be invited to send its observers to annual meetings of 
CCAMLR. 
The 1995 UN Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United 
Nations Convention on the law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the 
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish 
Stocks. 
The 1993 FAO Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation 
and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas. 
  
 
 
 
 
   
Home     News     List of Delegates    Delegate Handbook  
Documents    Meeting Program     Tromsø 
 
 
 
18.05.98 : Norwegian Polar Institute : Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
 
