Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIième Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/IP28
April, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 14

Improving Annual
Exchange of Antarctic
Information -
Facilitating
Information Exchange

Submitted by
USA

IMPROVING ANNUAL EXCHANGE OF ANTARCTIC INFORMATION -
FACILITATING INFORMATION EXCHANGE

Electronic media and Internet tools such as the World Wide Web have increased the ease 
and speed of information exchange. These same tools could be used to facilitate the 
exchange of information among Treaty nations.

Background

Annual exchange of information among Antarctic Treaty nations derives from the text of 
the treaty. Article III.1 states:

    (a) information regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica shall be 
exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations; . . .
    (c) scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and 
made freely available.

Article VII 5 states that "each contracting party shall, at the time when the present Treaty 
enters into force for it, inform the other Contracting Parties, and thereafter shall give them 
notice in advance, of:

    (a) all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships of nationals, 
and all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding from its territory;
    (b) all stations in Antarctica occupied by its nationals; and 
    (c) any military personnel or equipment intended to be introduced by it into 
Antarctica subject to the conditions prescribed in paragraph 2 of Article I of 
the present Treaty."

The Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR) maintains an annual exchange 
of information whose purpose is to keep SCAR members informed of the current status 
of Antarctic research. The Council of Managers of Antarctic Programs/Standing 
Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (COMNAP/SCALOP) requests 
advance information on aircraft and ship operations to help coordinate activities and share 
resources where appropriate.

Table 1 compares the topics required in the exchange of operational information required 
by the Treaty and used by COMNAP/SCALOP and the annual exchange of SCAR 
information.

Discussion

Three issues arise from the information requirements among the Treaty organizations and 
the current method of information exchange:

1. Overlapping and in some cases duplicative information requirements;
2. Outdated and inefficient mechanisms for the preparation and distribution of 
information;
3. Loss in timely delivery of information.

1
Overlapping and duplicative requirements spend program resources to prepare and use 
similar information to meet differing organizational reporting and report preparation 
requirements.

Current methods of information and report preparation and distribution are labor 
intensive and limit the distribution of data or information to the number of copies 
produced.

Also, the time required to prepare, format, and distribute copies limits the utility of the 
information. Where information is time sensitive, little opportunity is afforded to those 
who may otherwise wish to coordinate plans or share resources.

Suggestions for Improvements

Using electronic means for exchanging information would facilitate a more integrated 
approach to report preparation and submittal, thereby reducing overlap and duplication. 
It would also greatly improve the timeliness of exchange and access to the information. 
To this end the following suggestions are made:

1.      Each Antarctic Treaty Party should be encouraged to identify a World Wide Web site 
        as a means of providing the annual exchange of information required by Article VII.5. 
        Paper copies of the annual exchanges of information would be made available to the 
        extent that national requirements dictate.

2.      Organizations within each Party that are responsible for compiling the annual 
        exchange of information required under the Antarctic Treaty could collaborate as 
        feasible with their corresponding SCAR organizations to assist in the efficiency and 
        timeliness of preparing annual SCAR reports.

3.      To increase users' access to annual reports prepared by the various Antarctic Parties, 
        the Antarctic Managers Electronic Network (AMEN) and SCAR Web sites could 
        build country lists establishing links to the various nations' reports.

2
Table 1

Comparison of the 15 topics required in the annual exchange of Antarctic Treaty 
information and the 6 topics required in the annual exchange of SCAR information.

Antarctic Treaty report topics 
(from recommendation VIII-6, 1975)                                  Corresponding SCAR report topics 
                                                                             (from SCAR Circular 669, 1?95)

I. Ships, aircraft, vehicles                                             
II. Dates of expeditions                                                 2. Wintering stations, lat., long.
III. Station locations and dates                                         3. Summer stations
IV. Names and functions of personnel                                     1. Addresses, etc., of national SCAR 
                                                                               committee and operating agency
V. Armaments                                                              
VI. Program of work and science, and where                               4. Automatic recording observatories, 
                                                                               stations
                                                                           5. National programs and projects, 
                                                                               including subject, investigation, 
                                                                               locality, duration, and PI
                                                                           6. Planned new programs
VII. Scientific equipment                                                

VIII. Transportation and communication 
facilities                                                                 

IX. Facilities for rendering assistance                                  

X. Nongovernment expeditions                                            

XI. Unoccupied refuges                                                   

XII. Numbers of species killed                                           

XIII. Radioisotopes used                                                 

XIV. Research rockets used                                               

XV. Oceanic research                                                     

                                                                              



                                                                              



                                                                              



3
54
