Marine Protection in the Southern Ocean 
  
1. Introduction 
With the coming into force of the Antarctic Treaty Protocol IUCN considers it an 
appropriate time for Treaty Parties to look at developing a representative network of 
marine protected areas. These could be a mixture of Antarctic Specially Protected 
Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). 
On land the Antarctic Treaty system has developed a comprehensive system for 
specially protected areas (Annex V of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic 
Treaty). While marine areas can be included in ASPAs and ASMAs, except for the 
two Sites of Special Scientific Interest West Bransfield Strait and East Dalman Bay, 
the marine areas covered are small. 
Marine protected areas (MPAs) can play a critical role in protecting marine 
biodiversity, including ecosystem structure and function, and provide baseline 
information on unfished populations which is important for sustainably managing 
commercial species. MPAs may be exclude fishing altogether or in part. Marine 
reserves which are closed to fishing have been used in other areas of the world to 
prevent over-harvesting (e.g., Maria Island in Tasmania). 
MPAs have been used to protect critical areas in an ecosystem, (e.g., spawning and 
nursery grounds), and as a means by which localized impacts may be avoided, and to 
provide invaluable sites to study habitats and species (eg Ballentine 1995). They have 
a great potential to retain biodiversity at the species and community level primarily by 
preventing depletion of harvested species from direct harvest, indirect bycatch, and 
habitat alteration and by providing habitat protection and maintenance of ecological 
processes (Roberts et. al., 1995; Bohnsack 1996). 
  
2. Benefits of marine protected areas 
The benefits of MPAs (or marine reserves) to the protection of biodiversity, marine 
research and for fisheries management has been reviewed in a number of papers (eg 
Roberts et al 1995, and Rowley 1992). 
Roberts et al (1995) in their review noted that: 
"Marine reserves seemed to be an ideal biological solution to several fishery related 
problems because:  
• 
Marine Fishery Reserves (MFRs) are an appropriate way of providing 
protection to a multispecies assemblage...  
• 
If large enough, MFRs could protect spawning potential ratios of individual 
stocks.  
• 
Closed areas would benefit surrounding fisheries by exporting larvae and adult 
and juvenile biomass, providing insurance against stock collapse.  
• 
MFRs would provide control areas for monitoring and for better understanding 
natural processes and the biology of exploited species..."  
Potential benefits of marine reserves include:  
• 
the development of unharvested baselines from which to measure the effects 
of harvesting on populations and habitats;  
• 
the maintenance of genetic diversity and moderation of the impacts on 
biodiversity of fishing effects (eg Rowley 1992);  
• 
increasing the ability of marine ecosystems to withstand environmental 
perturbations;  
• 
protection of marine mammals populations and areas important to seabirds;  
• 
protection of areas for scientific study;  
• 
protection of areas of historical significance;  
• 
identifying areas at particular risk to oil spills and other pollution.  
A system of "no take" reserves could allow depleted stocks to rebuild. By protecting 
discrete habitats such as crucial sea mounts or shelves that provide high recruitment, 
these locations could potentially provide an overflow into areas which could have 
regulated takes of stock that allow long-term sustainable fishing. Marine reserves 
provide extra safeguards against over-estimating the sustainable limits for fisheries, 
which is important because of the uncertainties in managing the marine environment. 
  
3. IUCN and marine protected areas 
Through its World Commission on Protected Areas, IUCN has been carrying out a 
program to promote the establishment and management of MPAs around the world. 
Resolution 17.38, adopted at the 17th IUCN General Assembly in 1993, defines the 
goal for marine conservation and means to achieve the goal: 
"to provide for the protection, restoration, wise use, understanding and enjoyment of 
the marine heritage of the world in perpetuity through the creation of a global 
representative system of marine protected areas and through the management...of 
human activities that use or affect the marine environment." 
The IUCN also adopted the following definition of Marine Protected Area: 
"Any area of intertidal or subtidal terrain, together with its overlying water and 
associated flora, fauna, historical and cultural features, which have been reserved by 
law or other effective means to protect part or all of the enclosed environment." 
Resolution 17.38 emphasized that "the marine environment must be managed in an 
integrated way if it is to be able to sustain human use in the future, without 
progressive degradation." This follows from IUCN's policy on marine conservation 
that incorporates human use of the marine environment and advocates that 
ecologically compatible and legitimate uses of the marine environment and its 
resources must be recognized and accommodated but that they must be sustainable. 
IUCN's definition of an MPA covers a wide range of types of protected areas. These 
include zoned multiple-use areas (which may or may not incorporate areas closed to 
fishing), sites designed exclusively as no-take-zones, and areas with some protection 
but where certain forms of fishing are still permitted (Kelleher and Kenchington 
1991). Recent studies suggest that closed areas or no-take zones may be of particular 
value in fisheries management (see for example Roberts et al 1995). 
Annex V of the Protocol provides Antarctic Treaty Parties with the ability to set aside 
MPAs. Article 6 of Annex V requires prior approval of CCAMLR before any marine 
area can be designated. 
The setting aside of areas as no-take marine reserves is also consistent with:  
• 
the obligations on states for "in-situ conservation" of biodiversity under the 
Biodiversity Convention; and 
• 
the provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea for the 
conservation of living marine resources (de Fontaubert, Downes and Agardi 
1996; Sobel 1993). 
  
4. Examples of marine protection 
The creation of marine protected areas is a well-established means to protect the 
marine environment. MPAs also provide undisturbed and, if they are no-take areas, 
unexploited sites in which the biological information needed to accurately assess the 
status of the stocks can be gathered. Without this information, it is not possible to 
determine sustainable harvest levels. 
Many marine protected areas already exist in the world, some of which prohibit 
fishing activities completely. For example, New Zealand has 14 "no take" reserves, 
including the Leigh Marine Reserve and the Kermadecs Islands Marine Reserve, 
which have complete prohibitions on fishing. The Kermadecs Island marine reserve 
extends out to the 12 nautical miles around each of the Islands. The spill-over benefits 
of marine reserves for adjacent fisheries have been reported by a number of 
researchers including study of coral reef fisheries in the Philippines (Alcala and Russ 
1990). 
Fish populations, including commercial species, have increased within the Leigh 
reserve in the 16 years of its existence, and in several other "no take" reserves 
(Ballentine 1995; Sobel, 1993). Similar changes have occurred in other marine 
reserves in New Zealand, north eastern Mediterranean (Bell, 1983), South Africa 
(Bennett and Attwood, 1991), Chile (Moreno et al 1986), Belize and Mexico (Baker, 
Shepherd and Edyvane 1996). 
The Rockfish reserve system of the Pacific Coast of North America, Maria Island, and 
Scandola Nature Reserve are examples of "no take" systems with regulated fishing in 
adjacent areas. Although these examples are small in area, the results of the positive 
effects on fish populations have been documented. The Tasmanian marine reserve at 
Maria Island has been successful in restocking surrounding fisheries. 
  
5. Antarctic Marine Protected Areas 
The coming into force of the Antarctic Treaty Protocol is an appropriate time for 
Treaty Parties to look at developing a network of marine protected areas. These could 
include both Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed 
Areas. 
IUCN has developed criteria that could be applied in identifying suitable areas as 
candidates for marine protected areas (Kelleher, Kenchington and Bleakley 1994). 
They include:  
• 
biogeographic importance, including rare or representative biogeographic 
qualities; 
• 
ecological importance, for example the variety or habitats, the presence of 
nursery areas for juvenile fish or diversity of species; 
• 
degree of naturalness, the extent to which the area has been subject to human 
induced change; 
• 
scientific importance for research and monitoring; 
• 
international or national significance of the area. 
IUCN has also recommended that CCAMLR consider the use of closed areas in 
meeting the objectives of the CCAMLR Convention. IUCN notes that Article IX-2(g) 
of the Convention allows: 
"the designation of…closing areas, regions or sub-regions for the purposes of 
scientific study or conservation, including special areas for protection and scientific 
study". 
IUCN believes that, given the increased vulnerability of the toothfish stocks due to 
illegal and unregulated fishing, MPAs are needed to protect areas that are critical to 
the long-term viability of the species. Furthermore, in consultation with the Scientific 
Committee, the Commission could identify areas which should be closed based on 
data collected in accordance with under Article IX. 
The Antarctic Treaty Parties could look at developing criteria which are appropriate to 
the area. The establishment of marine protected areas could help ensure the 
maintenance of healthy stocks and healthy marine ecosystems, thus providing a more 
secure system to conserve the Antarctic marine environment. 
  
6. Recommendations 
IUCN believes it would be desirable for the ATCM, in consultation with the 
Committee on Environmental Protection and SCAR:  
• 
to assess how marine areas might be protected to meet the objectives of Annex 
V of the Antarctic Protocol; 
• 
to develop criteria that could be used to identify areas that might be 
appropriate to set aside as marine Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or 
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas. 
  
References 
Ballentine, W.J. (1995) Marine Reserves in New Zealand: principles and lessons. 
Presented to the Centre for Marine Conservation Workshop. 19p. 
Ballentine, W.J. (1995) Networks of "no-take" marine reserves are practical and 
necessary. pp13-20 in Shackell, NL and Willison, J.H.M. (eds), Marine protected 
areas and sustainable fisheries. Science and Management of Protected Areas Assoc., 
Nova Scotia. 
Baker, J., Shepherd, S. and Edyvane K. (199?) The use of marine fishery reserves 
to manage benthic fisheries, with emphasis on the South Australian Abalone Fishery. 
In Thackway (ed) Developing Australia’s representative system of marine protected 
areas: Criteria and guidelines for identification and selection. Proceedings of a 
technical meeting held in Adelaide. DEST, Canberra. 148p. 
Bell, J.D. (1983) Effects of depth and marine reserve fishing restrictions on the 
structure of a rocky reef fish assemblage in the North-Western Mediterranean Sea. J. 
App. Ecol. 20:357-369. 
Bennett, B.A. and Attwood C.G. (1991) Evidence for a recovery of a surf-zone 
assemblage following the establishment of a marine reserve on the southern coast of 
South Africa. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 75:173-181. 
Bohnsack, J.A. (1996) Maintenance and recovery of reef fishery productivity. Chap 
11. In: Polunin, N.V.C. and Roberts, C.M. (Eds). Reef Fisheries. Chapman and Hall, 
London. 
British Antarctic Survey (1997) List of Protected Areas in Antarctica. Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office and British Antarctic Survey. 33p. 
Moreno, C.A., Lunecke K.M. and Lepez M.I. (1986) The response of an intertidal 
Concholepas concholepas (Gastropoda) population to protection from man in 
Southern Chile and the effects on benthic sessile assemblages. Oikos 46:359-364. 
de Fontaubert, A C., Downes, D.R. and Agardi, T.S. (1996). Biodiversity in the 
Seas: Implementing the Convention on Biological Diversity in Marine and Coastal 
Habitats (IUCN Environmental Policy and Law Paper No. 32: A Marine Conservation 
and Development Report). Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. 
Kelleher, G. and Kenchington, R. (1991). Guidelines for Establishing Marine 
Protected Areas (A Marine Conservation and Development Report). Gland, 
Switzerland: IUCN. 
Kelleher, G., Kenchington R. and Bleakley, C. (1994) IUCN-CNPPA Marine 
Protected Areas Programme: Identification of Priority Areas for the Establishment 
and Management of Marine Protected Areas. In D J Brunckhorst (ed) Marine 
Protected Areas and Biosphere Reserves: "Towards a New Paradigm". Proceedings of 
the 1st International Workshop on Marine and Coastal Protected Areas. ANCA and 
UNESCO. Canberra. Australia Aug 1994. 98p. 
Lauck, T., Clark, C.W., Mangel, M. and Munro, G.R. (1998) Implementing the 
precautionary principle in fisheries management through marine reserves. Ecological 
Applications 8(1) Suppl. ppS72-S78. 
Roberts, C., Ballentine, W.J., Buxton, C.D., Dayton, P., Crowder, L.B., Milon, 
W., Orbach, M.K., Pauly, D., Trexler, J., and Walters, C.J. (1995). Review of the 
use of marine fishery reserves in the US Southeastern Atlantic. NOAA Technical 
memorandum NMFS-SEFSC-376. 31p. 
Rowley, R.J. (1992) An assessment of the impacts of marine reserves on fisheries. A 
report and review of the literature for the Department of Conservation. New Zealand. 
July 1992. 63p. 
Salm, R.V. and Clark, J.R. (1984). Marine and Coastal Protected Areas: A Guide 
for Planners and Managers. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.  
Shackell, N.L. and Willison, J.H.M, eds. (1995). Marine Protected Areas and 
Sustainable Fisheries. Science and Management of Protected Areas Association, 
Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
Sobel, J. (1993). Conserving Biological Diversity Through Marine Protected Areas: 
A Global Challenge. Oceanus 36, no. 3: 19-26. 
  
 
