 
 
 
 
 
 
XXII ATCM/IP125 
   
 
 
 
 
 
May 25, 1998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MR. ALIOCHA NEDELTCHEV 
               HEAD OF THE BULGARIAN DELEGATION 
ON AGENDA ITEM 19: 
CONSIDERATION OF BULGARIA’S NOTIFICATION  
                FOR CONSULTATIVE STATUS 
 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
Allow me first of all on behalf of the Bulgarian Government to express our 
sincere gratitude to the Representatives of all Consultative Parties for their unanimous  
acknowledgement that the Republic of Bulgaria has fulfilled the requirements for 
Consultative Party status. 
 
At this point of stage I would like very briefly to share with you some thoughts 
with respect to our future work. The Bulgarian Government is convinced that the 
Consultative status is not a privilege, but a demand for higher responsibility and 
improved co-operation. Bearing in mind this demand Bulgaria will spare no efforts to 
foster the process of its broader adherence to the Antarctic Treaty System. The Council of 
Ministers has authorised the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to submit for accession or 
acceptance international instruments belonging to that system to which Bulgaria is not yet 
a participant. In this regard our intention is to approve Recommendations which have 
already been  approved by all Consultative Parties as well as to consider favourably the 
approval of other Recommendations and Measures that have not yet become effective. 
Since the list of these Recommendations and Measures is quite long it might be 
appropriate to set up priorities for their gradual acceptance on the basis of their 
importance for the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System. The possible advice on this 
issue from countries with the relevant experience  would be most welcomed.  
 
On May 21, 1998 the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty entered into force with respect to Bulgaria. By its Decision N 11 of March 16, 
1998 the Council of Ministers assigned  to the competent Bulgarian Ministries and 
Institutions the task to submit for adoption legislative and administrative measures 
necessary to ensure the implementation of the Madrid Protocol. These measures should 
be adopted before the commencement of the next Antarctic campaign in 1998/99. This 
delegation notes with appreciation that at this ATCM the Consultative Parties have 
already started the exchange of information on national implementation of the Protocol. 
We certainly wish to borough from their experience and wisdom on this subject. 
 
Bulgaria acceded to the Convention on the Conservation of the Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources on 30 September 1992 and thus committed itself to its objectives. 
Bulgarian vessels are not involved in harvesting marine living resources in the 
Convention Area since the 1994/95 fishing season. However, if Bulgaria decides to 
resume such activities in the Convention Area, the Bulgarian Government will notify the 
Depository of its willingness to accept Conservation Measures in force and to apply for 
membership in Commission for Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
Bulgaria became a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty in 1978. The 
accession to the Treaty was motivated by our understanding that Antarctica should be 
used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that international co-operation in the field of 
scientific research in Antarctica should continue to be carried out in the interest of all 
mankind. Now, 20 years later, this motivation is much stronger since the Antarctic 
community is firmly committed to enhance international co-operation in full compliance 
with the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
The spirit of co-operation among nations in Antarctica made it possible for 
Bulgaria to establish a multidisciplinary programme of science at its Antarctic base of 
“St.Kliment Ohridski” and to dispatch six scientific expeditions. At this unforgettable for 
us moment we wish to recall that the first steps of the Bulgarian scientists on the 
Continent were made with the assistance of their British and Russian colleagues. The 
successive Antarctic expeditions were organised in close collaboration with and logistic 
support of the Spanish Antarctic Programme. Scientific co-operation was established 
with the Argentinean Antarctic Institute as well as with the Brazilian Antarctic 
Programme. I avail myself of this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude to all 
foreign institutions for their valuable support in implementation of the Bulgarian 
scientific programmes.  
 
At the same time I would like to confirm that the Bulgarian  Antarctic base on 
Livingston Island is open for fruitful co-operation between Bulgarian scientists and their 
foreign partners. During the 1997-98 Antarctic campaign Bulgaria’s scientific work on 
Livingston Island was intensified through implementation of joint Bulgarian-German and 
Bulgarian-Korean projects. Dipl.-Geol. Andreas Veit from Munich University and Dr. 
Moon Young Choe from the Polar Institute of the Republic of Korea studied the 
Quaternary volcanics and the Miers Bluff sedimentary rocks with their Bulgarian 
colleagues. The scientific research which has started in 1997/98 is planned to continue 
during the next seasons. The Bulgarian base was chosen as a GPS point within the SCAR 
98/GAP 98 campaign and Mr. Mathias Teichert from Hanover University was the 
German observer at the base. We are convinced that this kind of co-operation is 
extremely useful and we are looking forward to intensifying it in our future programmes. 
 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
