ANTARCTIC TREATY 
XXII Consultative Meeting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Paper 
 
 
Nomination of Greek Arbitrators in accordance with Art. 2 of the Schedule on  
Arbitration to the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
 
 
(Item 7a of the Preliminary Agenda) 
 
 
(Submitted by Greece)
 
 
 
 
Nomination of Greek Arbitrators in 
Accordance with Art.2 of the 
Schedule on Arbitration to the 
Protocol of Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
 
 
 
XXII ATCM/ 
June, 1998 
Original: English 
Agenda item 7a 
 
In accordance with Article 1 of the Schedule to the Protocol, an Arbitral Tribunal shall be 
constituted with the Secretary General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration as the 
Secretary to the Tribunal. Article 2 paragraph 1 of this Schedule stipulates, that each 
party shall be entitled to designate up to three arbitrators, at least one of whom shall be  
designated within three months of the entry into force of the Protocol for that Party. It is 
also stipulated, that each Arbitrator shall be experienced in Artarctic affairs, have through 
knowledge of International Law and enjoys the highest reputation of fairness, 
competence and integrity.  The names of the persons designated shall constitute the list of 
Arbitrators and it is mandatory for each party to the Protocol to maintain the name of at 
least one Arbitrator on the list at all the times. 
 
The Government of the Hellenic Republic has decided  to nominate  Prof. Dr. 
Constantine Economides, Professor for International Law at the Pantios University of 
Athens, and member of the International Law Commission of the UN, Ambassador 
Athanasius Theodorakopoulos L.L.M (“New York University”), to the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Dr. Emmanuel Gounaris Ph.D (“Freie Universität Berlin”) Minister 
Plenipotentiary - Expert on the Law of the Sea and Antarctic Affairs, as arbitrators within 
the framework of the arbitration procedure established by the schedule to the Protocol of 
Environmental  Protection. The nomination of the above mentioned persons has already 
been conveyed to the United States Department of State, as depository of the Antarctic 
Treaty and the Protocol. 
 
