Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/IP44
May, 1998
English
Original: Spanish
Agenda item 7e

Surveillance and 
Control of Marine 
Contamination within 
the Fildes Bay ...

Submitted by
Chile

REPUBLICA DE CHILE
MINISTERIO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES

SURVEILLANCE AND CONTROL OF MARINE CONTAMINATION
WITHIN THE FILDES BAY AND ADJACENT AREA

At the XXII ATCM, Chile submitted a paper on environmental
management aspects (WP 6a, April 22, 1997) related to the
development of a National Marine Contamination Research,
Surveillance and Control Plan, which included - inter alia -
the Coastal Environmental Observation Plan (CEOP) adequately
incorporating, for compliance with its objectives in the
Chilean Antarctic Territory, the regulations contained in the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Implementation of the Antarctic CEOP is in line with the
Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol, particularly with article 3
- which sets the environmental principles - each and every
applicable international convention subscribed by Chile and
section 33 of Law 19,300 (Enviromnental Bases), which provides
that public agencies shall develop programs to continually
measure and control air, water and soil environmental quality.

Additionally, the Antarctic CEOP also reflects the purpose
of the Global Action for Marine Protection against overland
activities and of the Declaration of Washington, both approved
in the capital of the United States of America in November,
1995. The said Program, furthered by the United Nations
Environmental Program (UNEP), draws upon Agenda 21, Chapter 17,
of the Rio Conference on Environment and Development, as well
as on the Convention of the Sea, the Convention on Biodiversity
REPUBLICA DE CHILE
MINISTERIO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES

and the several conventions concluded by the International 
Maritime Organization (IMO) to prevent marine pollution (CHILE.
W.P. 30/XX ATCM, April 1996).

The Antarctic CEOP is aimed at establishing essential 
parameters to assess the condition of marine areas under study 
in order to eventually take measures to prevent, mitigate,
control and/or eliminate Antarctic marine degradation: remedy 
the negative impacts of overland activities: restore land 
capability and biodiversity as well as other Antarctic 
environmental features to their original status.

Within this context, the Antarctic CEOP primarily seeks to 
determine baseline concentration levels for the main marine 
pollutants, placing special emphasis on pollutants coming from 
overland activities - given their consistency and the serious 
hazards involved - and those coming from ships.

Specific objectives include to evaluate baseline levels in 
water bodies being monitored, in order to keep a sound 
environment: to collect data supporting the establishment of 
environmental quality and emission standards: to detect 
concentrations of noxious substances, both to human health and 
hydrobiological resources: to verify the results of mitigation 
measures adopted, and to detect eventual changes in the 
environmental patterns of water bodies being monitored.

2
REPUBLICA DE CHILE
MINISTERIO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES

Thence, in December 1996, as reported before the XXI 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting held in Christchurch, New 
Zealand, the first Antarctic CEOP was carried out in Fildes 
Bay, King George Island. In January 1998, the second step was 
implemented as reported thereat.

As long as new programs are implemented in the area, both 
the data and information collected will enable to establish a 
preliminary environmental baseline to adequately manage, within 
the framework of the Protocol of Madrid, preventive 
environmental measures, and to establish, by a significant 
time-series statistical analysis, the potential influence of 
the facilities of other countries within such area.

Preliminary results

From the analysis and interpretation of results obtained 
in this second environmental surveillance program (ANTARCTIC 
PROGRAM, 1997-1998), as compared with the preceding program 
(ANTARCTIC PROGRAM, 1996-1997), it follows the below statements 
as regards the current environmental situation within the King 
George Island area:

I. Most monitoring stations established to evaluate 
environmental quality of this water body show signs of 
aqueous and/or sedimentary contamination in the receiving 
body.

3
REPUBLICA DE CHILE
MINISTERIO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES

II. Alterations detected in receiving environmental matrices 
are closely linked with human activities carried out 
within the area being studied.

III. Within the area, there is a nutrient excess (specifically, 
organic nitrogen), apparently coming from discharges into 
the sea of sewage from ocean outfalls.

IV. Although microbiological, metallogenic and noxious 
chemical contamination (only hydrocarbons) was detected, 
the impact in the receiving water body is still minor and 
no environmental adverse effects in the coastal marine 
ecosystem are currently observed.

ENVIRONMENTAL MEASURES TAKEN ÂT THE CHILEAN FACILITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC

* Garbage generated at such facilities is sorted and crushed 
according to its composition, and later comminuted and 
stored in sealed vessels, which are transported by ships 
to Punta Arenas for treatment and final disposition.

* Solid wastes are sorted, comminuted and stored in sealed 
vessels for their transfer to Punta Arenas and later 
treatment or final disposition.

* Hydrocarbons and oily mixtures are classified and stored 
in tanks, to be transferred to Punta Arenas and later 
treated.

4
REPUBLICA DE CHILE
MINISTERIO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES

*   Regarding sewage or domestic wastes generated, these undergo a preliminary treatment consisting in sorting of
oils and fats, solids reclamation and later chemical
disinfection of water bodies before being discharged into
the sea from ocean outfalls.

*   Vessels flying the Chilean flag and operating within the
Antarctic waters to carry out research, prospection,
logistical support and other activities should be equipped
with sewage and hydrocarbon treatment systems and fitted
with systems and tanks on board of sufficient retention
capacity. They should also be provided with storage
systems for solid wastes generated from ships' normal
operations.

*   Regarding the Chilean Navy, vessels operating in the
Antarctic for different re?sons, they are provided with
sewage and oily mixture treatment system, it being a
policy for this institution to fit its vessels with
environmentally sound equipment contributing to protect
the marine and Antarctic environment.

*   The incorporation to the environmental monitoring program
of two ocean stations, located at remote points beyond the
anthropic area of influence is being studied. Such
stations - to be implemented in the short- or medium term
- may serve as reference and reflect the uncontaminated
condition of the said territory. Also under study is the
possibility of establishing a station north of the

5
REPUBLICA DE CHILE
MINISTERIO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES

Uruguayan Base and another station south of the Chinese 
base with a view to following up the relevant parameters 
in both the aqueous and sedimentary matrix, according to 
the area's currents.

Within these supplementary studies, Lagrangian 
measurements are intended to be performed, following up 
surface and subsurface derivators located off the southern 
side of Fildes Bay, in order to characterize coastal 
currents circulation patterns. Hence, it is expected that 
an oceanographic database including current speed and 
direction be prepared to provide baseline technical 
information aimed at evaluating new placement of ocean 
outfalls in high-energy areas, to improve the current 
quality of the receiving water body and reach the highest 
dilution and dispersion conditions possible in liquid 
wastes having previously been treated, thus generating a 
minimum impact on the Antarctic marine ecosystem.

CONCLUSIONS

In a general briefing paper on the compliance with article 
13 of the Protocol, Chile reports that, after several 
environmental audits in its stations, an environmental project 
- whose design has been entrusted by the National Environmental 
Commission (CONAMA) to "Universidad de Magallanes" - is at the 
grassroot level. In another paper, Chile fulfils the 
requirement set by the Christchurch Consultative Meeting (XXI 
ATCM, Final Report, paragraph 11:) by submitting a progress
REPUBLICA DE CHILE
MINISTERIO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES

report on the surveillance measures taken to verify the impact 
of marine wastes discharged from an observation point at 
Shirreff Cape and making some comments to be considered in the 
discussions of the Polar Navigation Code proposed by the 
International Maritime Organization.

However, the Antarctic CEOP is already under full 
implementation, being in line with the preliminary 
recommendations of the Expert Group on Environmental Issues 
(GOSEAC), the SCAR and the COMNAP, as well as with the latest 
workshops. From all the foregoing, it follows that a more 
stringent surveillance is required in some critical exposure 
areas, including marine ecosystems of the Antarctic islands, 
which shall be afforded preeminence.

According to the preliminary evaluation and the nature of 
the measures taken by Chile in th?s field, experience should be 
analyzed, assimilated. implemented or improved by other 
countries within the Antarctic Treaty System, whether in the 
short or medium term, without prejudice to the studies that 
continue to be performed by each country, the GOSEAC - 
regarding a long-term follow-up program -- and the COMNAP - 
concerning the environmental impact of Antarctic facilities.

Within this context, the Antarctic CEOP activities reflect a 
tendency to rapidly increase practical, effective measures 
towards the protection of the environmental quality of waters 
where research, associated logistic and other Antarctic 
activities are concent?ated.

