XXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting  
Tromsø, Norway 
25 May-5 June 1998 
Information Paper presented by Italy 
(Item 7. c of the agenda) 
  
WASTE MANAGEMENT AT THE ITALIAN TERRA NOVA BAY 
STATION 
General Considerations 
The problem of waste management and waste disposal was taken into appropriate 
consideration since the first Antarctic season of the Italian National Research 
Programme-PNRA. It had a high priority during the construction of the station in the 
second campaign in 1986/87 and has remained a high priority item since then. 
A first Waste Management Plan was prepared in April 1989: this was a consolidation 
of operating procedures and station instruction given to Antarctic personnel since the 
beginning of Antarctic activities. Also the results of the SCAR Panel of Experts on 
Waste Disposal, held in Sept.1988 in Hobart have been considered. 
This plan has been updated when necessary with additional material. With the 
broadening of the programme and with the increase of scientific activity the scientific 
co-ordinators were given forms in which the amounts and types of different wastes 
foreseen for various activities had to be detailed and listed. This has been used for 
wastes produced during activities carried out in remote camps and has permitted a 
good level of planning for waste handling and later disposal. 
When the Madrid Protocol was completed and after its signature by Treaty Parties in 
1991, the PNRA was instructed by the ENEA President to apply the Protocol and its 
Annexes immediately, without waiting for its ratification. In practice it was found that 
the Waste Management Plan that was already been applied was in line with the 
Protocol. 
  
Criteria for Waste Management at TNB 
The strategic aim of waste management is to minimise to the maximum extent 
possible the environmental impacts due to the wastes generated by all the scientific 
and logistic activities in Antarctica.. 
Two basic criteria have been adopted right from the beginning of Italian Antarctic 
research activities: 
• 
All wastes from Antarctic activities, in the TNB station, its field camps, 
logistic and research vessels shall be removed from the Antarctic treaty area. 
The only waste which is disposed of in Antarctica is the treated effluent from 
the sewage treatment plant operating at the base. 
• 
Waste separation at the origin. This simplifies and rationalises waste handling 
and disposal. 
  
Waste management 
The main steps of the waste management plan have been: 
• 
the establishment and the implementation of a waste minimisation programme, 
aiming at the reduction of the volume and the weight of waste materials; 
• 
ensuring that storage, transport and final disposal are performed in accordance 
with national legislation; 
• 
the development and the implementation of appropriate waste streaming 
practices, including waste separation at waste production points; 
• 
the adoption of a uniform waste classification; in the first years the Italian 
classification was used, while at present the European Union classification is 
used; 
• 
the adoption of suitable and safe waste containers for all stages of waste 
management; 
• 
the establishment of a documentation system for waste management activities; 
• 
to increase the awareness of the waste management activities through training 
for both scientific and logistic personnel. This specific training is given to all 
personnel serving in Antarctica and it is part of the syllabus of the training 
courses. 
At Terra Nova station activities can be classified as: 
• 
logistic support  
• 
scientific activity, both in base and in remote locations  
• 
operation of the base  
• 
construction and maintenance activities.  
From these activities derive different types of wastes, grouped into four basic groups: 
1. Biodegradable waste: sewage, grey waters, food waste;  
2. Non-hazardous wastes: glass, metals, wood, plastics, etc.;  
3. Petroleum products: fuel, degraded fuel, transmission fluids, lubricants, used 
oil and fuel filters;  
4. Hazardous wastes: lab chemicals, photo lab chemicals, radioactive tracers, 
paints, thinners, etc. 
Each of these groups follows a different way to final disposal. Contracts are in force 
with waste treatment and disposal organisations both in Italy and elsewhere out of the 
Antarctic Treaty area for the handling of this material. Typical waste retrograded at 
the end of a campaign is listed in table I. 
Some of the waste, in particular steel scraps, aluminium cans and glass bottles, is 
retrograded for recycling.. ENEA is studying a technology, already used for the 
recycling of urban organic wastes and based on dehydration, inertisation and 
stabilisation of wastes. This technology is being tested in Italy and may be used in 
Antarctica in a few years.  
The Italian Antarctic Program also deals with the wastes produced in Antarctica by its 
contractors working in the base.. The same waste management rules are applied at the 
field camps and the waste generated there is taken back to base where it is streamed 
with the waste produced in base. 
  
Incinerator 
Terra Nova station is equipped with a double chamber incinerator used mainly for 
burning kitchen waste. The outlet temperature of exhaust gases is 950°C and the gases 
pass through a scrubber system before discharge in the atmosphere. 
  
Sewage treatment 
A sewage treatment plant of the biological type was installed at Terra Nova station 
during the construction of the base in the 1986/87 season. The plant was designed for 
40-50 people. The body of water where the treated effluent is discharged has been 
under constant monitoring from the third campaign onwards: the first monitoring was 
that for the BOD-biochemical oxygen demand-, later broadened to include BOD, 
COD, nitrites, surfactants, oils, etc. The monitoring was used to verify the 
effectiveness of the treatment and to adjust the process.  
At the end of the eighties it was clear that the plant was becoming insufficient for the 
increasing load due to the enlargement of the programme and the larger number of 
people. A new plant was added in parallel with the old. The new plant is of a physico-
chemical type and after a few years it was connected in series with the old one. 
In 1995/98 a completely new plant was installed. 
The experience with sewage treatment at Terra Nova Station has been positive. 
Pollution in the receiving body of water is low, is kept under constant surveillance 
and the plant is adjusted to the needs in a simple way. The sludge resulting from the 
treatment are retrograded to Italy. 
  
Table I: Waste retrograded to Italy for disposal at the end of the 1996/97 campaign by Italian 
contractors (EC is the European Category for waste classification) 
- one ISO 20 container with the following waste material: 
19 drums: incinerator ashes, kg.2.850 
EC 190100 
3 drums: electric cables, kg 400 
EC 170408 
2 drums: spent oil filters 
EC 150201 
2 drums: kitchen waste 
EC 200108 
1 PVC box: used batteries, 600 kg 
EC 200120 
1 PVC 10 l drum: used torch batteries, 10 kg 
EC 200120 
1 cardboard box: expired medical supplies, 60 kg 
EC 200118 
2 plastic drums: lab chemicals , 10 kg 
EC 060100p
1 plastic drum: lab chemicals, 7,5 kg 
EC 070100 
1 cardboard box used plastic and glass blood containers 
EC 180100 
1 plastic drum: 5g of mercury in a thermometer container 
EC 200121 
1 cardboard box: 10 kg of expanded plastic containers with vials with 
sulphuric acid (<85%) and Hg sulphate(<5%) 
EC 060100p 
  
 
