Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                                          XXII ATCM/IP30
                                          April, 1998
                                          Original: English

                                          Agenda item 7a

Cumulative
Environmental
Impacts in Antarctica:
Minimisation and
Management

Submitted by
IUCN

CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
IN ANTARCTICA: MINIMISATION 
AND MANAGEMENT

Information Paper presented to the XXII ATCM
    Tromso, Norway
    May 1998
By IUCN (The World Conservation Union)
Relevant to agenda items 7 (especially b.c.d.f).14,16

1 INTRODUCTION

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) makes several references to cumulative impact, and its implementation requires a better understanding of this concept and its ramifications for environmental management in the Antarctic context.

In order to encourage thought and discussion on the subject of cumulative impact in the Antarctic context, the World Conservation Union (IUCN), through its Antarctic Advisory Committee (AAC) organised an international workshop of invited experts in September 1996 and presented Information Paper (XXI ATCM/Inf 61) outlining the findings of this workshop. ATCM XXI noted that the CEP will have to consider how cumulative impacts should be addressed, and also noted that it was important to further this work intersessionally and suggested that Parties and interested observers and experts, including SCAR, forward their comments to IUCN, on ways of implementing the recommendations contained in the report. This would form the basis of a follow up paper, which could be tabled at XXII ATCM for further discussion.

Intersessionally, IUCN received comments from several individuals and groups. Comments received indicated that the discussion on aspects of cumulative impacts is timely and that the IUCN report was seen as a useful contribution. Specifically, it was mentioned by some that the recommendations in the report may be of use in the discussions of the CEP as it begins its work programs for providing advice to the ATCPs.

The present paper attempts to prioritise recommendations and conclusions of the IUCN workshop, and taking into account comments received, to indicate a) where practical progress could be implemented immediately, and b) where institutional discussion may be required.

IUCN wishes to express its thanks to all individuals and groups that contributed comments (see note 4, page 9), especially to COMNAP and AEON for their extensive and practical commentary.
2 CUMULATIVE IMPACT

Based on literature and discussions, the September 1996 Workshop arrived at the following 
definition:

DEFINITION OF CUMULATIVE IMPACT IN THE ANTARCTIC CONTEXT

A cumulative impact is the impact of combined past, present and reasonably 
foreseeable activities. These activities may occur over time and space.

Practical:

When conceptualising cumulative impact several points must be borne in mind:
•	Small actions whose impacts seem "insignificant" when viewed alone, can have 
    significant cumulative impacts when viewed along with other past, present or foreseeable 
    future actions.
•	Larger-scale activities can produce a "stream" of impacts, and the totality of impact from 
    actions that needs to be considered includes indirect and secondary impacts and any 
    activities or impacts which may be induced by the original activity.
•	The interaction of impacts can be additive or interactive (e.g synergism, antagonism, 
    biomagnification)
•	In considering the totality of impacts, it needs to be kept in mind that impacts may 
    spread in time and/or space.
•	Several different operators may be involved

Consideration of cumulative impact should include all relevant past, present 
and reasonably foreseeable activities. (Rec 1 IUCN 1996) For example: even 
though Protocol Annex I (Arts. 2&3) specifically mentions only existing and (other) 
known planned activities as elements that need to be taken into account when 
assessing cumulative impacts of a proposed activity, for proper assessment, past 
activities should also be included.

Wherever obligations regarding environmental impact are identified, it should be taken 
that this includes cumulative impacts (Rec 2 IUCN 1996). For example: there is no 
explicit requirement in the Protocol Annex I (Art 1) to consider cumulative impact at the 
Preliminary stage, however, cumulative impacts are a sub-set of impacts and wherever 
"impacts" are referred to it is assumed that this includes "cumulative impacts".
3 Practical Matters relating to Annex I

Several practical ways to contribute to improved coverage of cumulative impact in the EIA procedures were identified. These can be taken up by any operator, where appropriate, at any time.

3.1 Joint EIAs

Joint EIAs can be an effective tool for assessing, managing and/or preventing cumulative impacts when activities of different operators are known or predicted to overlap. Such joint assessments could be developed across many levels or combinations of operations, including within and between programmes, states, and government and non-government operators. In some cases this is already occurring.

For example, rather than preparing several individual IEEs , US based IAATO members prepared a joint IEE for the 1997/98 season. This is a first step towards trying to deal with the cumulative impacts resulting from different tourist operators visiting the same sites. It is hoped that further improvement could be achieved by expanding the joint EIA to all tourist operators, not just US based ones.

In areas of overlapping government activities, joint EIAs, or at least joint Operators' consideration of individual assessments may be beneficial. Where appropriate, this could become part of the environmental management practice in existing or developing ASMAs.

3.2 Regulatory authorities

The need to address cumulative impacts should be drawn to the attention of the regulatory authorities (who make the decisions regarding activities, based on the EIA) as well as to the proponent (who has the responsibility of preparing the EIA).

3.3 Audits/reviews

While EIA is used as a prior assessment in the planning phase, and is required by the Protocol, an Audit or review is undertaken for present or past activities, and is not a specific Protocol requirement. It focuses on compliance with international, national or programmatic requirements or policies. While not a Protocol requirement, it is seen as a useful tool in environmental management.

One of the major benefits of audits/reviews is the systematic and regular manner in which potential problems/impacts of existing and past activities can be identified. Note, however, that the process will not necessarily assess impacts. Several useful examples of audits/reviews have been completed for Antarctic activities and their increasing use as an environmental management tool could be an important mechanism for signaling where cumulative impacts might be occurring.
3.4 Programmatic EIAs

EIA procedures under Article 8 and Annex I are usually interpreted as relating specifically 
to proposed activities or changes to existing activities. However, _to accommodate 
assessment of cumulative impact_, the impact of existing activities _which remain 
unchanged_ will also _need to be asssessed_ in some way. Some operators have produced 
"programmatic EIAs" which extend the EIA procedure to existing operations, for instance 
the continued use of an existing Station.

4 Institutional Matters relating to Annex 2

4.1 Specially Protected Species

Consideration should be given to a review of the Specially Protected Species in 
Appendix A to Annex II with a view to examining its utility for the protection of species 
whose decline may be the consequence of, inter alia, cumulative impact (_e.g_ southern 
giant petrel, _Macronectes giganteus_) (Rec 4 IUCN 1996).

The Specially Protected Species provisions of Annex II (Art. 3(4)) may have utility for 
preventing or managing cumulative impacts. This is qualified by some because Annex II 
(Article 3) of the Protocol already accords protection. However, according to others, 
designation as a Specially Protected Species would raise the level of protection required, as 
well as the profile and awareness of the protected status. Several comments were 
received that supported the recommendation for a review of Appendix A to Annex II, and 
the following issues are suggested to be included in such review:

• Mechanism for review of Appendix A
There might be a need to develop _a mechanism for_ the review of Appendix A to Annex 
II. For instance: What kind of process should be initiated and on what scientific basis? 
Care must be taken to ensure that such a process does not become too time consuming, 
especially if there is an imminent threat to the species in question.

• Area specific protection & short-term protection.
Consideration could be given to the designation of species for short-term protection in 
order to _provide interim protection_ while the basis for long-time protection is 
considered. Similarly, species could be protected within defined geographic areas of 
Antarctica where particular cumulative or other pressures have been identified.

4.2 Translocations

In addition to guarding against intoduction of alien organisms, _potential 
translocation of species within Antarctica_ should be addressed through 
precautionary management measures and through further research (Rec 23, IUCN 
1996).
One potential cumulative impact of concern which is not presently addressed in the regulations is the translocation of organisms within the Antarctic (for example transfer of micro-organisms, diseases, birds which follow ships beyond their usual areas, etc). The concern is based on the threat to ecological, scientific and intrinsic values, which translocations can present. This threat is increasing in view of the growth e.g. in circumnavigations, and the increasing amount of formerly remote areas that are now subject to visits.

5 Practical Matters relating to (Annex v)

The use of ASMAs and ASPAs under Annex V (Area Protection and Management) should be encouraged as a tool for the management of cumulative impacts (Rec 5 IUCN 1996). The ASMA/ASPA mechanism of Annex V of the Protocol is adequate for managing cumulative impacts so long as it is approached in an open minded way. The framework is in place but it has not yet been applied in respect to some values nor has it been used explicitly for the purposes of protecting against cumulative impacts. Specific ways in which the ASMA/ASPA mechanism can be used for the minimisation and management of cumulative impacts include:

5.1 Environmental integrity of large remote areas

"Pristine" areas should be identified for a site register, and consideration should be given to the use of designations under Annex V to achieve the appropriate level of protection (which could include exclusion of activities) of such sites where appropriate (Rec 8 IUCN 1996). For the protection of the environmental integrity of remote areas (Annex V Art. 3(2a) and Art 4(2a)), the area designated may have to be much larger than for previously designated ASMA/ASPAs; Environmental integrity includes the avoidance of physical contamination, but is not limited to this. Even if it may be difficult to identify areas that are "pristine" in the sense of having not been exposed to contaminants, there are other values ("wilderness" e.g.) which could still justify such designation.

5.2 Short-term, interim designation

Consideration should be given to the designation of short-term (5-10 year) ASMA/ASPA to provide interim protection while long-term management options are assessed. This is a precautionary approach which allows site management when sufficient information is not yet available to demonstrate conclusively whether a value is being impacted or at risk of being impacted. This is particularly applicable to cumulative impacts because of the complexity of interacting factors such as different operators and activities)
5.3 Recovery

Even an area where environmental damage has occurred may need to be given specific protection: designation as a Protected Area may have to be considered to allow time for possible recovery for areas that have been degraded in the past.

5.4 Marine areas

A marine ASMA/ASPA would have to take account of other international agreements such as CCAMLR, CCAS or the IWC - however this should not preclude their designation or potential use for management;

5.5 Notes

Ratification of Annex V

There are still a number of Parties that have not ratified Annex V to the Protocol. To be able to utilise Annex V as a tool for protecting Antarctic values from cumulative impacts, it is important to continue to encourage ratification of the annex. As long as it is not ratified by all Consultative Parties, there are no legal requirements attached to the provisions of Annex V.

Protected Areas Workshops

At the occasion of ATCM XXII, a Protected Areas Workshop has been organised by the Host Country. The issues relating to Protected Areas that are identified above will form part of IUCN’s contribution to this Workshop.

In 1992 SCAR and IUCN jointly convened a workshop “Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System” to discuss the new provisions for special area protection and management under the Protocol. The proceedings have been published in 1994 by IUCN as “Conservation of the Southern Polar Region No 1”.

6 Institutional Issues concerning Information exchange under the ATS

6.1 Possible role for CEP

There is a possible role for intermediary and experienced coordination of information relevant to the assessment of cumulative impacts (for example, in their national context, the Canadian Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), may return EIAs to the proponent with advice to consider other activities that might interact with the proposed activity). With respect to this point:
•   it needs to be decided who has the onus to provide/collect information about possible interacting activities in the Antarctic context.
•   there would be a role for the CEP to advise on how this is achieved.

6.2 Review of Information Exchange
Antarctic Treaty Parties should review elements of information exchange under the ATS to see whether the format, timeliness and content of current exchanges are adequate to meet the obligations under Annex I of the Protocol to consider cumulative impacts in environmental impact assessment. Particular emphasis should be placed on geographic precision and standardised reporting (Rec 9 IUCN 1996). In order to facilitate assessment of cumulative impact, timely and frequent distribution should be considered of:
- lists of completed, and notification of planned, IEEs including summaries and contact details; and
- lists of permits issued under Annexes II and V (Rec 10 IUCN 1996).

While the latter Recommendation is being partly addressed through the implementation of ATCM Resolution 6 (1995) and the summary of EIAs provided by New Zealand to the ATCM XXI and currently being updated by Norway for ATCM XXII, several concerns remain especially in relation to information availability for EIA purposes:
- The EIA process does not require prior exchange of information of minor activities, yet their impacts may contribute to cumulative impacts.
- There is concern that the time frames for exchange of information for CEE is so long that other activities which may contribute to cumulative impacts may have been initiated during the process.
- Current systems of information exchange about planned activities, both formal and informal, may not always provide enough information, at the right time, to allow informed decisions about the potential for cumulative impact assessment.

7     Practical issues in Education and Training

Training programmes should include the notion that minor impacts by individuals can, when taken together, have cumulative impacts (Rec 12 IUCN 1996). Training programmes should include education about sensitive species and areas, which may be particularly susceptible to cumulative impacts (Rec 13 IUCN 1996).

There would be value in incorporating the concept of cumulative impact in training programmes. In the short term, this issue could usefully be considered for inclusion in discussions at the training and education workshop planned during SCAR/COMNAP in Chile in July 1998. A set of basic principles about cumulative impacts could usefully be developed from the information presented in the IUCN workshop report.

There might also be value in exchanging information about how the various governmental and non-governmental operators address this issue in their current training programmes.
8 Practical Issues in Information Management

The development of common databases containing comprehensive data on all activities and other relevant variables should be considered in multiple operator areas (Rec 14 IUCN 1996). It was also commented that consideration could be given to the need to collect and store information for all activities in a common database, not only for activities in multiple operator areas. Such database cuold include information on past activities.

Effective information management is an important component of identifying and addressing cumulative impacts. It would certainly be useful to learn about any existing examples of environmental databases being used in this manner, or being developed, in particular for multiple operator areas (for example the development of an environmental atlas of the eastern Antarctic region, including environmental attributes as well as e.g. site access, hazards, and history of visitation).

9 Further research

Further research should be carried out on:
- the processes and full extent of cumulative impact in different environments;
- the development of methods applicable to assessment and monitoring for cumulative impact;
- the procedures for managing cumulative impact (Rec 21 IUCN 1996)

Suitable control areas should be established relevant to stations or other activities as a tool for determining the impact of those activities (Rec 22 IUCN 1996).

Emphasis should be placed on defining priorities for cumulative impact research, in particular where there are significant gaps in our knowledge for certain environments, impacts and activities.

In practical terms, a crucial issue to be addressed is whether it is better to concentrate or to spread activities. The answer to this may well vary depending on the type of environment, timing, location, flora and fauna, and the activities in question. It is particularly pressing in relation to visits by tourists, government personnel on R&R or others, to areas with concentrations of wildlife. It will have to be determined what form the best precautionary interim management should take.

While there is no doubt that further research is necessary, it is important to note that the research in itself might lead to (cumulative) impacts in the area of interest. Consideration could be given to combining field studies related to cumulative impact with ongoing research in order to minimise impacts. An awareness of research into cumulative impacts elsewhere in the world will also be important.
10 NOTES

1) IUCN gratefully acknowledges the generous financial contribution made by the Tinker Foundation (USA) which made the Workshop on Antarctic Cumulative Environmental Impacts (September 1996) possible.

2) The full report of the IUCN workshop on Antarctic Cumulative Environmental Impact has been published by IUCN (May 1997). The complete Conclusion and all recommendations were presented as Information Paper (XXI ATCM/Inf 61) These publications can be obtained from IUCN at the following address

Margarita Restrepo, Protected Areas Programme,
IUCN World Headquarters, Rue Mauverney 28, CH 1196 Gland,
Switzerland; Tel.: +41 22 999 0160; Fax: +41 22 999 0015; email:
MMR@HQ.iucn.org;  OR

Beth Clark, Chair, Antarctic Advisory Committee, 408 C Street, N.E., Washington,
D.C., USA; Tel: +1 202
544 0236; Fax: +1 202 544 8483; email: antarctica@igc.org.

3) The designations of geographical entities in this paper and the presentation of the material do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of IUCN concerning the legal status of any country, territory or area, nor of its authorities or delimitation of its frontiers and boundaries.

4) Comments or other correspondence was received from:

Jack sayers, forCOMNAP, Emma Waterhouse for AEON, Dr Tom Maggs (Australian Antarctic Division); Olav H Loken (Canada); Dr Martin Riddle (Australian Antarctic Division) Dr. Edith Fanta (University of Curitiba, Brazil), Dr Pietro Giuliani (ENEA, Italy), Darrel Schoeling (IAATO). Discussion at GOSEAC IX has also been taken into account.

Paper prepared by
Dr Maj De Poorter
(IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee member)
11 Okura River Road
RD2 Albany
New Zealand
ph/fx +64 9 4730872

