 
 
 
 
 
In accordance with Article 1 of the Schedule to the Protocol, an 
Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted with the Secretary General of the 
Permanent Court of Arbitration as the Secretary to the Tribunal. Article 2 of 
the Schedule stipulates that each party shall be entitled to designate up to 
three arbitrators, at least one of whom shall be designated within three 
months of the entry into force of the Protocol. It is also stipulated that each 
Arbitrator shall be experienced in Antarctic affairs, have thorough 
knowledge of International Law and enjoys the highest reputation of 
fairness, competence and integrity. The names of the persons designated 
shall constitute the list of Arbitrators and it is mandatory for each party to 
the Protocol to maintain the name of at least one Arbitrator on the list at all 
the times. 
 
 
 
Government of India has nominated Mr. H.P. Rajan, Adviser, 
Department of Ocean Development, as one of the Arbitrators immediately 
to fulfil the requirement of the Protocol. Mr. Rajan is an expert on 
International Law and has thorough knowledge of Antarctic affairs, having 
handled eight out of seventeen Antarctic expeditions launched by India. Mr. 
Rajan is India’s representative in the Group of Legal Experts on the 
Liability Regime. He was India’s nominee for the Standing Committee on 
Antarctic Logistics & Operations from 1990 to 1994, and also Alternate 
Member of the Council of Managers of national Antarctic Programmes. 
During the year 1994, Mr. Rajan was also the Member of Finance 
Committee of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research. Mr. Rajan 
has visited Antarctica as the Organizer’s representative in the sixth Indian 
expedition launched in 1986. He also holds a Certificate in Antarctic 
Environmental Management, by virtue of  attending a Course conducted by 
the Australian Antarctic Foundation in the University of Tasmania, Hobart, 
in 1993. 
 
 
 
The nomination of Mr. H.P. Rajan was conveyed on 21 April 1998 
to the United States Department of State, as depository of the Antarctic 
Treaty and the Protocol. 
