PRELIMINARY REPORT 
 
"GEOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MACHU PICCHU 
STATION FOUNDATION SOILS FROM AN ENGINEERING 
PERSPECTIVE AND WATER SUPPLY FOR ITS FACILITIES" 
 
The purpose of this paper is to determine the geological characteristics of the Machu 
Picchu station foundation soils and analyze the possibilities of supplying the station 
with water. 
 
A series of geomorphologic events with a direct impact on existing geoforms have 
occurred and still do. These are marine activities, glacier shaping as well as mountain 
and denudation relief based events. 
 
The Machu Picchu and Auzangate ridges are made up of Mesozoic volcanic rocks of 
the andesitic lava overflow type intruded by monzonitic granite plutons and 
Quaternary detrited materials of glacier origin on the Salkantay ridge, colluvial 
sediments on the slopes of these ridges, fluvial-glacier sediments on the terraces and 
marine sediments on the beaches. 
 
In some sectors, the area has also endured external geodynamic phenomena, among 
which we may mention spilling of unconsolidated moraine type materials on both 
slopes of the Salkantay ridge, snow avalanches on the Dormeyko glacier, rockfalls on 
the Machu Picchu and Auzangate ridges, marine erosion on the Northeastern portion 
of Crepin Point; these are all phenomena which do not affect the physical safety of the 
facilities. 
 
As far as internal geodynamic phenomena are concerned, there are no historic 
references of seisms, but they might occur if one takes into account that the area is a 
prolongation of the Andes ridge. 
 
There are some meteorological aspects which impact on the base, among which we 
may mention the main wind direction, NW-SE to W-E, with speeds reaching up to 
200 Km/hour during the Southern winter. 
 
The foundation soils of the area s land are mostly fit for the laying of foundations, 
from a geomechanic point of view, the sandy soils where the MST radar is located 
have a low load capacity and during structure foundation special techniques must be 
used which take into account the freezing factor of the soil. 
 
The existing water resources are varied, as there are both surface and underground 
water tables. On the land where the base is installed there is a reservoir providing for 
good water possibilities. 
Figure 1 
Cs-137 levels in environmental samples 
 
Lichen Soil Sand Sediment 
 
Figure 2 
Cs-137 levels in seawater 
Polar circle Machu Picchu 
 
 
