 
 
 
 
ANTARCTIC TREATY 
XXII CONSULTATIVE MEETING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPENING ADDRESS:  
 
STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF  
THE WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANISATION (WMO) 
 
ATCM-XXII, TROMSO, NORWAY 25 MAY – 5 JUNE 1998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agenda item 3  
 
Submitted by WMO 
 
 
XXII ATCM/IP.................... 
May, 1998 
Original: English 
 
  
 
 
WEATHER, OCEANS AND HUMAN 
ACTIVITY 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The weather affects everyone. It is our constant companion – as tranquil, as turbulent, 
as wondrous, and sometimes as unpredictable as life itself. Meteorology is one of the 
oldest sciences and also one of the most challenging. An appreciation of nature’s 
beauty has always been one of the privileges of humanity, but only this century has 
science succeeded in explaining many of the weather’s mysteries.  
 
Weather forecasting is one of those rare activities that unite nations in a common 
endeavor from which people worldwide benefit daily. Through weather satellites and 
the combined efforts of the more than 180 member countries of the World 
Meteorological Organization, we can track the forces that control our weather and 
forecast their behavior up to a week or more ahead.    
 
As the world begins to come to grips with global environmental issues ranging from 
air quality and acid rain to climate change, meteorology is assuming an important new 
role in underpinning the development of policies aimed at securing the long-term 
survival of the planet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Meteorological Organization 
 
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is a specialised agency of the United 
Nations. It is responsible for facilitating worldwide cooperation in collection of 
meteorological and related hydrological and oceanographic observations; and their 
rapid exchange and application in support of a wide range of essential services to 
aviation, shipping, agriculture and the community at large. 
 
Through the National Meteorological Services of its 185 Member countries, the 
WMO operates marine observation networks in the provision of marine 
meteorological and related oceanographic services. The WMO cooperates closely 
with the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO, which 
was established in 1960 to promote marine scientific investigations and related ocean 
services.  
 
World Meteorological Day 
 
World Meteorological Day commemorates the coming into force on 23 March 1950 
of the Convention of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).   Each year, 
WMO celebrates the Day by focusing on a theme of topical interest.   On the initiative 
of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO, the United 
Nations declared 1998 as the ‘International Year of the Ocean’.   Its objective is to 
focus the attention of all sectors of the community on the importance of the oceans 
and the marine environment as resources for sustainable development. It is therefore 
particularly appropriate that the theme selected by the World Meteorological 
Organization for World Meteorological Day this year, is ‘Weather, Oceans and 
 
1
 
 
Human Activity,’ in recognition of the United Nations’ designation of 1998 as the 
International Year of the Ocean. 
 
The relevance of the theme is highlighted by the fact that two out of three of the 
world’s largest cities (over 2.5 million inhabitants) are located in coastal regions and 
nearly two-thirds of the world’s population live in coastal zones.  The Australia 
National Capital, Canberra, is the only Australian capital city distant (100 km) from 
the coast, and yet weak late sea breezes eventually reach that city in some summer 
evenings. 
 
Ocean/atmosphere interaction 
 
The structure and behaviour of the earth’s atmosphere and ocean are linked by the 
transfer of energy, momentum, water and various chemical species across the air/sea 
surface. This atmosphere-ocean interaction takes place over a wide range of time and 
space scales from wind-driven waves and ocean currents to inter-annual and longer 
term fluctuations in weather patterns driven by ocean circulation variations and sea 
temperature anomalies. Because of their much greater density and heat content, the 
oceans serve as the ‘fly-wheel’ for the atmospheric heat engine. Another aspect is 
that, the atmosphere holds only 0.001% of the total water on earth compared with 
97% in the oceans.    
 
The oceans act as an equal partner with the atmosphere in transporting vast amounts 
of energy from the tropics to higher latitudes. These processes take place on every 
time-scale, but they can have very serious economic consequences when the duration 
of any significant variation extends out in time from a few months, to a year or more.  
 
The oceans and climate 
 
The oceans play a major role in the determination of the global patterns of climate and 
their variation over time. At the largest scale, the density-driven (thermohaline) 
circulation of the global ocean can be likened to a large conveyor belt in which warm 
surface water flowing into the north Atlantic cools and sinks before flowing 
southward again and then eventually eastward into the cold deep Antarctic 
Circumpolar current. Fluctuations in the conveyor belt on time scales of decades to 
centuries and longer generate corresponding long term fluctuations in atmospheric 
temperatures in various parts of the globe. 
 
On shorter time-scales fluctuations in ocean temperature patterns across the equatorial 
Pacific Ocean are associated with the so-called Southern Oscillation/El Nino 
phenomenon. Sea surface temperatures and sea ice influence the behaviour of intense 
depressions over the Southern Ocean. Conversely, weather and climate directly 
influence oceanic conditions. Winter conditions expand the Arctic and Antarctic sea 
ice. 
 
 
 
The Southern Ocean 
 
 
2
 
 
Sea-air interaction over the high latitude ocean surrounding Antarctica plays a 
uniquely important role in driving the circulation of the entire global ocean. The 
Southern Ocean is characterised by massive overturning of water in the north-south 
direction. Upwelling of relatively warm salty water is transformed into Antarctic 
Surface Water, cooling (through heat loss to the atmosphere, and mixing with fresh 
water from ice melt and precipitation), and ultimately sinking and moving northward 
as Antarctic Bottom Water. 
 
The oceanic circulation is influenced by gaps in the sea-ice (polynya) which allow 
heat to be rapidly vented to the atmosphere. Salt that is rejected when ice forms 
increases the density of surface water and accelerates formation of Antarctic Bottom 
Water. Take-up of oxygen in this overturning process is important to biological 
processes in the deep ocean, as is take-up of carbon dioxide to reducing the potential 
for global warming. 
 
Measurements from drifting buoys 
 
While satellites can provide comprehensive coverage of some features of the ocean, 
there are several atmospheric and ocean properties that must be measured directly at 
or near the ocean surface. Sea surface atmospheric pressure is a particularly important 
example. 
 
In regions with little shipping – especially the Southern Ocean – one approach is to 
deploy ‘drifting buoys’ that float with the prevailing winds and ocean currents in 
waters too deep to allow an anchor. They typically measure atmospheric temperature, 
pressure, wind direction and speed as well as sea surface temperature. Data are 
relayed for the lifetime of their battery power supply (usually about two years) via 
satellite to national meteorological collection centres for use in global real time 
operational models. More than 600 drifting buoys are in use around the world at any 
one time. Some buoys launched in the Southern Ocean have circled Antarctica.       
 
Monitoring the oceans from space 
 
The oceans cover two-thirds of our planet and exert a major influence on daily 
weather and global climate. Satellite remote-sensing systems provide vital data over 
vast areas of the ocean surface. ‘Passive’ systems measuring energy radiated from the 
oceans in the visible infra-red and microwave channels are used in conjunction with 
data from ships, buoys and shore-based weather stations to measure sea-surface 
temperatures, surface currents, wind and wave conditions, rainfall rates and sea-ice 
cover.  
 
“Active’ microwave systems that transmit energy and measure the return signal (for 
instance, radar altimeters which measure deviations of the ocean surface with an 
accuracy of a few centimetres) provide information on sea surface elevation, wave 
height and wind speed. 
 
Polar orbiting and geostationary satellites operated by the European Community, the 
USA, Russia, China and Japan provide global coverage of the oceans. Satellite remote 
sensing information is available on a regional scale in real time to National 
 
3
 
 
Meteorological and Oceanographic Services to assist in their routine monitoring of 
sea surface temperatures. The state of the oceans such as 
• 
the height of  surface waves generated by local winds or the height of swell waves 
that have been propagated from distant wind storms, as well as; 
• 
the aerial extent and concentration of sea ice. 
 
Marine weather services 
 
Accurate forecasts of gales and storms are of importance to nearly two-thirds of the 
world’s population who live in coastal zones. Moreover, a wide range of activities 
depend on the world’s oceans to provide food, energy, water, petroleum and other 
mineral resources. Driven by the need to develop a comprehensive global ocean 
observing system, new measurements and communications systems have evolved. 
Polar orbiting and geostationary satellites; automatic weather stations; drifting and 
moored buoys are transforming our knowledge of the interactions between oceans and 
atmosphere. 
 
In many countries, the earliest national Meteorological Services were established 
primarily to provide gale and storm warnings for mariners. The sinking of Titanic in 
April 1912 prompted agreements for ensuring shipping safety standards and practices, 
including weather and navigation advices. Weather forecasts and warnings for 
shipping on the high seas are provided under the provisions of the International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS). With the international adoption, in 
1988, of the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS), marine 
communications exploit the latest technology. The dissemination of meteorological 
forecasts and warnings is a major part of this system. Australia’s dramatic Southern 
Ocean rescue of yachtsmen in 1997 occurred under the provision of SOLAS and 
using GMDSS. Over the years, WMO and marine organizations have developed a 
system of maritime weather forecast and warning services for the high seas. Other 
marine services provided by National Meteorological Services include coastal waters 
information, forecasts and warnings for fishing vessels and yachts.  
 
The Antarctic Meteorological Centre at Casey 
 
Expanding activities of marine transportation, fishing and marine research to sub-
Antarctic and Antarctic regions depend on satellite observations for reliable analysis 
of sea ice formation, behavior and decay. WMO Member countries, have made an 
increasingly important contribution to safety and efficiency of cold-ocean operations. 
In polar regions, satellites accurately monitor the extent of pack ice, its characteristics 
of concentration and thickness and can help track icebergs.  
 
A ground station for polar orbiting satellites, launched by the USA, is operated by the 
Australian Bureau of Meteorology (with support from Australian Antarctic Division) 
at the Antarctic Meteorological Centre, located at Casey ANARE station. This gives 
satellite pictures of sea ice and wind storms that are useful for provision of marine 
weather services for the navigation of ships. The high resolution data are archived at 
the Antarctic Cooperative Research Centre located at the University of Tasmania for 
applications in and climate related research. 
 
 
4
 
 
Modern weather services meet specific requirements of weather sensitive activities at 
sea. Operators of National Antarctic Programs when planning their routes over the 
Southern Ocean need wind and wave forecasts from weather and sea state prediction 
models of the national Meteorological Services. Expanding activities in Antarctic 
regions depend on satellite observations for reliable sea-ice information, behaviour 
and decay. Ever larger vessels increase the risks of spills and require improved 
services for coastal waters.  
 
Pollution 
 
The oceans play several important roles in the climate system. As well storing and 
transporting large amounts of heat, they also store carbon dioxide and carbon within 
their depths. Atmospheric transport and deposition of pollutants, including heavy 
metals such as lead, cadmium and mercury, and persistent organic pollutants such as 
DDT, play a significant role in coastal and deep-ocean pollution. These can cause 
shifts in marine biological productivity. In response, WMO has established the Global 
Atmospheric Watch (GAW) Program to provide observational data, scientific 
assessments and related information which will help refine our understanding of these 
processes. 
 
Climate variability 
 
The threat of global warming is of great public interest. Any factor that alters the 
radiation balance between that received from the Sun or radiated from the Earth to 
outer space, or which modifies the net radiation within the atmosphere or between the 
atmosphere, oceans and land, will effect climate. 
 
Observed increases in the concentration of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, 
methane, and nitrous oxide, warm the lower atmosphere and surface of the Earth. 
Many scientists suggest that changes in the world’s climate may be already under 
way.  The Intergovernmental Panel on climate change (IPCC) was established in 1988 
by WMO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to assess and 
report periodically on climate change.  The Panel’s most recent assessment (1995) 
suggests that the Earth could be as much as 3.5oC warmer by the year 2100 if no 
preventive measures are taken. How the oceans respond to this change is central to 
predicting both global and regional impacts of any climate change. 
 
In the last 100 years, mean global sea level is thought to have risen by between 10 to 
25 centimetres. Over the next hundred years, and perhaps the next two hundred years, 
it is probable that greater snowfall on Antarctica will outweigh the increased loss of 
grounded ice, caused by increasing temperatures of the surrounding ocean. The rise in 
sea level due to thermal expansion of the world’s oceans is difficult to predict. 
According to WMO the rise in sea level due to thermal expansion will be in the range 
15 to 95 centimetres over the next century. The Antarctic Cooperative Research 
Centre at the University of Tasmania, released a Position Statement in November 
1997, indicating that scientific analyses suggest that the rise in sea level due to 
thermal expansion of the world’s oceans is likely to be something of the order of 20-
30 centimetres over the next century, according to current models. Calculations also 
 
5
 
 
 
6
suggest that the net gain of Antarctic ice will reduce the rise attributable to thermal 
expansion of the oceans by a few centimetres. 
 
Conclusions 
 
Ocean activities have increased greatly during the latter half of the 20th century. This, 
combined with our growing appreciation of the role of the oceans in the climate 
system, has increased the focus of the scientific community and governments on the 
ice/ocean/atmosphere system. Against this backdrop, there is a continuing 
requirement to provide marine meteorological services to facilitate safe and efficient 
operations at sea and to contribute to the protection and sustainable development of 
ocean resources. 
 
All these activities confirm the importance of the theme of World Meteorological Day 
this year - “Weather, oceans and human activity.”  WMO and the national 
Meteorological Services emphasize the importance of improving our understanding of 
the role of the oceans in the climate system and to contribute to the preservation of 
this vital resource for future generations on our planet. . For WMO a top priority is 
improving our understanding of global warming, developing policies to reduce its 
magnitude and mitigate impacts. 
 
 
