Antarctic Treaty                                                    
XXII Consultative Meeting                                            
                                                                     
Traité sur L’Antarctique                                             
XXIIième Réunion Consultative                                        
                                                                     
Tratado Antartico                                                    
XXII Reunión Consultiva                                              
                                                                     
Договор об Антарктике                                                
XXII-ое Консультативное Совещание                                    
                                                                     
                                    XXII ATCM/IP33                   
                                     April, 1998                     
                                     Original: English               

                            Agenda item 7a                           


                                   Draft Decree                      
                          on the Protection                      
                          of Antarctica                              


                        Submitted by                                 
                        The Netherlands                              
Draft Decree on the Protection of Antarctica

First draft of a decree as referred to in section 10 of the Protection of Antarctica Act

Decree of . . .

no.

containing rules relating to permit applications under the Protection of Antarctica Act
(Protection of Antarctica Decree)

On the recommendation of Our Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, no. . . ., of . . . 1998, Legislation Division, Central Legal Affairs Department, as agreed with Our Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries;

Having regard to section 10 of the Protection of Antarctica Act;

Having heard the Council of State (recommendation no. . . ., of . . .);

Having seen the further report no. . . ., of . . ., from Our Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, Legislation Division, Central Legal Affairs Department, issued with the agreement of Our Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries;

Have approved and decreed:

§ 1. Definitions

Article 1

For the purposes of this Decree, the following terms have the following definitions:

a.	Act: the Protection of Antarctica Act;

b.	permit: a permit as referred to in section 8 (1) of the Act;

c.	genetically modified organisms: genetically modified organisms as defined in the Genetically Modified Organisms Decree pursuant to the Chemical Substances Act.

§ 2. Permit applications

Article 2

1.	Permit applications shall be submitted by the organiser of the activity for the implementation of which the permit is requested.

2.	Applications shall be submitted in quadruplicate to the Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment on a form to be adopted by Our Ministers.

3.	The application shall be accompanied by an English translation.

4.	The documents pertaining to the application shall be identified as such by or on behalf of the applicant.
§ 3. Information to be provided

Article 3

The applicant shall provide the following information in or with a permit application:

a.  an accurate description of the activity for which the permit is required, including in any event:

    1.  the scope, duration and intensity of the activity;
    2.  the purpose of the activity and the reason why it needs to be carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area;
    3.  actions as referred to in section 6 (2) of the Act for which a permit is required, together with the purpose of and the reason for the actions;
    4.  the number of persons who are to take part in the activity;
    5.  an accurate indication of the places, including historic sites and monuments, to be visited in the Antarctic Treaty area, the dates and times of these visits, together with the other places that might be visited in certain circumstances and the number of persons who will visit the said places;
    6.  a map showing the route that the activity will follow and indicating the places indicated in point 5 of this article;
    7.  an examination of the alternatives to the proposed activity and the considerations that led to the decision to carry out the activity as specified at (a), points 1 to 5, of this article;

b.  particulars of the persons involved in the activity, including in any event:

    1.  names, nationalities and addresses of the applicant and the persons implementing the activity;
    2.  names, nationalities and addresses of the participants in the activity;
    3.  particulars of the expertise of the organiser or the persons implementing the activity;

c.  information relating to the requisites for the activity, including in any event:

    1.  stations and other accommodation, temporary or otherwise, that will be visited, placed, established or changed, together with an indication of the location of these accommodations;
    2.  means of transport that will be used or available;
    3.  materials and equipment that will be taken along or used for the purpose of implementing the activity, together with the associated energy supply;
4.  gaseous, liquid or solid substances, including chemical substances, radioactive 
    substances and explosives, and any genetically modified organisms, which will be 
    taken along or used for the purpose of implementing the activity;

5.  the nature and quantity of food, including the species and number of plants and 
    animals intended as food to be taken into the Antarctic Treaty area.

6.  species, number, age and sex of plants and animals not intended as food to be 
    taken into the Antarctic Treaty area;

d.  an accurate description of the adverse effects that the activity may or will have on the 
    Antarctic environment, together with the nature and extent of the individual types of 
    adverse effect, and the periods within which they might occur, including in any event:

    1.  the adverse effects that might be caused by:
    
    -the visiting, placing, establishing or changing of accommodations as indicated at (c), 
     point 1, and the entering of places not previously visited by humans;
    
    -the use of means of transport as referred to at (c), point 2;
    
    -the taking along or use of technics, materials and equipment as referred to at (c), 
     point 3;
    
    -the taking along or use of substances as referred to at (c), point 4;
    
    -the taking of food to Antarctica, except for the adverse effects that might be 
     caused by taking plants and dead animals intended as food;
    
    -the removal from the Antarctic Treaty area or the moving, temporarily or 
     otherwise, of physical elements, such as soil, rock, fossils, bones and shells;

    2.  the waste generated during the activity, the method of storing and the method of 
        disposing of such waste, a distinction being drawn between hazardous waste, 
        other solid and nonflammable waste, flammable waste and wastewater;

    3.  the cumulative effects of the combination of the proposed activity with other 
        existing or planned activities in the Antarctic Treaty area that may reasonably be 
        known to the applicant;

e.  the measures - including technologies and procedures - that have been or are to be taken 
    to prevent or limit as far as possible the adverse effects that the activity may have on the 
    Antarctic environment;

f.  the adverse impact that the activity may have on other existing or planned activities in the 
    Antarctic Treaty area, and the measures - including technologies and procedures - that 
    have been or are to be taken to prevent or limit this impact as far as possible;

g.  the manner in which and times at which the adverse impact is to be determined and 
    recorded during the activity;
h.	the measures - including technologies and procedures - which have been or are to be taken to deal with accidents quickly and effectively, especially accidents that may affect the environment;

i.	any developments that the applicant may reasonably expect which may affect the decision on the application;

j.	any contacts established with organisers of other activities in the Antarctic Treaty area in connection with the implementation of the activity, and the purpose of these contacts;

k.	any contacts established with other countries that are party to the Protocol in connection with the implementation of the activity, and the purpose of these contacts;

l.	insurance policies or other financial guarantees intended to cover the cost of implementing the activity and liability for damage arising from any adverse effects of the activity in question on the Antarctic environment.

Article 4

If the application partly relates to the removal of living resources from their population or actions harmful to living resources, the applicant shall also specify the following in or with the application:

a.	a precise description of the relevant actions, the related materials and techniques, and the manner of ensuring that the removal of the living resources will entail minimum pain and suffering;

b.	a precise indication of the places where and the dates and times when the actions in question will be carried out;

c.	the names of the persons who will carry out the actions;

d.	the number of living organisms that will be removed from their population and the reasons for this number;

e.	the effects which the actions may have on the survival or recovery of a plant or animal species or local population and the local ecosystem.

Article 5

If the application partly relates to the introduction into the Antarctic Treaty area of animals or plants belonging to a species designated in appendix B to annex II of the Protocol, the applicant shall also specify the following in or with the application:

a.	the purpose and necessity of this action;

b.	the precautions taken to prevent the animals or plants escaping or coming into contact with native flora and fauna;

c.	the method of ensuring that these animals or plants will be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area before the permit expires or will be disposed of by means of incineration in a low-emission incinerator or by some other equally effective means so as to eliminate any risk to native flora and fauna;
d.     the precautions taken to prevent the introduction into the Antarctic Treaty area of microorganisms that are not present among the native flora and fauna, such as viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts and fungi;

e.     the effects that the action may have on the survival or recovery of a plant or animal species or local population and the local ecosystem.

Article 6

If the application partly relates to the introduction into the Antarctic Treaty area of plants and dead animals intended as food, the applicant shall also specify the following in or with the application:

a.     for whom the food is intended;

b.     the method of ensuring that slaughtered poultry is examined for signs of disease, such as Newcastle disease, tuberculosis and yeast infection, before being packaged for dispatch to the Antarctic Treaty area;

c.     the method of ensuring that unconsumed parts of animals and plants are stored under carefully controlled conditions and removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or are disposed of by means of incineration in a low-emission incinerator or by some other equally effective means, so as to eliminate any risk to native flora and fauna;

d.     the precautions taken to prevent the introduction into the Antarctic Treaty area of microorganisms that are not present among the native flora and fauna, such as viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts and fungi;

e.     the adverse effects that the action may have on the Antarctic environment.

Article 7

If the application partly relates to visits to specially protected Antarctic areas, the applicant shall also specify the following in or with the application:

a.     the actions to be carried out in the area, and:

1.     the scope, duration and intensity of the action;

2.     a precise indication of the places where these actions will be carried out and the relevant dates and times;

3.     the information referred to in article 3, points (c) to (k), relating to this action;

c.     the method of ensuring that the management plan relating to the area, as referred to in article 5, annex V to the Protocol, is complied with.

§ 4. Concluding provisions

Article 8

This Decree shall enter into force on a date to be determined by royal decree.
Article 9

This Decree shall be cited as the Protection of Antarctica Decree.

We order and command that this Decree and the accompanying explanatory memorandum be 
published in the Bulletin of Acts and Decrees.

Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment

Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
