Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/IP10
April, 1998
English
Original: Spanish

Agenda item 7c

Compilation of
Information on the
Antarctic Wildlife and
Phytoplankton ...

Submitted by
Peru
```
COMPILATION OF INFORMATION ON THE ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE
AND PHYTOPLANKTON GATHERED DURING
THE PERUVIAN ANTAR EXPEDITIONS

1. INTRODUCTION

Since the first expedition to Antarctica took place, the wildlife existing around the Peruvian Machu Picchu
station, located at Crepin Point, has been evaluated.

Thus, during the second Peruvian expedition to Antarctica, a preliminary inventory of birds and marine
mammals was carried out (Peru, 1989).

During the fifth Peruvian expedition to Antarctica, mollusks, crustacea, birds and marine mammals were
identified and information was gathered (Elliott, 1995)

During the Antar VII expedition, a full inventory of the seabirds species living on and around the Machu
Picchu station was made (Jahncke and Sánchez, 1996).

Concerning the phytoplankton structure and production, samples have been gathered ever since the first
expedition, where the phytoplankton community elements on Bransfield Strait are being described (Gómez,
1988). Antar II also carried out a similar study in the same area (Antonietti, 1989). Other samples were
gathered during Antar III in that area, and phytoplankton samples were gathered and described on
MacKellar Inlet during Antar VIII (Ochoa, 1997).

A summary of the wildlife and phytoplankton identified and inventoried during the above mentioned
expeditions is introduced hereafter.

2. WILDLIFE IDENTIFIED DURING THE ANTAR EXPEDITIONS

At Crepin Cape, the area where the Peruvian Scientific Station in Antarctica, "Machu Picchu", is located,
nine ornithological species have been recorded, among which we find the Pigoscelis antartica, P. adeliae
and P. papua penguins; the Phalacrocorax atriceps Antarctic cormorant; only the Sterna vittata Antarctic tern
and the Catharacta maccormicki, Antarctic skua, breed in this area.

Besides the above mentioned species, the following are recorded at MacKellar inlet, adjacent to Crepin
cape: the Daption capensis, cape petrel, the Kelp gull or Laurus dominicanus, the tern, Oceanitus
oceanicus, and a heron, Dublus ibis.

XXII ACTM - Perú - Doc. 10/Eng                                  Page 1
As far as mammals are concerned, the only seen at Crepin cape was the crabeater seal, Lobodon carcinophagus.

During the Antar II cruise, which took place between February 8 and 13, 1989, along Bransfield strait, ten ornithological species were recorded, five of which belong to the Procellariidae family, two to the Diomedeidae and one each to the Stercorariidae, Hydrobatidae and Laridae families. We distinguish among the first ones:

-   The Daption capensis (Cape petrel, Paloma del Cabo, Damero) 
    It spreads from Antarctica to Ecuador, along the Humboldt stream. It nests on the South Georgia, South Sandwich, Orkney, South Shetland, Bouvet, Crozet, Kerguelen, and Heard islands and many other places of the Antarctic peninsula. It lays a single egg inside cracks or between stones on the inaccessible crags, close to the sea. It feeds on fish, cephalopods (cuttlefish), crustacea and waste from the ships.

-   Macronectes giganteus (Southern Giant Petrel, Pájaro camero, Petrel Gigante). It nests on the South Georgia, South Sandwich, Orkney and South Shetland islands and on the Antarctic peninsula. It migrates along the west coast of South America, alongside the Humboldt stream, approximately up to Paita, Peru (5º S). It lays a single egg. It feeds on fish, cephalopods, crustacea, algae and seabird offspring.

-   Fulmarus glacialoides (Antarctic Fulmar, Potro plateado). It nests on the Sandwich, Orkney, South Shetland, South Georgia and Bouvet islands and different other places of the Antarctic peninsula. It migrates to the North along the west coast of South America, alongside the Humboldt stream, to the North of Peru. It lays a single egg. It feeds on fish and crustacea.

-   Pterodroma lessonii (White-Head Petrel, Petrel cabeza blanca). It nests on the Kerguelen, Crozet, Antipodes and Macquarie islands. It spreads over the Southern seas.

The species belonging to the Diomedeidae family are the following:

-   Diomedea melanophris (Black browed Albatross, Albatros ceja negra) 
    It nests on the Falkland, South Georgia, Kerguelen, Heard, Antipodes and Macquarie islands. Their distribution is circumpolar, and spread from 65º S to 23º S, but they reach Peru (10º S) and West of Arica (10º S) following the cold areas of the Humboldt and Benguela streams. It lays one egg. It feeds mainly on fish and cephalopods.

XXII ACTM - Perú - Doc. 10/Eng                                                             Page 2
- Phoebetria fusca (Sooty Albatross, Albatros tiznado). It nests on the Tristán de Cunha, Gough, St. Paul, Marion, Prince Edward, Crozet and Kerguelen islands.

- Oceanitus oceanicus (Wilson's Storm Petrel, Golondrinas del Mar). This species belongs to the Hydrobatidae family, Procellariform order. It is a common species in the Southern oceans and has a widely transequatorial distribution. It nests in the Antarctic, South Georgia, Crozet, Kerguelen, Falkland and Cape Horn islands. It lays one egg and feeds on zooplankton.

- Larus d. dominicanus (Kelp gull, Gaviota dominicana). This species belongs to the Laridae family, Charadriform order, encompassing more than 80 species.

3. BIODIVERSITY AT THE PERUVIAN SCIENTIFIC STATION IN ANTARCTICA: "MACHU PICCHU".

VERTEBRATES

Fish
Nototheniidae family
Dissostichus eleginoides              Southern black hake              "Astromerluza negra"
Notothenia (N.) neglecta              Yellow rockcod                  "Trama amarilla"
Notothenia (N.) rossii               Mottled rockcod                 "Trama jaspeada"
Trematomus newnesi                    Southern dark cod              "Austrobacalao oscuro"

Marine mammals
Otariidae family
Arctocephalus gazella                 Antarctic fine wolf            "Lobo fino antártico"

Phocidae family
Mirounga leonina                      Elephant seal                  "Elefante marino"
Leptonychotes weddelli                Weddell seal                    "Foca de weddell"
Lobodon carcinophagus                 Crabeater seal                  "Foca cangrejera"

Balaneopteridae family
Megaptera novaeangliae                Humpback whale                 "Ballena jorobada"

XXII ACTM - Perú - Doc. 10/Eng                                                             Page 3
Penguins

Spreniscidae family
Pygosceles antarctica         Chinstrap penguin         "Pingüino de barbijo"
Pygosceles papua             Gentoo penguin            "Pingüino papua"
Pygosceles adeliae           Adelie penguin            "Pingüino de adelia" o
                                                         "Pingüino común"

Other birds nesting in the area

Stercoralidae family
Catharacta maccormicki       Skua                      "Skua"

Phalacrocoracidae family
Phalacrocorax atriceps       Blue-eyed shag            "Cormorán de ojos azules"

Sternidae family
Sterna vittata               Antarctic tern            "Golondrina de mar" o 
                                                         "Gaviota de mar"

Lariidae family
Larus d. dominicanus         Kelp gull                 "Gaviota dominicana"
                                                         Dominican gull
                                                         "Gaviota cocinera"

Procellariidae family
Oceanitus oceanicus         Wilson's storm petrel     "Golondrina de tempestad"
                                                         Giant petrel
                                                         "Petrel gigante"

4. ANTARCTIC PHYTOPLANKTON

The Antarctic phytoplankton assessment carried out during the first expedition made with the Antar I cruiser
was marked by a predominance of diatoms and phytoflagellates. In terms of quantities, the best represented
species were the following diatoms: Nitzschia prolongatoides, Eucampia antarctica, Chaetocaros fortissimus,
Nitzschia castracaneir, Odontella weissflogii and N. delicatissima. In the phytoflagellates group, there were
large concentrations of Phaeocystis.

The phytoplankton composition during the Antar II expedition was quite similar to the first one. Thus, during
Antar II, besides the above mentioned species, the following diatoms and phytoflagellates were also found in 
high concentrations: Diatoms: Nitzschia seriata, Thalassiosira gravida, Tropinoneis gracialis, Chaetoceros
socialis, Rhizosolenia alata f. enermis and Rhizosoleniahebetata f. semiespina. Phytoflagellates: Leucocryptos
marina and Monodas.

XXII ACTM - Perú - Doc. 10/Eng                                         Page 4
During Antar III, the phytoplankton was represented by the same taxonomic groups as the previous ones, plus 
the Chaetoceros neglectum diatom. Here the Leucocryptos marina flagellate was very abundant.

REFERENCES

Antonietti, E. 1989. Microplancton del Estrecho de Bransfield. de 1980 (Perú Antar II) Inf. Científico de la 
Segunda Expedición Peruana a la Antártida pp. 9-44.

Elliott, W. 1995. Fauna y Flora del entorno de la Base Antártica Peruana "Machu Picchu" (ANTAR V) 
Informe Progresivo Instituto del Mar del Perú. Callao N0 1.

Gómez, Olga. 1988. Microplancton del Estrecho de Bransfield durante el Verano de 1988. Inf. Científico de la 
Primera Expedición Peruana a la Antártida.

Gómez, Olga. 1988. Microplancton del Estrecho de Bransfield durante el Verano de 1991. Inf. Científico de la 
Tercera Expedición Peruana a la Antártida.

Jahncke J.V.R. Sánchez. Las Aves Marinas de la Punta Crepín, Isla Rey Jorge, Verano de 1996 (Perú Antar VII)

Perú, 1989. Report on Peruvian Antarctic activities 1989. National Commission on Antarctic affairs. Lima, 138 
pp

XXII ACTM - Perú - Doc. 10/Eng                                                             Page 5
2
