Developing an Environmental Monitoring Program -- 
a Work in Progress 
Background 
The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) is developing an environmental 
monitoring program to measure the impacts from science and operations at it research 
stations in Antarctica. The monitoring program is being built on the recommendations 
of the SCAR/COMNAP workshops (Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from 
Science and Operations in Antarctica, SCAR, 1996) and seeks to implement them in 
a cost effective, scientifically sound manner. 
Recognizing that scientific research and related logistic support can have effects on 
the Antarctic environment, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties adopted 
Recommendation XV-5 on environmental monitoring in Antarctica. In addition to 
encouraging national programs to establish monitoring programs to verify predicted 
effects and detect unforeseen effects, the Parties also recommended that a meeting of 
experts be convened to provide advice on monitoring programs in the Antarctic. In 
June, 1992, the first Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring was held in 
Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
The meeting participants considered many aspects and issues related to environmental 
monitoring. Among their conclusions was that: 
"The first steps in environmental impact monitoring are defining the programme 
objectives, identifying the variables of concern, determining the natural variations 
therein, and establishing baselines against which the nature, magnitude, and 
significance of future changes can be evaluated." 
They also pointed out that environmental monitoring should be focused on questions 
of how activities cause or may cause environmental impacts and that the monitoring 
results should provide the feedback operators need to improve their activities through 
prevention or mitigation of impacts. Furthermore, the meeting recommended that a 
group of technical experts on monitoring be convened to address in greater detail 
issues of: 
• 
design of monitoring programs  
• 
scientific protocols for monitoring  
• 
standardization and quality assurance  
• 
applicable technology  
• 
data management  
The scope and complexity of these issues necessitated conducting two workshops. 
The first, held in October 1995, was tasked with developing options for monitoring 
human impacts associated with research activities and logistic operations. The second 
workshop, held in March 1996, considered methodologies, technologies, study 
designs, and data management needed to implement a successful and meaningful 
monitoring program. 
The results and recommendations from these workshops are providing the framework 
within which the USAP environmental monitoring program is being developed. The 
approach being taken is to develop a hypothesis driven monitoring program precisely 
targeted on a few key indicators, carefully selected on the basis of sound scientific 
criteria. Those indicators must be related to specific activities or operations. 
Furthermore, the environmental monitoring program must be tied to an environmental 
management strategy in order to be useful. 
  
Development of a Monitoring Program for the United States Antarctic Program 
The primary purpose for developing a monitoring program is to provide the basis for 
sound environmental management decisions and improvements in management 
activities. Data obtained from the monitoring program will be used to document 
baseline conditions, detect and monitor changes from that baseline, verify operational 
impact, and monitor recovery from accidental impacts to the environment. At a 
minimum, the program must provide an early warning of deterioration in key values 
or resources and identify the activities responsible for such deterioration. The program 
must be cost effective and be useful for management decision making. 
In developing the USAP monitoring plan, we are focusing first on McMurdo Station. 
McMurdo is the largest U.S. station and presumably has the most extensive impact. 
McMurdo Station is a year round coastal station built on the bare volcanic rock of Hut 
Point Peninsula on Ross Island. It is the logistics hub of the U.S. Antarctic Program 
and has a harbor where research and resupply vessels dock, landing strips on sea ice 
and shelf ice for fixed wing aircraft, and a helicopter pad. Its 85 or so buildings range 
in size from a small radio shack to large, three-story structures. The buildings include 
a modern laboratory with state-of-the-art instrumentation to facilitate research, repair 
facilities, dormitories, administrative buildings, a firehouse, power plant, water plant, 
wharf, and warehouses. They are linked by above-ground water, sewer, telephone, 
and power lines. 
Research is performed at and near McMurdo in marine and terrestrial biology, 
biomedicine, geology and geophysics, glaciology and glacial geology, meteorology, 
aeronomy, and upper atmosphere physics. 
The complexity of the station, with a wide range of station support activities, the on-
going research in the immediate vicinity of the station, and a substantial data base 
concerning air, water, benthic and soil sampling are the primary reasons that the 
USAP decided to use McMurdo as the starting point for developing an environmental 
monitoring plan. It is anticipated that all potentially affected media and all types of 
potential sources of impact from station operations will be represented. Lessons 
learned from development of a site specific monitoring program here will be 
applicable to other areas in Antarctica where similar operations are occurring.  
  
Components of the Monitoring Program 
The monitoring program being developed will have two components. The first 
component will be a simple, practical, cost effective plan that will: 
• 
define the boundary/extent of the "footprint" of anthropogenic impacts 
resulting from station operations (e.g. air emissions from the power plant);  
• 
document that boundary and develop a baseline assessment of current 
conditions within the boundary; and  
• 
develop a monitoring program that will detect changes in the "footprint" 
directly related to station operations.  
Monitoring the footprint of station operations will provide background information 
for future planning as well as data needed for status and trend analysis. It should also 
be noted that the definition of "footprint" will be very much related to the media 
under consideration. For example, air borne particulates might be the indicator of 
choice for detecting the extent of a station footprint on land while some other 
constituent might be the indicator of choice for a marine area adjacent to a coastal 
station. Use of such an indicator might yield a different "footprint" than use of carbon 
soot from power plant operations. The footprint, then, would be related to what 
indicator is chosen and how that indicator is transported. 
The second component will be a similar plan for the more heavily impacted areas at 
and surrounding the station. This second component will: 
• 
define the boundary/extent of heavily impacted areas;  
• 
document that boundary and develop a baseline assessment of current 
conditions within the boundary, and;  
• 
develop a monitoring program that will detect changes from baseline 
conditions that can be directly related to station operations.  
  
Specific Approach to Development 
Following the recommendation that any monitoring program should be hypothesis 
driven, the following hypotheses form an integral part of the USAP approach to 
developing a station are monitoring plan: 
Hypothesis 1. The areal extent the impact from the presence of a station as an 
operational facility is bounded and the boundary limits can be determined. 
Hypothesis 2. Changes in operations and activities will be reflected in changes in the 
selected indicators. 
A phased approach is being used to develop the monitoring program. The first phase 
will: 
1. compile and summarize existing data on station emissions, discharges, and 
impacts to the local environment;  
2. identify and evaluate possible models for defining the probable extent of the 
station’s "footprint";  
3. develop an approach for defining the boundaries of heavily impacted areas;  
4. select appropriate indicator parameters to monitor emissions from specific 
activities in different media such as air, water, and soil (indicators will be 
justified based on their ability to unambiguously record the impact area of an 
activity.  
To accomplish this, existing sampling and analysis data is being gathered and relevant 
literature is being reviewed. This review will also assist in identifying relevant, 
meaningful, cost effective parameters that can be monitored to detect change. The 
literature review will assist in identifying valid predictive models for defining 
boundaries. An important consideration in developing or using predictive models is 
that of spatial and temporal scales that are appropriate for various types of 
disturbance. Once the historical data on heavily impacted areas is summarized, 
models can be used to estimate a sphere of influence that might be expected. This in 
turn will be used in designing the spatial distribution of a pilot sampling project. 
To assist in this process, a Scientific Advisory Board is being created to advise on the 
development of the environmental monitoring program. The advisory board will 
consist of three to five well known experts with a combination of experience in 
developing large, multidisciplinary monitoring programs, and nationally recognized 
expertise in an appropriate scientific field with an emphasis on polar experience. 
Based on the model chosen during the first phase, the second phase will include the 
development and implementation of a statistically valid study plan, including a pilot 
sampling design, to verify the predicted footprint area and heavily impacted area. 
Using existing data to the greatest extent possible, any necessary studies and/or 
sampling will be conducted to verify the prediction. The results will be used to 
determine if the anticipated sphere of influence is as predicted. The information 
obtained will be used to refine the sampling design and provide input into the final 
long term monitoring design. It is anticipated that the pilot phase may require as much 
as three years to adequately determine temporal issues and effects.  
  
Expected results 
Using the information gathered, a long term environmental monitoring program plan 
will be designed and implemented. Assessment of the monitoring data will provide an 
early warning of deterioration of values or resources while identifying those activities 
most likely to be responsible for any observed deterioration. The program should also 
be capable of detecting improvements in environmental conditions that can be directly 
linked to modification of operating procedures.  
As noted earlier, the initial plan will be developed for McMurdo Station. The 
conceptual approach to plan development can then be applied at the other two U.S. 
research stations, Palmer Station, on the Antarctic Peninsula, and the Amundsen-Scott 
South Pole Station, an inland location. The detailed plan for McMurdo Station will 
include the indicators (parameters) to be used, the location, frequency and analytical 
methods to be used in sampling and analysis, and a database with currently available 
baseline information for comparison purposes. The plan will also include 
recommendations on more focused investigations of selected areas or media to fill in 
gaps in the baseline information or to provide answers to questions that may relate to 
future monitoring needs. The process of developing a monitoring program will then 
be applied to the other U.S., research stations, with site specific plans being developed 
for Palmer Station and the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. 
Another anticipated product of this process is a guidebook that will document the 
process used in developing the monitoring plan for McMurdo Station and provide 
recommendations for applying the process at any research station. It will also contain 
lessons learned in developing an implementable, cost effective monitoring program 
and questions to be considered before starting to develop a monitoring program. The 
questions could include how to decide whether and when to seek external assistance 
in developing a program and how to factor in funding considerations in developing a 
reasonable and effective monitoring program.  
  
 
