 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION 
(ASOC) 
 
Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty 
 
XXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
 
 
Agenda Item 5 (b) 
May 1998 
 
Since the XXI ATCM in Christchurch, ASOC and its member groups have participated in 
and monitored components of the Antarctic Treaty System. ASOC member groups have 
continued to provide educational and public information materials on the Antarctic 
Treaty System to government and legislative officials, scientists, professional groups, 
the media and the public in many countries. 
 
PROTOCOL RATIFICATION 
 
Our primary focus during the past year has been working with individual Parties to 
achieve ratification of the Protocol. With the ratifications of the remaining two Parties, 
happily the Protocol is now fully in force as a legally binding instrument. ASOC extends 
its congratulations to all Parties. We are ready to work with Parties to ensure faithful 
implementation of the Protocol and the proper functioning of the new entities to be 
created as a result of its being in force. In this context, ASOC notes the large number of 
tourist expeditions that are using Canada as a base. 
 
ASOC calls upon those Non-Consultative Parties which are active in Antarctica, or from 
which activities in Antarctica are organized, to ratify and implement the Protocol as soon 
as possible. In particular we recommend that Canada and Ukraine take the necessary 
legal steps to bring the Protocol into force for their countries. Until this occurs, 
organizers of Antarctic activities are provided with a legal loophole for avoiding 
compliance with the Protocol. 
 
PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION 
 
We urge all Parties to take the necessary steps at this ATCM to ensure actual 
implementation of the Protocol in preparation for the 1998/99 Antarctic summer season. 
This includes establishment of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP), 
ensuring that domestic regulations are 
fully operative, putting into place the process for reviewing environmental impact 
assessments, and implementing the Annex V provisions for establishing and managing 
protected areas. 
 
Although the Protocol has now entered into force, only eleven Parties have passed 
implementing legislation. ASOC hopes that, consistent with each state's legal 
 
2
processes, all Parties will work quickly to achieve an effective domestic legal basis for 
their commitments under the Protocol. In many cases this will require Parties to enact 
enabling legislation to codify these commitments. Effective implementation is the litmus 
test for this Protocol.  
 
We encourage all Parties to offer whatever assistance they can to facilitate the practical 
implementation of the Protocol. In this context, it would be useful for every Party to table 
as an information document the provisions of its new legislation or revised regulations 
that are designed to implement the Protocol. This would help achieve greater 
consistency in implementation. 
 
We suggest that Parties facilitate practical implementation by increased sharing of 
expertise and technology, through multilateral and bilateral initiatives. In this respect, we 
support in principle the proposals outlined in the papers tabled at this ATCM on 
"Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning" as a good way to achieve 
rapid response to environmental threats and impacts. 
 
We also urge those Parties which have not yet done so, to ratify Annex V, the Protocol 
Annex on Protected Areas. ASOC understands that only six nations have not ratified 
Annex V: Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, India, Poland, Russia. Until this Annex is ratified, 
the mechanism to protect large areas of Antarctica will not be in force. The designation 
of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) will be a valuable tool in managing 
tourism. However, ASMAs cannot be established until Annex V enters into force. As 
tourism escalates, management is needed to ensure that potential impacts to the 
Antarctic environment, including cumulative impacts are mitigated. But the Annex has 
many other uses as well. 
 
LIABILITY ANNEX 
 
ASOC continues to direct substantial attention and resources to the question of a 
liability annex to the Protocol. An effective liability regime is an essential component of 
the comprehensive commitment to environmental protection called for in the Protocol. 
Existence of that annex will help to ensure compliance with the provisions of the 
Protocol. Without it, the mandate of Article 16 is being ignored. 
 
ASOC congratulates Professor Rudiger Wolfrum for his work in developing the 
elements of a liability annex, and putting forward successive "Offerings." ASOC has 
been pleased to have contributed to this process even though the Parties have not seen 
fit to formally allow our representatives to be present. ASOC is ready to participate fully 
in these liability discussions, and requests all Parties to agree to the inclusion of 
observers. 
 
ASOC is extremely concerned about the slow rate of progress Parties are making 
towards a completed annex and by several Parties' support for a very weak final 
instrument, which we believe would undermine the comprehensive nature of the 
Protocol. We note with concern efforts by several Parties to negotiate additional 
annexes which would tend to undercut progress toward completion and entry into force 
of a comprehensive annex on liability. 
 
ASOC disagrees with the view, as stated in two papers tabled at last year's ATCM, that 
elaboration of a liability annex will interfere with the conduct of science. A response to 
 
3
the concerns articulated in these papers is provided as a special issue of ECO. If there 
is the possibility of liability, all operators, whether government or private, will use better 
equipment, will provide better training for their crews, and will take more urgent steps to 
deal with problems that arise. 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
We note with disappointment the continuing failure to establish a Secretariat, which 
could greatly contribute to the implementation of the Protocol and assist with other 
aspects of the Treaty's work. 
 
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
 
ASOC looks forward to the first meeting of the CEP. We hope that Parties will give the 
CEP sufficient mandate and latitude to allow it to operate effectively. Among other 
matters, ASOC submits that the CEP should be able to provide advice on: 
 
• the adequacy of environmental impact assessments; 
• the need to strengthen and improve the Protocol's measures;  
• the state of the Antarctic environment; 
• the need for scientific research related to the implementation of the Protocol, 
including environmental monitoring; and 
• the elaboration and operation of the Antarctic Protected Area system. 
 
ASOC submits that a test of Parties' commitment to faithfully implement the Protocol will 
be in their willingness to allow the Committee on Environmental Protection to function 
as a true advisory body. 
 
TOURISM 
 
Given the rapid increase in Antarctic tourism, ASOC reiterates the urgent need for 
adequate prior EIAs by operators and Parties and their review by the CEP. One 
particular concern  is the possible cumulative impacts of such activities. Since the 
country with the largest tour operator has not yet ratified or implemented the Protocol, a 
large proportion of tourist expeditions still proceed to Antarctica without any EIA.  
 
We are especially concerned since we understand that the number of tourists which will 
visit the Antarctic in the 1998/99 season is expected to remain at the high level of this 
past season, and that several large boats carrying in excess of 400 passengers will 
again be traveling to the Antarctic. We do welcome the fact that many tourist operators 
produced EIAs for the first time this past season to fulfill their obligations under U.S. 
law. ASOC reviewed and commented on several of these EIAs, and were encouraged 
by the willingness of most operators to evaluate alternative ways of conducting their 
activities in order to minimize their impact. 
 
ASOC submits that the following minimum steps are required in order to properly 
implement the Protocol and minimize impacts to the environment: 
 
 
4
(1)  the completion of an environmental assessment, which includes evaluation of all 
possible alternatives, which predicts that the expedition will have no more than a minor 
or transitory impact on the environment; 
 
(2)  the pre- and post-activity reports, which were tested this past season, should 
incorporate time and duration of site visits. This information is needed to allow the 
identification or detection of cumulative impacts as required by the Protocol. Otherwise,  
there is no way to determine if a site was visited by more than one ship simultaneously, 
whether visits were spaced closely together or spread out over 24 hours. To ensure 
consistency, GMT should be used on the forms; 
 
(3)  tour operators should be required to carry liability insurance commensurate with the 
scale and riskiness of their Antarctic operations. 
 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
ASOC continues to focus significant attention and resources on Antarctic science. In 
1997, ASOC scientists participated in the meeting of the SCAR Group of Specialists on 
the Environment and Antarctic Conservation. We note the need for adequate resources 
to be provided by the Treaty System and its Parties if SCAR is realistically to be able to 
provide the advice sought by the Treaty System. 
 
The best available environmentally sound technologies should be introduced into 
Antarctic operations on a progressive and continuing basis as early as possible. These 
include greatly increased use of renewable energy, and minimum impact waste disposal 
systems. For technologies as yet untested in Antarctic conditions, Parties could 
undertake in-situ testing of pilot systems as part of their research programs. 
 
CCAMLR 
 
It is quite clear that CCAMLR is facing its biggest challenge to date.  The rampant illegal 
and unregulated fishing for toothfish has preempted CCAMLR's progress towards 
precautionary management and conservation of Antarctica's marine living resources. 
Although CCAMLR issues are not formally on the agenda of the ATCM other than the 
report from the CCAMLR Secretariat, we encourage Parties to elevate consideration of 
these issues within the ATCM framework. 
 
ASOC is very concerned that nations have attempted to gain consensus for catch levels 
which are economically beneficial to their fishing fleets, without regard to the actual 
state of the fishery. ASOC submits that advances in CCAMLR's approach to 
management in recent years is being threatened by unresolved bilateral issues between 
some Parties, and by the overwhelming commercial realities of the burgeoning 
Patagonian toothfish (black hake or Chilean sea bass) fishery. In this fishery CCAMLR 
faces a challenge which is threatening to negate its reputation as a credible 
conservation regime. ASOC urges that actions to ensure sound management and 
enforcement of these fisheries should, wherever possible, be taken in a truly 
international manner. 
 
ASOC is also extremely concerned over the continued reports of substantial illegal 
fishing, particularly in the Western Indian Ocean Sector of the Southern Ocean, whose 
totals are reported to have exceeded the legal catch. We welcome the efforts of several 
 
5
nations to address this problem, but believe that ultimately CCAMLR and the Antarctic 
Treaty System must take coordinated steps to address it. This must include the creation 
of an enforcement regime with measures sufficiently severe to curb these illegal 
activities, and the imposition of sanctions on those nations which permit their fishers to 
fish without regard for CCAMLR's measures. ASOC calls on those Parties whose 
vessels have taken part in illegal fishing to take all necessary steps to enforce the rules 
against their fishers. We encourage all members to take steps to encourage non- 
member nations with Southern Ocean fisheries (in particular, Mauritius, Namibia, 
Portugal, Panama, and Vanuatu) to join CCAMLR. 
 
ASOC is disappointed that the problem of seabird mortality in the longline fishery has 
not yet been adequately resolved. Efforts to date to reduce seabird mortality by limiting 
the fishing season have met with limited success because of economic priorities. ASOC 
urges Parties to CCAMLR and the Antarctic Treaty to take steps to ensure that the 
incidental mortality of all seabirds is further reduced. ASOC notes that incidental seabird 
mortality is heightened by the illegal and unregulated longline fisheries, and cannot be 
adequately addressed until these fisheries are dealt with. 
 
The credibility of CCAMLR is at stake. If CCAMLR is unable to bring the illegal and 
unregulated fisheries under control, it may be time to formally return management of 
fisheries to the Antarctic Treaty System. The political accommodation which led to the 
Protocol assumed effective operation of CCAMLR. To the extent that CCAMLR fails, it 
undermines the credibility of the Protocol and the Treaty System, for if CCAMLR had 
not existed, the Protocol would surely have been extended to cover fishing in the marine 
environment. 
 
We look to Parties to both the Protocol and CCAMLR to integrate Protocol-type 
measures into CCAMLR. It is important to ensure that CCAMLR is kept up to date and 
consistent with the newer and more rigorous environmental protection initiatives of the 
Protocol. 
 
INTERNATIONAL WHALING COMMISSION 
 
ASOC has continued its policy of sending an observer to the annual IWC meetings. 
ASOC is very concerned that despite the Resolutions passed at the 1997 meeting and 
previous meetings of the IWC, recommending that scientific whaling should not be 
permitted in Sanctuaries, large-scale "scientific" whaling is still being conducted by 
Japan in the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. Since the 1995/96 season 440 Minke 
whales have been killed annually, up from 330 in previous years. 
 
ASOC calls for steps to be taken to ensure compliance with the Southern Ocean Whale 
Sanctuary, and, within relevant fora, urges the implementation of a global whale 
sanctuary. 
 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
Looking beyond issues arising within Antarctica, ASOC remains concerned about the 
impacts on Antarctica of global environmental problems such as stratospheric ozone 
depletion and anthropogenic climate change. Over the past year there has been 
increasing evidence that climatic changes may be impacting on Antarctica's systems. 
The consequences of climate change may be most evident in the physical geography of 
 
6
the Antarctic where seemingly small changes in temperature have already contributed 
to, for example, the breaking up of various ice shelves. The imminent disintegration of 
Larsen B shelf was reported in last year's ASOC report, following an investigative trip by 
ASOC member Greenpeace. 
 
We urge Parties to ratify those Treaties and Protocols, specifically the Montreal Protocol 
and the Climate Change Convention, directed to controlling or minimizing these 
problems, to use their particular knowledge of Antarctica to raise awareness of the 
issues in appropriate fora, and to promote further action to ensure the long term 
protection of the Antarctic environment. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
ASOC looks forward to working with delegates at this XXII ATCM, and to the successful 
resolution of some of the more contentious issues addressed in this report. 
