Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIième Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                                   XXII ATCM/IP68
                                   May, 1998
                                   Original: English
                                  
                                   Agenda item
                                   7b,15

Deep Drilling at
Vostok Station -
Environmental
Impact

Submitted by
Russia
1
Project of deep drilling at Vostok station and 
its environmental impact

Introduction

Drilling of deep boreholes with full core retrieval in the ice strata 
with previously unknown and changing with depth ice physical, thermal 
physical and structural properties and behavior was for the first time 
started at Vostok station. This activity presents a technical problem 
related to the development of new non-traditional means and 
technologies.

The most complicated tasks include;
- provision of stability of the borehole depending on ice rheological 
properties that change with depth under the overburden pressure and 
temperature;
- selection of the most efficient low-temperature drilling fluid filling 
a borehole in order to compensate the overburden pressure by hydrostatic 
pressure providing thus normal technological conditions for ice drilling;
- assessment of the possible deformation of the borehole under the 
influence of differential pressure and prevention of complications;
- provision of reliable and non-failing thermal and electrical-
mechanical drills at a cable developed for borehole drilling under the 
extreme conditions;
- improvement of drilling technology not only with the aim to 
enhance reliability and the output, but also in terms of ecological safety.

In 1997 a borehole at Vostok station has reached a depth of 3623 m. 
It is the deepest borehole drilled in the ice in the world. The ice core 
retrieved from this hole presents a unique material for studies in many 
areas of natural science. The location of the borehole above Lake Vostok 
allows us to consider it as one of the possible variants of access to the 
lake.

1. Characteristics of the environment of Vostok station

The Vostok station is situated in a plain snow surface of the glacial 
plateau of East Antarctica with coordinates 78°29′ S, 106°49′ E at the 
elevation of 3488 m above sea level. The least distance from the coast is 
1260 km. It is in 1410 km from Mirny station and in 1253 km from the 
South Pole.

The thickness of the ice cover in this region is about 3700 m with the 
snow-firn stratum about 120 m thick. The lower ice surface under the 
station is about 200 m below sea level. There are no bedrock outcrops. 
The glacier is perennially covered with snow, which never melts.

1
76,15
Above the Antarctic Plateau intense air cooling occurs and a strong 
surface temperature inversion is developed throughout the year.

The geographical location of the station, especially of the underlying 
surface, regime of solar radiation and atmospheric circulation govern 
general climate severity. Here the air temperatures are unusually low the 
year round. Mean annual air temperature at the station is equal to -
55.4°C. In spite of uniform in general air temperature variations in the 
winter, August is the coldest month (mean multiyear temperature in 
August is close to −70°C) when cooling of the atmosphere above the 
continent continuing all polar night reaches its ultimate value. The 
absolute air temperature maximum of −89.2°C was recorded at Vostok 
station.

In the middle of the polar day in the summer (December-January) the 
temperature is naturally the highest and was never below −36°C, on 
average, over a month although not exceeding −30°C. The highest 
temperature is observed during the third 10-day period and the first 10-
day period of January indicating a direct relation to the Sun's elevation 
above the horizon. The absolute maximum recorded at Vostok station is 
equal to −13.6°C.

The entire amount of the deposited snow is actually formed in the 
winter. This is a thin layer several centimeters thick composed of fine 
crystals and their fragments, which is much less dense than in the other 
regions. Since in the summer the snowfalls are rare, the finest sublimation 
ice crystals falling out from the atmosphere at clear sky are 
predominantly deposited at the surface. The main amount of snow is 
accumulated during the cold time of the year from May to October. 
Accumulation of atmospheric precipitation is within 2–3 g/cm² a year.

The vicinity of the station presents a level snow plateau with small 
soft blown snow mounds up to 20 cm high. The rate of the horizontal ice 
motion is minimum.

Data of main climatic characteristics of Vostok station are given 
below:
- annual radiation balance                      -0.08 GJ/m²
- mean annual air temperature                  -55.4°C
- absolute air temperature maximum            -13.6°C
- absolute air temperature minimum            -89.2°C
- mean annual absolute air humidity           0.07 hPa
- mean annual relative air humidity           71%
- mean annual air pressure                    624.2 mb
- absolute air pressure maximum               666.1 mb
- mean annual cloudiness                      3.4 points
- mean annual wind speed                      5.4 m/s
- mean annual frequency of occurrence of the 
  west-south-west wind                        
                                                  24.8%

The extreme environmental conditions of the Vostok station region 
exclude the presence of any life forms except for microbial forms.

                                                  2
2. Current state of the station

At the present time, the station territory comprises around 25600 m^(2). 
The current infrastructure of Vostok station was created in the mid-
1980s. It permits accommodation of 25 people during the summer season 
and 14 people during the wintering over.

Main functioning structures:
-       office-living building
-       a mess-room building
-       diesel-electric power station-garage-bath-house,
-       a new and an old drilling complexes,
-       a hut of the emergency diesel-electric power station,
-       three huts for storage of food products.

The buildings and the huts are communicating. The main station 
buildings are located in a compact manner at a site 130 x 130 m^(2) in size.

Power supply is provided by 5 diesel-generators 100kW each 
producing electrical current 220/380, 50 Hz. Under the mountainous 
conditions, the output power of one diesel-generator is 80 kW and if two 
diesel-generators are simultaneously in operation the power is 130 kW. In 
addition, there are three diesel-generators of 75 and 2x16 kW ready to be 
used in case of emergency.

Mean monthly consumption of diesel fuel is 18 t/month provided one 
diesel-generator is operated and 24 t/month if two generators are operated 
simultaneously. The total volume of the station fuel tanks is 350 m^(3).

For transportation purposes there are a heavy ATT tractor modified 
for transporting 30 t of cargo, a heavy bulldozer T-170 and a snow mobile 
"Buran" at the station.

The station runway with dimensions 3000x80 m is suitable to receive 
wheel-ski aircraft of the LC-130 type.

The repair base of the station enables any types of fitting, turning 
and welding activities.

A compact location of the station has resulted in a significant snow 
accumulation and landscape change. The maximum formation of snow 
plumes in the 38^(th) RAE (1993) occurred in early September when the 
plume height reached 2 m in some places. The snow plumes are formed 
between the office-living building and a mess-room building, between the 
mess-room and the emergency diesel-electric station and between tanks 
with fuel-lubricators and the drilling complexes. The station is cleared of 
snow depending on snow accumulation. This is as a rule made 
simultaneously with snow supply for the galley. As a result of constant 
snow accumulation the station is located in a trough.

The removed snow mainly moves northeastward, where the old damp 
site is located.

3
3. Ice core studies

Glacial-drilling activity at Vostok station was started in 1970. From 1980 (25 SAE) isotopic-geochemical studies have become widespread.

The Antarctic ice sheet is a unique archive storing in the most pristine form information about the past state and changes of climate and the environment. For millennia, it accumulated solid atmospheric precipitation, atmospheric aerosol components and the atmospheric air itself entrapped in the form of gaseous bubbles in the process of ice formation. Hence, the ice core samples extracted from deep boreholes have allowed obtaining the unique data on paleoclimate.

The following types of studies are the most informative:
- determination of the content of stable heavy oxygen isotopes and hydrogen in ice;
  -   determination of the content of air inclusions in ice;
  -   determination of the gaseous content of air inclusions in ice, including carbon dioxide and methane;
  -   determination of total content of microparticles in ice;
  -   determination of a cosmogenic isotope beryllium-10 in ice;
  -   determination of the absolute ice age from the cosmogenic isotope - carbon-14 contained in air inclusions;
  -   determination of chemistry and concentration of soluble mixtures in ice.

Paleoclimatic information of the enumerated types of ice core studies is as follows:
- the content of stable oxygen and hydrogen isotopes in the ice yields evidence on air temperature changes at which atmospheric precipitation was formed;
- the content of air in the ice reflects the change in the elevation of the ice cover surface above sea level;
- the levels of carbon dioxide and methane in air inclusions in the ice provide understanding of the change in concentration of these "green house" gases in the Earth's atmosphere;
- the content of microparticles in the ice characterizes the aerosol concentration in the atmosphere and its dust content, and the chemical mineralogical composition of particles points to sources of dust formation;
- the content of a cosmogenic isotope beryllium-10 in the ice characterizes intensity of space rays of galactic and solar origin;
- the content of heavy metals, organochlorines and other artificial compounds in the ice gives information about the environmental anthropogenic pollution.

Drilling of several boreholes with the aim to conduct geochemical studies was interrupted owing to accidents connected with filling the hole under the action of ice crystal pressure. Three of the holes drilled have reached a depth of more than 2000 m (boreholes 3G, 4G, 5G).

4
A significant part of studies was carried out along the lines of international scientific-technical cooperation with France and the USA. A large number of analyses was made at the Laboratory of Environmental Glaciology and Geophysics in Grenoble (France). Part of unique studies of the gaseous and isotopic composition of air inclusions in the ice were performed at the laboratories of the universities in Miami, Rhode-Island and California (the USA).

Beginning from 1983 (21st SAE), the Institute of Microbiology of the Russian Academy of Science carried out the microbiological studies of deep levels of the ice sheet strata for several seasons in order to obtain reliable data on the duration of the anabiotic state in microorganisms. These studies were part of the studies connected with a possible transfer of microorganisms and spores in the interplanetary space under the conditions of super-low temperatures, deep vacuum and penetrating radiation.

Based on long-term studies, the presence of microorganisms in the Antarctic ice sheet strata that were in the state of anabiosis for more than 100 kyr, was discovered. A large general biological importance of this discovery is determined by its relation to the problems of prolonged storage of microorganism cultures and genofund replenishment.

4.      Drilling complex

At the present time the drilling complex includes: an old drilling complex with a core storehouse, a new drilling complex with nearby geophysical and glaciological laboratories and an underground core storehouse. One more core storehouse is located at the place of the temporarily closed down borehole 4G.

4.1.    Old drilling complex

The 3G complex is located above the mouth of borehole 3 G whose drilling began during the 25th SAE (1980). After a number of accidents, the hole depth has reached 2202 m in 1986 (31st SAE). This is the first borehole in the history of ice cover drilling from which an ice core was recovered containing information on the full climatic cycle.

Now the complex has a winch for geophysical work in the hole allowing observations of the ice cover dynamics.

The 3G complex includes living space for drillers, mechanical shops, a geophysical laboratory and core storage space for 2 thousand meters of the ice core.

4.2.    New drilling complex

The necessary materials for constructing a new drilling complex were delivered by aircraft and sledge-tractor traverses from Mirny for several years.

5
In 1982 (27^(th) SAE) an assemblage site was constructed where a drilling rig 15 m high with special lowering-pulling equipment was set up. In 1983 (28^(th) SAE) drilling of borehole 4G was started continuing throughout the 34^(th) SAE. The borehole depth had reached 2546 m when an accident took place with a loss of the drill and the cable. The borehole mouth was closed down and the drilling installation was moved to a new site where during the 35^(th) SAE (1990) a new borehole 5G was started continued up to now.

The 5G complex includes the drilling complex building with a lowering-pulling equipment, a strong air compressor and equipment for filling the hole with a drilling fluid. A French geophysical laboratory that has its own winch and a panel house of the glaciological laboratory adjoins this building. The laboratory has all necessary equipment for ice core express-analysis.

The laboratory has a special facility allowing highly productive cleaning of a meter ice core segment, cutting a thin slice from it for preparing samples for deuterium and beryllium analyses, surface polishing and continuous scanning of this surface by electrodes for measuring electric conductivity of ice. The method of continuous measurement of electric conductivity allows not only recording the core layers with enhanced content of acid precipitation of volcanic origin but also to differentiate by the level and the signal character the core intervals referring to glacial and interglacial periods of the Earth's climatic history.

Sampling of ice cores to be exported from Vostok station to the laboratories of Russia, France and the USA was made in accordance with the general principle. Each of the participating parties had the right to use for their studies 1/3 of the entire core volume retrieved from a deep borehole 5G.

Near the complex 5G there is a well-equipped core storehouse under the snow cover with an elevator for core recovery. The core is stored in special tubes with numbers at a temperature not more than −50°C.

4.3. Characteristics of drills

Two drills were used in the process of drilling activities beginning from 1970, developed at the Leningrad Mining Institute (modified with time):

1.	A thermal drill for drilling a “dry hole” – TELGA-14M;
2.	A thermal drill TBZS-152M for drilling a hole filled with a low-temperature fluid.

The design dimensions of both drills are given below:

     TELGA-14M

External head diameter, mm – 178;
Length of the core barrel, m – 2.0;
Diameter of the core barrel, mm – 146;
Length of the water tank, m - 1.65;
Diameter of the water tank, mm - 168;
Total drill length, m - 4.13;
Number of water-suction pipes, units - 8;
Diameter of water-suction pipes, mm - 8;
Drill weight, kg - 200.

TBZS-152M

Diameter of the heater head, mm - 152;
Type of head - copper, cast;
Length of the core barrel, m - 3.25;
Diameter of the core barrel, mm - 127;
Length of the water tank, m - 3.0;
Diameter of the water tank, mm - 146;
Length of the power supply section, m - 0.7;
Length of the mud tube, m - 0.4;
Diameter of water-suction pipes, mm - 10;
Number of water-suction pipes, units - 3;
Total drill length, m - 7.7;
Drill weight, kg - 180.

From the 34th SAE a coring electrical mechanical drill is used for 
drilling boreholes with 112 mm in diameter (KEMS-112).

The electrical mechanical method of drilling using a cable has some 
drastic advantages as compared with thermal drilling:
    -   higher mechanical drilling rate;
    -   a possibility for incorporation to the mountain massif 
        underlying ice deposits;
    -   a better core quality.

The drill KEMS-112 consists of a core barrel, a motor with a 
reducer, a pump, an antit?orque, an electrical section and a suspension.

The design dimensions of KEMS-112 drill are as follows:

The external/inner head diameter in different modification changes 
within 112-116/85-89 or 132-135/107 mm.

The external/inner diameter of the core tube - 108/99 or 127/117 
mm.

Length of the core barrel, m - 1.5-3 m.

Electrical motor power - 2.2 kW.

Total drill length (depends on the length of the core barrel) - 7-12 
m.

Drill weight - 110-180 kg.

5. Fluids for drilling boreholes in the ice

The main method for maintaining stability of the borehole, both 
during drilling and after the end of drilling is to fill it with a fluid not 
7
interacting with ice which provides partial or complete compensation of 
the overburden pressure of the ice strata.

In addition to providing the main function, i.e. clearing away the 
debris from the bottom, the fluid used for filling the hole drilled in the 
ice should meet the following requirements:
-   frost resistance;
-   inertness relative to the ice and melt water forming during 
    drilling;
-   low viscosity within the operational temperature range (not 
    more than 5 mPa/s) at which the regimes of drill lowering-pulling 
    in the hole and operation of the circulation system of bottom 
    clearing are not complicated;
-   high stability and compatibility with metals and insulation 
    materials used in the drills;
-   non-flammable
-   non-toxic.

It is obvious that fluids applied in the drilling practice (clay drilling 
solutions, salt solutions, emulsions, etc.) are unsuitable for drilling 
boreholes in the ice.

The peculiar features of borehole construction in the ice cover 
determine some functions of drilling fluids as the main and other 
functions as secondary or subordinate resulting in the need for their 
additional differentiation.

One of the main characteristics of drilling fluids used at below zero 
temperatures in a borehole is the temperature of their freezing or of the 
onset of crystallization. According to this criterion, the fluids can be 
subdivided into the fluids with a freezing temperature above −30°C (for 
drilling boreholes in warm and moderately cold glaciers) and fluids with a 
freezing temperature below −30°C (for drilling cold glaciers).

The first group includes some kinds of mineralized drilling fluids, 
emulsions and polymer drilling fluids. The second group includes fluids 
containing different organic compounds (hydrocarbons, alcohol and some 
others).

By the effect on the ice, the washing agents are subdivided into the 
agents interacting with the ice and the inactive agents relative to the ice.

The first group includes alcohol-washing fluids at the base of ethyl 
alcohol and ethylene glycol. A negative property of such fluids is 
dissolution of ice composing the borehole walls up to equilibrium 
concentration corresponding to the glacier temperature at a given depth. 
With increasing temperature of the fluid in the borehole, for example, due 
to heat released by the drill, the concentration of alcohol (ethylene 
glycol) in the fluid can turn out to be below the eutectic one for the given 
depth. Afterwards this leads to freezing of excessive moisture and 
formation of shuga.

The second group includes fluids containing or wholly consisting of 
hydrocarbon fluids.
                                                                                                                                8
The products obtained from oil by distillation and destructive treatment present a complex mixture of saturated, naphthene and aromatic hydrocarbons. Their composition can also include an insignificant amount (1-2%) of non-hydrocarbon compounds - sulfur, nitrogen, oxygen compounds and traces of different metals.

For preparation a drilling fluid, the application of diesel arctic fuel DF-A and aviation fuel of different types (TS-1, Jet A-1, JP-8) is known.

Diesel fuel DF-A, produced in the USA is an analogue of the Russian arctic diesel fuel DTA for high-speed diesels. It can be used at the ambient air temperature below -30° C. Diesel fuels of the arctic types can be used for preparation of drilling fluids for drilling moderately cold glaciers. During drilling of cold glaciers the solid phase released from diesel fuel (mainly paraffin series) makes difficult or even completely excludes the possibility for lowering-pulling operations.

The aviation fuel TS-1 presents a fraction of a densified ligroin of sulfurous oils and is used in Russia for jet engines of subsonic aircraft. The fuel TS-1 has the best viscous-temperature properties as compared with fuels Jet A-1 and JP-8 and hence can be used at lower temperatures in a borehole.

The aviation fuel Jet A-1 is now the most widespread jet fuel overseas and is produced in some European countries (Great Britain, Germany, Switzerland) and the USA.

The aviation fuel JP-8 is produced in the USA and is close in properties to the fuel Jet A-1.

The most important properties of fuels used as washing agents when the boreholes are drilled in the ice are the temperature of the onset of crystallization (turbidity), solidification point, density, viscosity, water solubility and stability. Some properties of trade fuels applied for drilling boreholes are presented in Table 1.

Table 1
Main properties of fuels applied for drilling boreholes in the ice

| Parameter                | DF-A         | TC-1         | Jet A-1      | JP-8         |
|--------------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| Technical  conditions    | FSVV-F-800   | GOST 10227-  | ASTM D 1655  | MJLT-83133   |
| (country)                | (USA)        | 86 (Russia)  | (USA)        | (USA)        |
| Density at  temperature | 820.3/15     | 776-786/20   | 775-840/15   | 775-830/15   |
| (°C), kg/m³              |              |              |              |              |
| Kinematic  viscosity at  | 1.32/37.8    | 1.27-1.48/20 | <8/-20       | -            |
| temperature  (°C), 10⁻⁴  | 4.1/-17.8    | 4.0-5.5/-40  |              |              |
| m²/s                     | 8.42/-32.0   |              |              |              |
| Temperature  of          | -46*         | -60          | -47          | -46          |
| crystallization onset, °C|              |              |              |              |
| Solidification point, °C | -57          | -            | -51          | -            |
| Flash point (not lower), | 38           | 28           | 38           | -            |
| °C                       |              |              |              |              |

9
6. Densifiers of drilling fluids

Due to low density of liquid oil fuels when they fill the boreholes drilled in the ice there is no complete compensation of the overburden pressure of ice strata. For weighting the liquid column, different additives are used in drilling practice. These are additives of the CFC classes (freon-11, freon-141b) and ethylene hydrocarbons (perchloroethylene and trichloroethylene). The main properties of these compounds are given in Table 2.

             Table 2
Main properties of densifiers of drilling fluids based on oil fuels

| Parameters                          | Freon-11  | Freon-141b | Freon-112 | Perchloroethylene | Trichloroethylene |
|-------------------------------------|-----------|------------|-----------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Chemical formula                    | CCl3F     | C2HClF     | C2HCl3F2  | C2Cl4             | C2HCl3            |
| Density at 20°C, kg/m³              | 1487      | 1247.5     | 1569      | 1635              | 1464              |
| Dynamic viscosity at 20°C, mPa·s    | 0.444     | 0.8 (at 0°C) | -         | 0.88              | 0.58              |
| Melting point, °C                   | -111      | -103       | -140      | -22               | -86.4             |
| Boiling point, °C                   | 23.7      | 31.7       | 71.8      | 121.2             | 87.2              |
| Flash point, °C                     | Non-flammable | Non-flammable | Non-flammable | Non-flammable | 32                |
| MPC in the air of the working zone, mg/m³ | 5000    | 500        | 700       | 10                | 10                |

CFC belong to the saturated halogen fluoride derivatives with a general formula Cm(H,Cl,F)2n+2 and are mainly used as cooling agents and propellents, solvents and foaming agents. In the mid-1970s, Sh. Rowland and M. Molina (USA) have found that CFC can destroy the ozone layer, which is located in the stratosphere at a distance of 25 km from the Earth's surface. In 1986, about 1.13 million tons of CFC was used in the world. In 1987 in Montreal and in 1990 in London, the protocols were adopted according to which production and use of CFC destroying the ozone layer were to be reduced by 50% in 1995 and completely stopped from 2000.

In accordance with this decision, from 1995 at Vostok station freon-141b is used for drilling a deep borehole, which was recommended by specialists as the substance not influencing the ozone layer of the Earth. The physical-mechanical properties of freon-141b are close to the properties of the earlier used freon-11, which has governed its choice.

Properties of freon-141b

Under the normal conditions, freon-141b is a colorless fluid with a faint smell of ether:
- molecular weight    117
                     10
- boiling point at 1.013 bar, C                  32
- density at 25°C, kg/m³                       1236
- vapor pressure at 25°C, bar                  0.81
- critical temperature, C                     205.7
- critical pressure, bar                       43.4
- critical density, kg/m³                      463
- surface tension at 25°C, mH/m               18.4
- heat conductivity at 25°C, W/(m s)          0.098
- freezing temperature, °C                   -103.5

Most metals and plastics do not interact with freon-141b. Like freon-
11 it has extremely low toxicity both at inhalation of oral intake by 
humans.

7.      Environmental impact of drilling activities and measures 
        to mitigate the consequences

The technology of drilling a deep borehole at Vostok station consists 
of using a mixture of aviation fuel TS-1 as a drilling fluid and freon-141b 
as a densifier. The losses of drilling fluid govern in the end the adverse 
environmental impact produced by drilling. The largest danger is related 
to freon losses as the most volatile substance.

Freon-141b is delivered to the station in sealed barrels and its losses 
during transportation and storage are practically excluded.

The technological process and borehole structure provide a minimum 
loss of the drilling fluid and in particular of freon. During the season of 
the 39th RAE (December 1993) in order to minimize the losses of the 
drilling fluid (seeping to the firn) the casing of borehole 5G up to 125 m 
was made. For this purpose French equipment and plastic (fiber glass) 
tubes delivered to Vostok during the season of the 38th RAE were used. 
After casing was set up, a short metal rim was installed at its mouth with 
lateral outlets for filling the hole, dumping excessive drilling fluid to an 
extension container and also for connecting the casing with the 
compressor. The casing column has significantly improved the operation 
technology in the borehole: facilitating pouring of the drilling fluid and 
hence reducing the losses of kerosene at pouring.

The lower part of the hole in 200-300 m above the bottom and the 
upper 200 m are filled with the drilling fluid with a relatively low freon 
content. The fluid density in these segments does not exceed 900 kg/m³. 
Freon and kerosene are added to the hole separately. Pure freon is 
delivered to the hole to the selected levels by means of a special device 
and kerosene is poured from the surface, which contributes to decreasing 
the freon concentration near the drilling fluid surface. At the beginning of 
the drilling run the drill is filled near the surface with practically pure 
kerosene which is delivered up to the bottom since the design of the drill

11
does not allow the fluid to circulate through it in the process of lowering-
pulling operations.

With pulling using a cable, about 40 liters of drilling fluid is 
extracted from the borehole. Its density (based on numerous 
measurements) corresponds to mean density of the drilling fluid in the 
upper 100 m. Together with mud in the mud trapping section about 35 
liters of fluid is extracted from the near-bottom zone. The fluid flowing 
down from the cable and the drill is collected to pans from which it is 
pumped to the borehole.

For assessing the losses of the drilling fluid during the 43d RAE a 
drilling group has performed a complex of geophysical observations 
including:
  - regular measurements of the density of the fluid withdrawn from 
the borehole,
  -   sampling of fluid from different levels,
  -   temperature measurements throughout the entire length of 
the hole drilled.

A comparison of fluid density data obtained in this season with data 
of measurements before the borehole was temporarily closed down in 
January 1997 has shown no changes occurring over the past year. This 
indicates high stability of the kerosene/freon mixture and the absence of 
freon losses during the borehole standby.

The fluid removed from the hole on a cable and in the drill, stays at 
the site in open containers for about an hour. Then it is pumped to the 
hole at the beginning of the next run at lowering the drill. Initially, the 
fluid has a temperature of around −40°C. When it is pumped to the hole, 
the temperature is around −20°C. For 10 hours the fluid density if 
recalculated to initial temperature decreased by about 10 kg/m^(3). 
Obviously with increasing temperature freon will evaporate quicker from 
the fluid. Assuming that freon evaporates uniformly with time, we obtain 
that about 0.2 kg of freon can evaporate from 80 liters of drilling fluid 
during an hour.

Part of extracted fluid is lost with mud. After each run the mud 
removed from the drill, is melted to determine the volume. The fluid is 
heated up to above zero temperature and freon practically evaporates from 
it. As is seen from the measurements made after each run, 3 liters of 
drilling fluid is left, on average, during one run.

In spite of the fact that under the diverting rollers and the cable over 
its entire length from the borehole to the winch, special pans are set up to 
collect the fluid flowing down, part of its is irrevocably lost due to 
splashing. These losses can be estimated as about 2 liters a run.

Conclusion

In the process of work, the methods for controlling the state of the 
drilling fluid in the borehole and estimating its losses were developed.

Setting up a plastic casing eliminates the fluid losses in the upper 
part of the borehole due to seeping through the snow-firn zone.

12
The technological losses that take place during drilling can be divided into two parts:
- evaporation of the drilling fluid from the surface in the borehole;
and
-   losses of fluid brought to the surface by pulling operations.
    -  For decreasing freon evaporation to the atmosphere a kerosene layer several tens of meters thick is constantly maintained in the hole.

The extracted fluid is collected during the pulling operations to special pans after which the fluid is pumped to the borehole. The studies and calculations performed have shown that:
- total non-replenished losses of the drilling fluid comprise around 5 liters a run;
- losses of freon (taking into account evaporation) are 1.2 kg a run.

Considering that the overall number of the drill runs was about 40 during the 1997-1998 season, the total freon losses were around 50 kg.

About half of freon losses are in the fluid remaining with mud. These losses can be significantly reduced if the fluid is separated from mud by means of a centrifuge.

Along with the existing bans of the Convention on Ozone Layer Protection for the work with the CFC class freons, the use of freon-141b (HCFC class) as a densifier is allowed at least up to 2005.

13

