Antarctic Treaty 
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique 
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico 
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике 
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/IP29
April, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 7a

Pollution Abatement 
at McMurdo Station, 
Antarctica

Submitted by
USA
]
Proceedings of the Seventh (1997) International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference
Honolulu, USA, May 25-30, 1997
Copyright © 1997 by The International Society of Offshore and Polar Engineers
ISBN 1-880653-28-1 (Set); ISBN 1-880653-30-3 (Vol. II)

Pollution Abatement at McMurdo Station, Antarctica

Eric Chiang, Shih-Cheng Chang and Arthur J. Brown
Office of Polar Programs, National Science Foundation
Arlington, VA, USA

ABSTRACT

The soil and marine sediment of McMurdo Station, the logistical 
hub of the U.S. Antarctic Program, are contaminated by both                   
petroleum hydrocarbons and the residual products of waste disposal.           
These contaminants were released to the environment during earlier           
years of expeditionary operations. Since 1987, the National Science           
Foundation has initiated a number of measures in pollution abatement           
to correct past abuses and to protect the Antarctic environment. These        
measures include promulgation of waste regulations, development and           
implementation of a waste management program, cleanup of the station           
waste dump sites, and development of spill prevention and spill               
response plans.

KEY WORDS: McMurdo, Antarctica, contamination, pollution               
abatement, waste management

Introduction

McMurdo Station established in 1955 is the largest U.S. research            
station in Antarctica. This paper briefly reviews the U.S. Antarctic           
Program, its expeditionary operations and waste disposal practices at           
McMurdo and the resulting contamination at the station. The paper            
then describes the measures and investment in pollution abatement            
which the National Science Foundation has initiated since 1987. The            
national operators of other Antarctic Programs which have experienced           
similar conditions of contamination resulting from past practice have           
also implemented active pollution abatement programs. However, this           
paper is limited to the U.S. Antarctic Program pollution abatement at           
McMurdo Station.

Antarctica

Antarctica is the coldest and the driest continent on earth, and was            
largely unknown until four decades ago. Approximately 98 percent of            
the continent is buried under ice, averaging 2000 m thick, which               
represents 90 percent of the world's ice. The continent encompasses 14        million km², as large as the United States and Mexico combined. In the        
winter, the continent is surrounded by a belt of sea ice, 500 to 1500 km       
wide, making the continent inaccessible to ships, while erratic storm         
conditions combined with cold temperatures makes air access               
impractical.

The extreme cold and dry climate limit natural biodegradation.                 
Pollutants and wastes released to the environment tend to persist.            
Therefore control of the release of pollutants and removal of waste are       
essential to the protection of the environment. This premise is               
embodied in the Antarctic Treaty. By international agreement, the             
Antarctic Treaty governs the conduct of human affairs south of 60             
degree south latitude. The Antarctic Treaty assures free access to the        
region for scientific purposes, conserves the resources, and protects the      
environment. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the                 
Antarctic Treaty, Annex III, provides the basic framework for waste           
management and waste disposal in Antarctica.

U.S. Antarctic Program

The United States has strong interests in Antarctica and is a                 
signatory to the Antarctic Treaty. The U. S Antarctic Program (USAP)          
is a national program administered by the National Science Foundation         
(NSF) to implement U.S. policy through the support of scientific              
research on the continent and in its surrounding oceans. The Program          
currently operates three year-around research stations in Antarctica:         
McMurdo, Amundsen-Scott South Pole, and Palmer. Additional                    
seasonal field camps are established during the austral summer. The           
Program also charters two research vessels-Polar Duke and Nathaniel           
B. Palmer-to support research in Antarctic waters.

McMurdo Station

McMurdo Station (77° 51' S, 166° 40' E) ( Figure 1) is located on             
the southern tip of Hut Point Peninsula on Ross Island, Antarctica,           
approximately 3860 km south of Christchurch, New Zealand. Ross               
Island is located in the western Ross Sea, separated from the Antarctic        
mainland by McMurdo Sound. The annual mean temperature at                     

572
McMurdo Station is -18° C: monthly mean temperatures range from -3
° C in January to -28° C in August. The station is constructed on
barren volcanic rocks consisting of pyroclastic deposits. The soil
derived from weathering of volcanic rocks contains virtually no organic
matter. The ground is frozen solid, permafrost underlying the station at
a depth of 15 to 45 cm.

McMurdo has the world's most southern port accessible by ship.
Winter Quarters Bay (WQB) is a small harbor of less than 4 hectares in
area. The harbor has a floating ice pier, a solid 6 m thick ice platform
reinforced with layers of steel cables. For most of the year, McMurdo
Sound and the harbor are covered with sea ice about 2.5 m thick. Late
in the austral summer, a U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) icebreaker opens a
navigation channel to the harbor, which allows a fuel tanker and a
supply vessel to replenish the station with a yearly supply of fuel and
provisions. After unloading the cargo, the vessel is backloaded with
science cargo and the annual accumulation of USAP wastes which are
to be returned to the United States.

Starting as an expeditionary camp in 1955 in preparation for the
International Geophysical Year, McMurdo expanded over the past forty
years and has evolved into a modem research station currently having
54,000 m2 of living and working space housed in more than 70
structures. McMurdo (Figure 2) has numerous storage yards, graded
roads, a helicopter pad, a power plant, water plant, maintenance
facilities, above ground water and sewer systems, above-ground bulk
fuel storage tanks, and an extensive fleet of general purpose vehicles
and heavy equipment.

McMurdo operates a fuel terminal which has a bulk fuel storage
capacity of 34 million liters. Currently most of the fuel is an AN-8
aviation turbine fuel (JP-8 with an icing additive inhibitor to depress
the freezing point to -58° C) which is the primary fuel for power
generation, space heating, and aircraft operation. Annual deliveries of
AN-8 average 20 to 25 million liters. Fuel is transported to outlying
aerodrome complexes by above-ground pipelines and hoses. Within the
station proper, intermediate storage tanks are directly fueled through
above-ground steel pipelines from the bulk storage tanks.

Most of the fuel tanks and delivery pipeline were built before 1970
and are antiquated compared to modern construction standards. Until
recently, the steel pipes were jointed by flanges fitted with neoprene
gaskets; the flanged joints were prone to leaks as the piping expanded
and contracted with changing temperatures. Most of the fuel tanks are
without secondary containment, and are not equipped with overfill
protection devices such as high level alarms and indicators. This fuel
system has traditionally been the major cause of fuel spills.

Early Practices in Waste Disposal

In the years prior to 1980, McMurdo disposed of its solid waste at a
dump site located on the eastern shore of Winter Quarters Bay,
approximately 2 hectares in area, which slopes to the bay from an
elevation of 12 to 15 m. During winter months when the bay was
frozen, the dump often extended out onto the sea ice. Combustible
solid wastes were stock piled at the southern tip of the dump site.
Periodically the piles of waste were doused with contaminated fuel and
set on fire. Open burning lasted from hours to days. Afterward, the ash
and residues were spread throughout the dump site.

Non-combustible wastes (scrap metals, construction debris, waste
drums, unserviceable equipment) were frequently staged on the
adjacent sea ice for eventual disposal at sea. During late summer
months, the sea ice would break up and drift out to sea, dumping waste
material into the deep waters of McMurdo Sound. However, the waste
did not always make it all the way to the sea, and some would sink in
the immediate vicinity of Winter Quarters Bay.

During a consecutive three-year period in the late 1970s, the sea ice
failed to break away from the shoreline. As a result, wastes continued
to build up and eventually encroached onto the shore. When the ice
finally did break away in the fourth season, a significant amount of
waste remained as an ice encased, consolidated mass on the shore. This
mass was a source for continuous pollutant releases to the contiguous
shoreline and adjacent marine environment. In 1980 the waste disposal
activity was relocated from WQB to Fortress Rocks, a natural hollow
on high ground on the northeast side of McMurdo Station. The dump
site at Fortress Rocks was less than 2 hectares in size. Open
Table 1 Distribution of Hydrocarbon in Soil Samples

TPH Level (ppm)     Number of Samples
less than 10         35
10 to 100            86
100 to 200           27
200 to 300           15
300 to 400           11
400 to 500           6
500 to 1,000         6
1,000 to 5,000       20

A number of studies (Lenihan 1990, 1992; Risebrough 1990) have 
indicated that hydrocarbon contaminated marine sediments were 
largely confined to Winter Quarters Bay. Among the contaminants 
measured in the sediments in WQB were petroleum hydrocarbons, 
polychlorinated biphenyl's (PCBs) and terphenyl's (PCTs). Level of 
purgeable hydrocarbons (PHC) in sediments was measured as high as 
4,500 ppm. Total polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) in the 
sediments varied from below the method detection limit to as high as 
13 ppm. Level of PCBs and PCTs were measured in the range of 0.1 to 
1.4 ppm and 0.03 to 1.2 ppm respectively. It was estimated that WQB 
contained 4 kg of PCBs and 1 to 2 kg of PCTs in its sediment. Certain 
trace metals were also elevated in the bay compared to sediments 
outside the bay.

WQB is enclosed at the bay entrance by a large submarine sill which 
greatly constrains the flow in and out of the bay. The inner part of the 
bay is 34-37 m deep and the submarine sill rises to a water depth of 18-
20 m. Consequently, the contaminated sediments are naturally 
contained within the bay. Contaminants are found to drop precipitously 
away from the bay. The sharp pollutant gradient represents one of the 
steepest and claims to be the most well-defined sediment contamination 
in the world. Just a few hundred meters away, levels of PHCs in 
sediments were measured at only 3.5 ppm, about one thousandth of that 
in the bay sediment (Lenihan 1990, 1992).

Scattered around the floor of the bay and in the vicinity in 
McMurdo Sound are numerous debris; metal drums, vehicle frames, 
and discarded equipment. This debris was deposited as residuals from 
the former waste disposal activities.

Pollution Abatement

Since 1987, NSF has initiated a number of measures to abate 
pollution at the U.S. stations in Antarctica. These measures have 
included: termination of open burning and land disposal, surface 
cleanup of former dumps sites at WQB and Fortress Rock, 
promulgation of waste regulations for all U.S. citizens visiting or 
working in Antarctica, establishment of a waste permit system for the 
use and discharge of designated pollutants in Antarctica, development 
and implementation of a waste management program and a spill 
contingency and response plan, removal of all wastes except sewage 
from Antarctica, training of program participants, upgrade of fuel 
systems to prevailing standards, and investigation of soil remediation 
technologies applicable to the polar environment. A brief description 
of these measures follows.

Termination of Open Burning and Land Disposal and Cleanup of 
Dump Sites

Commencing in 1987 and extending over the next two field seasons, 
the residual surface waste and debris left at the former WQB dump site 
was removed and relocated to Fortress Rocks. The site was then 
covered with fill material and graded.

At the end of 1990-91 field season, the waste disposal operation-
open burning of combustible waste and land disposal of ash residue -- 
at Fortress Rocks was terminated. This decision in part resulted from 
concern for public health over the presence of friable asbestos found in 
the demolition waste.

During the 1991-92 field season, USAP, through a special Safety, 
Environment and Health initiative, launched a multi-million dollar 
operation to clean up the Fortress Rocks dump site and to remove all 
the waste backlog and accumulated surface debris (Reference 4). 
Specialized equipment for processing and packaging the waste and 
debris were purchased and flown in to McMurdo via U.S. Air Force C-
5 Galaxies. Remediation specialists were subcontracted to undertake 
the actual hands-on cleanup. A temporary decontamination structure 
was erected on the site and air monitoring was set up in advance of 
remediation of the asbestos waste. Scrap metals were either baled or 
appropriately sized with cutting torches. Wood waste was chipped in a 
tub grinder to reduce volume. Other wastes were sorted and segregated 
into various waste streams -- cardboard, rubber, tires, glass --to 
facilitate packaging and shipment. The contents of 800 abandoned 
drums were sampled and tested to allow chemical characterization. 
Based
waste regulation is consistent with the provisions for waste management and disposal, endorsed in October 1991 by the Antarctic Treaty nations, in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In 1996, the U.S. Congress adopted the legislation necessary to implement the provisions of the Protocol and on October 2, 1996, President Clinton signed into law the Antarctic Science, Tourism, and Conservation Act of 1996.

The waste regulation bans the use of certain substances in Antarctica. These include any PCBs, non-sterile soil, polystyrene beads, plastic chips or similar loose polystyrene packing material, pesticides (other than those required for scientific, medical or hygiene purposes). The regulation requires a permit for the use or release of designated pollutants, and for release of any waste in Antarctica. It specifies that certain wastes be removed from Antarctica, except when the removal of such waste would cause greater adverse environmental impacts.

The regulation sets forth requirements for waste storage and waste disposal. Maximum time limits are set for storage of hazardous wastes at U.S. stations: 15 months for McMurdo and South Pole Station, 28 months for Palmer Station, and 12 months for field camps. Hazardous waste storage facilities are to be inspected weekly.

The regulation requires phase out of open burning by March 1, 1994 and prohibits disposal of any waste onto ice-free areas, or into fresh water system. Sea disposal of any sewage is allowed provided sewage is macerated before discharge at a location where dispersal is rapid.

The regulation establishes the requirements for waste permit application, and requires the tracking of the USAP wastes in five categories and the filing of an annual report on the USAP waste management.

Waste Management

Since the close down of Fortress Rocks dump site and phase out of open burning at McMurdo in 1991, USAP has launched an aggressive waste management program at all U.S. stations.  All the solid wastes generated at South Pole and at the seasonal field camps are transported to McMurdo for further processing and preparation for removal from the continent. A brief attempt at incineration of food waste at McMurdo did not prove to be satisfactory, and incineration was terminated in 1993. The USAP no longer practices open burning, incineration or land disposal of wastes at any U.S. station in Antarctica. All wastes except domestic sewage are removed from Antarctica. Approximately 4000 metric tons of waste were removed from Antarctica in 1994, 3000 tons in 1995 and 2700 tons in 1996. The decline in the amount of the waste removed reflects a diminishing waste backlog at the station. Table 2 shows the annual production of USAP wastes in category and waste streams which are to be removed from the continent.

After discharging the annual resupply of equipment and material at McMurdo, the resupply vessel is backloaded with the USAP waste which has accumulated during the previous 12 months. On return to the United States, the vessel disembarks the waste at Indian Island, Washington; the State of Washington has one of the most aggressive waste recycling infrastructures in the nation.  A waste disposal subcontractor takes custody of the USAP waste at the port and is responsible for its disposition in accordance with the USAP mandated priority of resale, reuse and recycling, with incineration or land

disposal being the last consideration. For the past three years, USAP has achieved a recycling rate in excess of 60 percent, compared to the U.S. average recycling rate of 24 percent for municipal solid wastes.

Table 2

Annual Production of USAP Waste in 1995
(sewage excluded)

Category        Waste Stream              Quantity
                (1000 kg)

Recyclables     aluminum                     16
                cardboard                   149
                cooking oil/lard               6
                copper & wire                 22
                glass                         12
                scrap metals (heavy)         327
                scrap metals (light)         108
                paper, magazine                9
                wood                         298
                                 subtotal   947      38%

Disposables     clothing                       1
                construction debris          587
                greywater & urine             42
                plastics                      26
                others                        54
                                 subtotal   710      29%

Combustible     food waste                   163
                food contaminated              8
                human waste                    8
                trash                         73
                                 subtotal   252      10%

Used Equipment  tire & resalable              199       8%

Hazardous waste hazardous waste             368      15%

                Total waste produced       2,476     100%

In creating the necessary infrastructure to achieve its desired objectives, the USAP completely reordered the waste management organization and practices. Single point management was established, functions were consolidated, the organization streamlined, and an investment was made in staffing and in the procurement
required for transportation and importation of waste into the U.S. The 
procedures are revised in response to changes in state and federal 
regulations or in response to the introduction of new technologies. An 
educational program was launched to inform USAP participants about 
the waste management program  and to instruct them in the need for 
compliance with established practices. This program was supplemented 
by special training provided to those contractors and researchers who 
generate or process hazardous waste or low level radioactive waste in 
the course of their normal duties.

Waste prevention and waste minimization are two keystones 
underlying the USAP waste management; the former is achieved 
through source reduction, and the latter through reuse and recycling.

Waste Prevention and Source Reduction

Education and employee training have proven to be essential in 
reducing the generation of waste. A waste management brochure 
(Reference 9) is distributed to each USAP participant before they start 
their journey to the continent. When packaging personal hygiene 
products, participants are asked to consolidate, use bulk containers, and 
to discard excess vendor packaging. The brochure encourages 
articipants to observe the backpacker's rule (pack it in and pack it out) 
and further advises participants not to leave personal items behind 
when departing the station. Upon arrival at McMurdo all participants 
are required to attend a waste management orientation, which 
emphasizes each individual's responsibility for sorting and recycling of 
waste (Reference 10).

On-going measures are also being taken to improve material 
procurement practices and to streamline the consumable material 
inventory in order to reduce conditions of over stockage and the 
retention of products which have exceeded useful shelf-life. Vendors 
are notified, in the purchase order, of the ACA waste regulation which 
bans the use polystyrene foam "peanuts," plastic chips or similar loose 
polystyrene packing materials. Often, cargo is re-packaged in the U.S. 
before loading the supply ship, in order to reduce needless over-
packaging which would end up in waste stream. Fresh fruits and 
vegetables which are purchased at Christchurch, New Zealand are pre-
processed in New Zealand for the removal of excess leaf and stalks, 
then sealed in plastic bags which are filled with nitrogen gas. Such 
preprocessing significantly reduces the amount of food waste which 
would be generated from food preparation at McMurdo Station.

Product substitution is pursued as a means of reducing the on-hand 
inventory of highly toxic materials. For example, polypropylene glycol 
has been substituted for ethylene glycol. Polypropylene glycol unlike 
ethylene glycol is significantly less toxic. Since ethylene glycol is used 
as an antifreeze coolant in all vehicles and as a heat transfer fluid in the 
heating systems of most buildings at McMurdo, the on-hand inventory 
of the product is high. This substitution eliminates a major source of 
toxic waste.

Waste Minimization

Opportunities for reuse and recycling are continuously being 
assessed in order to minimize the quantity and volume of waste 
produced at McMurdo Station. Used pallets and crates which are in 
good conditions are reused. A reuse center has been opened for the 
distribution to the community of reusable discarded personnel items - 
clothing, stereos, books. The procurement of a drum washing apparatus 
enables local cleaning and reuse of metal drums as they are returned to 
McMurdo from outlying camps. Off-specification aviation fuel is 
being burned in furnaces for space heating. Used lubrication oil is 
tested and, if found to be within the established standards, is then 
blended with furnace fuel and burned.

The USAP also maximizes reuse and recycling after the waste is 
retrograded to the United States. The terms of the waste disposal 
subcontract is designed to leverage the subcontractor to maximize reuse 
and recycling. The Request for Proposal requires each bidder to 
explicitly list how and where the bidder plans to dispose of individual 
waste streams, hazardous and nonhazardous, that are listed in the 
proposal. The criteria for evaluating the proposal explicitly assigns 
high scores to recycling and reuse, and low scores to incineration and 
landfill. This procurement mechanism has worked well.

Waste Segregation, Processing and Packaging

Reuse and recycling has been demonstrated to be most easily 
facilitated when the wastes are segregated at the source (Reference 10). 
This requires the active involvement of the entire McMurdo 
community. In the dormitories and in all maintenance shops and 
laboratory spaces, numerous receptacles are provided, each clearly 
marked and dedicated to a single type of waste. The receptacles are 
colored coded to indicate the type of waste acceptable: green for 
recyclable, gold for incineration, blue for disposable, and red for 
regulated waste. These receptacles are collected and the contents 
further sorted for ease of processing.

Aluminum, metal cans, and light-weight scrap metals are
The level of spill response is based on the scale of the spill. Level I 
are small spills of less than three 208-liter (55-gallon) drums of cleanup 
waste. Level II are spills that generate cleanup waste in excess of three 
208-liter (55-gallon) drums. Level III are large spills that are beyond 
the capability of the local spill response teams and will require outside 
assistance.

It is the responsibility of the individual causing a Level I spill to 
clean it up. Level II and Level III spills are addresse ' through a team 
approach. There are four 5-person teams organized in the summer 
season to respond to Level II spills. The teams rotate the duty on a 
weekly basis. For Level III spills there are 23-person response 
teams. During the winter, the response capability is reduced to two 5-
person teams because the decreased level of winter activities limits the 
potential for spills to occur. Spill response teams are organized prior to 
deployment to the continent and team members receive hand-on spill 
response training at U.S. based training centers. An extensive inventory 
of equipment and supplies for containment and recovery of spills, both 
waterborne and terrestrial, have been procured. A representative 
amount of this inventory is staged in mobile containers which can be 
rapidly transported to the scene of a spill, if required.

Spill reporting procedures have been established for all levels of 
spill. The data are used to identify spill causes and trends so that 
preventive measures can be instituted.

A Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasures Plan (SPCC) 
(Reference 7) has been developed following the requirements of the 
EPA regulations as guidance. The SPCC recommends measures 
deemed necessary or helpful to prevent and control spills. The 
recommendations include: replacement of the older bulk fuel storage 
tanks, replacement of all flanged pipe joints, and installation of 
secondary containment.

In response to these recommendations, in 1995 USAP completed the 
construction of two new 1,892,000 liters bulk storage tanks with 
secondary containment, initiated a multi-year program for the welding 
of all flanged type piping, and by 1996 completed the construction of 
secondary containment around 5 of the older bulk storage tanks ( 2-
1.892 million liters, 2-946 thousand liters, 1-9.46 million liters).

Investigations Underway

The USAP continues to investigate the means to further reduce 
waste at McMurdo Station. One significant target for waste reduction 
is wood, a major waste stream of high volume. The feasibility of 
utilizing commercially available wood burners for space heating is 
being assessed. Such devices are clean burning and could potentially 
eliminate the need to annually retrograde approximately 110 milvans of 
waste wood. An added benefit would be realized in the reduction of 
heating fuel usage.

Soil cleaning technologies for remediating fuel contaminated soils at 
McMurdo are also being actively investigated. Technologies of interest 
include: soil washing with biodegradable deterg ats, in-situ 
bioremediation, thermal desorption, and steam cleaning.

At the international level, the USAP is currently in discussion with 
the national operators of other Aniartic Programs concerning regional 
based approaches to spill response. The capability to provide an 
increased level of response through a sharing of assets could be critical
in limiting the extent and coincident damage to the environment of a 
large spill.

Conclusion

During the past several years, the NSF has taken aggressive 
measures to abate pollution at McMurdo. It has issued new waste 
regulations to govern waste management and disposal in Antarctica. It 
has banned open burning and closed down the waste dump. It has 
cleaned up former waste dump sites and removed the waste backlog 
from the station. It has developed and implemented spill prevention 
and spill response plans and continues to invest in the upgrade of its 
aging bulk fuel storage and distribution system. It has interacted with 
other national programs within the Antarctic Treaty System in sharing 
pollution abatement plans, procedures and technology. Opportunities 
for further reductions in waste are being pursued and technologies to 
remediate soil contamination are being explored. Perhaps the most 
significant improvement from past practices has been the shift in the 
culture of McMurdo community toward environmental responsibility. 
All these measures have enabled the USAP to assume a leadership role 
in the Antarctic Treaty System for the protection of the Antarctic 
environment.

REFERENCES

1. Lenihan, HS; Oliver, JS; Oakden, JM, and Stephenson, MD (1990). 
"Intense and Localized Benthic Marine Pollution Around McMurdo 
Station," Marine Pollution Bulletin, Vol 21, No. 9, pp 422-430.

2. Lenihan, HS (1992). "Benthic Marine Pollution Around McMurdo 
Station, Antarctica: A Summary of Findings,"
ANTARCTICA
5.4 million square miles
larger than the United States
and Mexico combined

Palmer
Station                  South Pole Station

                                  McMurdo Station

Figure 1    Location Map of McMurdo Station, McMurdo

Figure 2    McMurdo Station Site Plan
578

