Prevention, control and management of avian influenza in
Antarctica: Need to unify biosafety criteria
Prevention, control and management of avian influenza in
Antarctica: Need to unify biosafety criteria
Summary
Chile proposes the establishment of an intersessional contact group
(ICG) to analyse the different protocols that have been applied by
the Consultative States in Antarctica in relation to avian influenza
and, in general, in matters of biosafety. The objective of the ICG is
to collect the respective information and promote the unification of
criteria between the Consultative Parties, either through a Measure
to be agreed upon in a future Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(ATCM) or by suggesting certain guidelines that can be replicated in
the domestic legislation of each State. This proposal is based on the
results of the monitoring carried out in different areas of Antarctica
by scientific groups belonging to different National Antarctic
Programmes, as well as an analysis of the way in which the ATCM
and different individual countries have reacted normatively to this
threat.
Background
Since 2022, the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) has
warned of the largest global outbreak of Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza H5N1 (HPAI) among colonies of birds and marine
mammals. WOAH, 90 SG/8 (2023).Technical report:Desafíos
estratégicos para el control mundial de la influenza aviar de alta
[Strategic challenges for global control of Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza]. P. 6 Avian influenza is characterised by being an
extremely contagious viral disease with high levels of mortality in
both domestic poultry and wild birds.
On 24 February 2024, the first cases of avian influenza were
confirmed on the Antarctic continent after the analysis of two dead
skuas found at the Primavera base (Argentina). “Scientists from the
Severo Ochoa Molecular Biology Centre of the CSIC confirm the
first presence in Antarctica of the Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza virus.”Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities of
Spain.Available at:https://www.ciencia.gob.es/Noticias/2024/
febrero/gripe-aviar-antartida.html Days later, infected penguins and
cormorants were also identified. “Chile confirms the presence of
avian influenza in penguins, cormorants and skuas in Antarctica.”
University of Chile.Available at:https://uchile.cl/noticias/214119/
confirman-presencia-de-gripe-aviar-en-diferentes-aves-de-la-
antartica
At ATCM XLV (Helsinki, 2023), a number of Consultative and
Observer States presented documents on this matter. Among them,
the United States presented a Working Paper (WP) proposing
measures and recommendations in this regard; ATCM XLV
(Helsinki, 2023), WP 3 (United States). while Chile, ATCM XLV
(Helsinki, 2023), IP 122 (Chile). South Korea, ATCM XLV (Helsinki,
2023), IP 23 rev.1 (South Korea). United Kingdom, ATCM XLV
(Helsinki, 2023), IP 30 (United Kingdom). IAATO ATCM XLV
(Helsinki, 2023), IP 52 (IAATO). and SCAR in conjunction with
IAATO and COMNAP, ATCM XLV (Helsinki, 2023), IP 101 (IAATO,
SCAR and COMNAP). presented Information Papers (IP) on
detection and control procedures for infections.
Subsequently, the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP)
warned about the potential risks of the proliferation of HPAI in
Antarctica and its effects. Along with the above, several Members
highlighted the need to coordinate efforts and develop a joint,
timely and effective response to prevent the dramatic consequences
of HPAI in Antarctica. In this regard, it was proposed that the
Parties share their national experiences, while SCAR and IAATO
promoted general recommendations for its prevention, control and
management. Report of the XXV Meeting of the CEP (Helsinki,
2023), para. 151. None of these efforts have ensured the application
of unified criteria in the regulation of these biosafety measures,
encouraging, on the contrary, each State to regulate a matter of
international interest through their respective domestic laws.
In this context, Chile adopted the “Protocol for the prevention and
control of the Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza virus (HPAI) in
Chilean Antarctic Territory” through Exempt Resolution No. 393 of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs/INACH, dated 1 August 2023, where
various measures were addressed for each of the stages of an
expedition to Antarctica to mitigate the transmission of the virus by
its various state and private operators. Additionally, the Chilean
Antarctic Institute (INACH), the Millennium Institute of Biodiversity
of Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic Ecosystems (BASE), and the Spanish
Polar Committee provided molecular analysis platforms for the
detection of positive cases. Likewise, field observation, interviews
and visits to Antarctic bases were carried out by the Antarctic
Studies Programme of the Faculty of Law of the University of Chile
and the Milenio BASE Institute on the way in which the ATCM and
different countries have reacted to this threat individually through
legislation.
Need to improve international coordination by means of the
exchange of information through the Secretariat of the Antarctic
Treaty
The ATCM has continually been concerned with the exchange of
information between the Member States, in accordance with the
obligations established in this regard by the Antarctic Treaty, the
Protocol on Environmental Protection and its annexes, and the
agreements adopted by the ATCM on this matter. The last of these
agreements is Decision 4 (2023), which establishes that the Parties
to the Antarctic Treaty must share with each other information
about their relevant national legislation. The requirements for this
exchange are the inclusion of a description of the law, rule,
administrative measure or other provision, date of entry into force
or promulgation, copy (PDF), or contact information for the printed
version.
At the same time, it is worth remembering that Recommendation 1
(1991), entitled “Antarctic legislation and exchange of information”
established that “the Representatives [. . .], recommend that their
Governments' information exchanges under Article VII (5) of the
Antarctic Treaty should include information on any national
legislation enacted to give effect to the Antarctic Treaty and the
obligations arising from the Recommendations adopted at the
Consultative Meetings of the Antarctic Treaty”. This provision came
into force in September 2019.
To guarantee the success of this exchange with rapid and efficient
access to information, it is necessary to centralise the data provided
by the National Antarctic Programmes. In this regard, it would be
advisable to consider that, together with the Secretariat, the
Consultative Parties should generate a spreadsheet in the Electronic
Information Exchange System (EIES) to allow the centralisation of
all the domestic regulations that regulate HPAI in Antarctica.
During the 2023/24 Antarctic summer campaign, with HPAI
expected to reach Antarctic territory, both SCAR and COMNAP have
prepared information exchange procedures that have worked
optimally and in a harmonised manner, offering the parties updated
information on the development of the infection. Likewise, both
organisations prepared procedures and recommendations to tackle
the disease with the aim of avoiding infection in people and prevent
it from becoming the vector of transmission of the virus between
different animal colonies. Likewise, IAATO played an active role in
both the detection of possible symptoms of the disease
and in the genetic confirmation of the virus in the different
locations visited by tour operators. The information obtained by
IAATO was immediately communicated to the requesting parties.
Need for considerations on unification of biosafety measures
regarding avian influenza in Antarctica within the framework of the
Antarctic Treaty System
The Consultative States have been proactive regarding the handling
of health contingencies that affect the Antarctic Continent. At the
same time, within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System
(ATS) as a legal regime applicable in the Sixth Continent, various
proposals have emerged to confront these situations, as in the case
of SAR-CoV 2 and recently with H5N1 avian flu.
However, it should be noted that in terms of biosafety there is
plenty of room for further progress. In this regard, the fact that the
ATCM acknowledge the importance of the issue will be an impetus
for the Consultative Parties, individually and together, to strengthen
what they do in this regard. The creation of an ICG that analyses
domestic regulations and that is in a position to propose criteria to
move towards their uniformity through an international standard,
or that at least provides guidelines for better domestic regulation,
can be a first step of special significance for guaranteeing the
prevention and management of this type of contingency.
Proposal
In accordance with the above and what is stated in the IP presented
by Chile on scientific advances in relation to avian influenza, it is
proposed to establish an open ICG that will work until the next
ATCM or an agreed deadline, supported by SCAR experts and the
communication and operational capacity of COMNAP, in order to
examine the biosafety measures associated with the prevention,
management and control of avian influenza adopted by the different
Consultative States, and reflect on the possibility of agreeing on a
unified protocol in this regard, with the following terms of
reference:
Discuss issues related to the prevention, control and management of
avian influenza in Antarctica which considers at least the following
elements:
General definitions
Proposals and recommendations within the framework of the ATS
Scope and effect of existing national regulations
Comparative study of domestic regulations
With the collaboration of relevant Observers and Experts, discuss
the objectives, types and contents of the information to be
exchanged.
Task the Secretariat with establishing an interactive electronic
discussion forum and providing assistance to the ICG.
Draft an ICG report to present at ATCM 47 (2025).
The State of Chile offers to lead this ICG on prevention, control and
management of avian influenza in Antarctica, extending the
invitation for active participation by the other Consultative Parties,
Observers and Experts.
