Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 135 North-east Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast,
Wilkes Land
ASPA No. 135 North-east Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation 8 (1985) - SSSI
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation 8 (1985)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2003), Measure 8 (2008), Measure 6 (2013)
Current management plan:
Measure 6 (2013), CEP XXII (2019) agreed the existing
management plan would remain in place with the next review to be
initiated in 2024
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Yes – Resolution 7 (1995), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 135 North-east Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No – The depiction of the Area boundary in the maps has been
updated to more accurately represent the boundary coordinate
points
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes – Changes to captions and graphics to represent removed
infrastructure, updated vegetation, bird distributions and
topographical features, and update key and publication details. As
noted above, the depiction of the Area boundary has also been
updated.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Introduction revised to include minor editorial changes
Section 1 revised to reflect updated research on bryophytes
(including a new figure)
Section 2 revised for consistency with other ASPA Management
Plans
Section 3 revised for consistency with other ASPA Management
Plans
Section 4 revised for with other ASPA Management Plans
Section 5 revised to reflect updated maps and figures
Section 6 revised to include updated research on vegetation
(including a new figure) and birds in Area, omit information not
directly relevant to Area, update summary of structures in Area, and
reorder content
Section 7 revised for consistency with other ASPA management
plans (including standard wording on Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS)), and describe the risk posed to values from
pedestrian access and contamination
Section 8 revised to update and consistently format references
Appendix 2 moss species updated
Editorial amendments made throughout the document
Map A caption updated
Map B caption, bird distributions, structures and topographical
features updated, and boundary representation improved
Map C caption, structures, vegetation distributions and
topographical features updated,
and boundary representation improved
Map D caption, structures and topographical features updated, and
boundary representation improved
Map E caption, structures, topographical features and Australian
Antarctic Science (AAS) project locations updated, and boundary
representation improved
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2(c) – Areas with important or unusual assemblages of
species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or
mammals
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes – Environment D East Antarctic coastal geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes – Biogeographic Region 7 East Antarctica
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
N/A
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 135 North-east Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast,
Wilkes Land
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has
undertaken a five-yearly review of the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 135 North-east Bailey
Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land. The review was conducted
with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the
Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections
briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor
amendments to the Management Plan. Australia recommends that
the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
North-east Bailey Peninsula is situated in the Windmill Islands
region on the Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. ASPA 135
North-east Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land is directly
adjacent to Australia’s Casey station, and was originally designated
under Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) following a proposal made by
Australia. Revised Management Plans were adopted under Measure
2 (2003), Measure 8 (2008) and Measure 6 (2013). Following a
five-yearly review conducted by Australia, CEP XXII (2019) agreed
the existing Management Plan would remain in force with the next
review to be initiated in 2024. Following a five-yearly review
conducted by Australia, CEP XXII (2019) agreed the existing
Management Plan would remain in force with the next review to be
initiated in 2024.
The Area is primarily designated as a scientific reference site to
protect a representative example of the diverse assemblage flora
found in the Windmill Islands region, including several moss and
lichen communities. The Area has intrinsic ecological value and
scientific importance, particularly to botanists, microbiologists, soil
scientists and glacial geomorphologists, and is designated to protect
the communities and ecosystem from further human impact.
Review of Management Plan
During the process of this review, subject matter experts and
personnel permitted to enter the Area during the past five years
were consulted. Regulatory and operational advice was also sought,
a literature review conducted, and associated maps updated. The
proposed revisions to the Management Plan are intended to
enhance protection of the values that the Area was designated to
protect.
Summary of amendments to Management Plan for ASPA 135
A revised Management Plan for ASPA 135 is presented at
Attachment A. Only minor changes are proposed and there are no
changes to the Area boundary. Proposed amendments are
summarised as follows:
Introduction revised to include minor editorial changes
Section 1 revised to include updated research on bryophytes
(including a new figure)
Section 2 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 3 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 4 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 5 revised to reflect updated maps and figures
Section 6 revised to include updated research on vegetation
(including a new figure) and birds in Area, omit information not
directly relevant to Area, update summary of structures in Area, and
reorder content
Section 7 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans (including standard wording on use of remotely
piloted aircraft systems (RPAS)), and describe the risk posed to
values from pedestrian access and contamination
Section 8 revised to update and consistently format references
Appendix 2 moss species updated
Editorial amendments made throughout the document
Map A caption updated
Map B caption, bird distributions, structures and topographical
features updated, and boundary representation improved
Map C caption, boundary representation, structures, vegetation
distributions and topographical features updated, and boundary
representation improved
Map D caption, boundary representation, structures and
topographical features updated, and boundary representation
improved
Map E caption, boundary representation, structures, topographical
features and Australian Antarctic Science (AAS) projects locations
updated, and boundary representation improved.
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
Management Plan for ASPA 135 North-east Bailey Peninsula, Budd
Coast, Wilkes Land.
