Report on the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to review the use
and functioning of the Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan (MYSWP)
Report on the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to review the use
and functioning of the Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan (MYSWP)
Summary
An intersessional contact group (ICG) was established by ATCM
XLV to review the use and functioning of the Multi-Year Strategic
Work Plan (MYSWP) and identify opportunities for improvements
for further consideration at ATCM XLVI. ICG participants judged the
MYSWP had been useful for focussing attention on ATCM priorities,
saw value in its continued use, and largely supported the
suggestions that had been put forward by the Secretariat at ATCM
XLV. Based on comments provided by participants, the ICG advises
the ATCM that the MYSWP remains a useful tool for parties and
could be improved by adopting a procedure for discussing priorities
and adopting the work plan, and by developing further guidance for
the content of the MYSWP itself.
Background
At ATCM XLV (2023), Australia submitted a Working Paper (ATCM
XLV WP030 Proposal for an Informal Intersessional Process to
Review the Use and Maintenance of the Multi-Year Strategic Work
Plan) with Belgium, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Sweden and the United States, proposing an intersessional process
to review the current use and functioning of the ATCM’s MYSWP.
The Secretariat, on request of the parties, also reported on its
review of the MYSWP (ATCM XLV SP010 A review of the use of the
ATCM Multi-year Strategic Work Plan (MYSWP) which included
five key suggestions for consideration:
establish a procedure for the discussion and adoption of the
MYSWP, to ensure that enough time is devoted annually to the
MYSWP;
limit the number of priority issues per year to a certain maximum,
in line with principle 3;
determine how many years the priority issues should cover to
ensure the MYSWP is dynamic and flexible;
define criteria to propose candidates for new issues; and/or
standardise the way priority issues are written, to allow evaluation
of the issue’s effectiveness over time.
Parties agreed that the MYWSP has been a useful tool to support the
work of the ATCM and noted that, as it had been in place for ten
years, it was a timely opportunity to review its use and functions.
ATCM XLV agreed to establish an intersessional contact group (ICG)
convened by Australia, with the following terms of reference:
Reviewing the use and functioning of the MYSWP to date, including
with reference to the issues identified in SP 10, based on its
findings; and
Identifying and discussing opportunities for improvements to
support the Meeting’s work for the further consideration of ATCM
46.
The ICG commenced in January 2024 and operated via the online
ATCM Discussion Forum. Australia as convener provided a template
with questions, aligned with the recommendations in SP10, to guide
the discussion.
Summary of comments received by ICG participants
Comments were submitted by six participants (Argentina, Australia,
France, Germany, Japan, Spain and Venezuela). The following
sections summarise the main points raised by ICG participants, in
accordance with the ICG terms of reference and the five
recommendations of SP10.
ICG participants all saw value in the MYSWP. The discussion
identified some common views on, and opportunities to improve,
the MYSWP.
Question 1: Following its review of the MYSWP, the Secretariat
suggested parties may find value in in discussing whether it is
necessary or convenient to:
1a) establish a procedure for the discussion and adoption of the
MYSWP, to ensure that enough time is devoted annually to the
MYSWP
Parties generally agreed that there was value in a procedure to
ensure adequate time during the annual meeting to discuss
priorities, review progress, and update the MYSWP. Suggestions
included periodic review procedures and action on priority issues
through methods such as preparatory work or special sessions led
by host countries. It was also noted that a more systematic
approach to how the ATCM manages the work plan could
contribute to minimising overlap with other ATCM agenda items
and improve consistency in scheduling of priority issues,
introduction of new priority issues, and standardising the
descriptions and information about the priority issues.
It was noted that the standing ATCM agenda item on the MYSWP
provides the meeting with the opportunity to devote time to
MYSWP issues.
1b) limit the number of priority issues per year to a certain
maximum, in line with principle 3
Parties agreed there was merit in having a maximum number of
priority issues in the MYSWP. Suggestions included no more than
10 priorities, or no more than 4-6 priorities. It was noted that the
MYSWP needs to remain a flexible tool that can incorporate new
challenges as necessary.
Better spreading priorities throughout the plan’s 5-year period was
suggested as one option to ensure manageable numbers of priorities
could be approached strategically.
It was suggested that it had been useful to use the MYWSWP to
track agreed or ongoing work initiated by the ATCM, while that had
not been the intended purpose of the MYSWP originally. It was
noted that exploring alternative ways to continue to track such
work could be useful.
1c) determine how many years the priority issues should cover to
ensure the MYSWP is dynamic and flexible;
Parties agreed that limiting the duration of priority issues in the
MYSWP was reasonable and noted that automatic ‘extension’ of
issues over multiple years where no actions had been taken by the
ATCM was not desirable. There was general agreement that
addressing issues over periods as long as 4 or 5 years was a
maximum, and regular review was encouraged.
1d) Define criteria to propose candidates for new issues
There were mixed views regarding the idea of defining criteria for
inclusion of new issues on the MYSWP. Some regarded the idea of
criteria as useful, with the aim of agreeing fewer, but more concrete
issues. Some participants did not think new criteria would
necessarily be helpful, noting the challenges of reaching agreement
on and implementing criteria. It was suggested that if such criteria
are to be defined, any new issues should be considered subject to
the availability of resources and the ability of the ATCM to address
multiple issues.
Suggestions for criteria included: urgency – that a new and urgent
issue has arisen; and level of support (for example, several Parties
regarding an issue as significant).
In the context of criteria for new issues, it was suggested that
priorities need not be discussed every year and could for example
be considered only every 4 or 2 years. In between those cycles, the
Parties would only focus on evaluating the implementation or
effectiveness of the plan.
It was suggested that it might be possible to develop some more
generalised guidance for the types of priority issues for inclusion in
the plan, with caution about making criteria that could be rigid.
1e) standardise the way priority issues are written, to allow
evaluation of the issue’s effectiveness over time.
Parties broadly agreed on the value of standardising how priorities
are described in the MYSWP, to be specific, clearly articulated and
consistent. There was some caution about rigid approaches.
Suggestions included: having some guidance or ‘soft’ instructions;
including justification for inclusion; and defining a general priority,
supported by one or two goals to assist evaluation.
Question 2: How do you think the MYSWP could be improved to
support the ATCM’s work?
Most parties referenced responses to Question 1, with a focus on
limiting the number of priorities.
Specific additional suggestions included: cross-referencing papers to
MYSWP priorities when preparing and submitting papers;
mechanisms for monitoring implementation of the MYSWP; and
ensuring the MYSWP is suitable for communicating the ATCM’s
priorities to a wider audience.
Question 3: Has the MYSWP been a useful modality for directing
future work of the ATCM?
Parties agreed the MYSWP has been a useful tool, but
improvements could be brought about to increase focus in line with
responses to Questions 1 and 2, and to promote an increased level
of engagement by more Parties.
Benefits of the MYSWP were noted including assisting a strategic
approach to addressing key priorities across the work of the ATCM;
the ACTM considering priority issues in a more predictable and
structured way; and assisting meeting participants in their own
planning and preparation.
Question 4: Do you have any other comments or views to share on
the MYSWP?
Parties considered that it may be useful to consider the MYWSP in
light of the CEP’s experience with its five-year work plan, including
the CEP’s current review process.
The outreach and communications function of the MYSWP was
noted. It was suggested that the further promotion and
reinforcement of the MYSWP and ensuring a more effective
discussion about the plan and its priorities, would help ensure it is
not seen as a formality.
Conclusions
Having considered the use and functioning of the MYSWP,
including with reference to the issues identified in SP10, the ICG
identified several opportunities to improve the functioning of the
MYSWP. Firstly, by adopting a procedure for discussing priorities
and adopting the work plan, and secondly, through further
guidance for the MYSWP itself.
The following recommendations are presented to the ATCM 46 for
consideration:
Establish a periodic review procedure to take place every third
ATCM, for example a more detailed discussion in the ATCM
supported by margins work. Support for that
review procedure could include a guidance document for ATCM
chairs, a Secretariat-supported procedure, and/or using the meeting
report to identify MYSWP items more explicitly;
Invite host governments from 2025 to, if desired, identify a MYSWP
issue that will be a focus for their hosting year;
Support the monitoring and implementation of priorities, for
example by requesting ATCM Chairs to summarise in the ATCM
report any action on priority items;
Adopt a guideline of no more than 5 – 10 priorities over a five-year
term;
Set a maximum five-year term for a priority issue, consistent with
the five-year horizon of the MYSWP;
Develop guidance to assist the ATCM in drafting priorities, with a
view to produce time-bound, action-oriented priorities; and
Encourage cross-referencing of MYSWP priorities in papers
submitted to the ATCM, including requesting the Secretariat update
the paper template to allow authors to reference a MYSWP priority.
