Nested permitting
Nested permitting
Summary
This paper is submitted with reference to Article 13.4 of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection, relating to activities which
affect the implementation of the objectives and principles of the
Protocol. Drawing on ATCM XLIV/IP62, submitted by the United
States, on the ‘Authorization of science activities associated with
tourist and other non-governmental expedition organizers’, this
paper sets out issues concerning ‘nested permitting’, which occurs
when an expedition permitted by one National Competent
Authority is carrying passengers permitted for activities permitted
by another National Competent Authority.
Background
There is an increasing trend in Antarctica that sees Non-
Governmental Organisation (NGO) expeditions relying on tourist
operators for logistical support in the region. Whilst this can
provide opportunities for researchers to conduct activity in
Antarctica, it also raises challenges for National Competent
Authorities (NCAs) in assessing the full environmental impact of
activities and subsequently issuing permits. One such challenge is
‘nested permits’, where two or more separate permits are issued for
a combined visit on a single vessel travelling to Antarctica.
NGO expeditions must obtain the appropriate authorisation to enter
Antarctica from an NCA and submit an Environmental Impact
Assessment as part of the application process. Article 8.4 of the
Protocol provides that “where activities are planned jointly by more
than one Party, the Parties involved shall nominate one of their
number to coordinate the implementation of the environmental
impact assessment procedures set out in Annex I”. In practice,
however, often multiple EIAs, sometimes to different NCAs, are
being submitted through the practice of ‘nested permitting’ and the
requirement of Article 8 to nominate a single Party to coordinate
the process is not necessarily being met.
In its approach to permitting, the UK aims to ensure each activity is
assessed and authorised by a single NCA and not split between
NCAs wherever possible. A single permit allows for a central point
of contact for any person covered by that permit, which would
ensure the assessment of all activities to be undertaken as part of
their expedition to Antarctica. The permit holder also does not have
to navigate, nor can they seek to circumvent, requirements from
more than one NCA which can be different depending on how the
Protocol has been interpreted in the relevant domestic law.
Recording data on the Electronic Information Exchange System
(EIES) can also be challenging if there are multiple expeditions on a
single vessel if each individual permit has to be recorded separately
despite being on the same vessel. This results in an inaccurate
number of expeditions being recorded as travelling to Antarctica.
The growth in Antarctic tourism is seeing greater instances of
nested permits as there is increased opportunity to encompass both
science and tourism on a single visit to Antarctica. Citizen science
initiatives and guest scientists on board tourist vessels also present,
in many cases, a direct crossover between separate permitted
expeditions. This is also expanding to include requests by
filmmakers who are travelling alongside scientists and tourists on
the same vessel. Accurately evaluating the impact of all activity on
an expedition with nested permits is a challenge as there is limited
oversight of the full picture. The UK is also concerned that permits
obtained from different NCAs might contain contradictory
requirements and make managing the expedition more difficult. As
noted in IP 62, “in some cases, Parties may also have different
requirements for authorising citizens and foreign nationals who
seek to work with domestic operators”.
In the 2023/24 season, the UK permitted both scientific and
filmmaking expeditions that used a tourist vessel permitted by a
different NCA for logistical purposes. In each of these cases, this
was at the request of another NCA. The EIAs for the two UK permits
only covered a portion of the full activity that was taking place on
the tourist vessel and made it harder to see whether the mitigations
set out in the applications would be effective.
Recommendations
The UK recommends that Parties continue to discuss this issue in
the Competent Authorities Discussion Forum as one of the five
priority issues, to determine how best to ensure that all activity in
multimember expeditions is assessed for environmental impacts, in
the context of Article 8.4 of the Environmental Protocol.
We would also recommend that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
change the EIES to allow Parties who request separate authorisation
be sought for activities taking place on their authorised vessels/
operations, to identify which other Parties are authorising those
activities, and enable those Parties to record the activities on the
EIES as part of a single overall expedition.
