Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area
on Signy Island, South Orkney Islands
TEMPLATE A: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON AN
ASPA OR ASMA
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? Note: this
information may be found on the ATS website in the Documents
database by searching under the name of the area. While the ATS
has made every effort to ensure the completeness and accuracy of
the information in the database, occasional errors or omissions may
occur. The proponents of any revision to a protected area are best
placed to know the history of that area, and are kindly requested to
contact the Secretariat if they notice any apparent discrepancy
between the regulatory history as they understand it and that
displayed on the ATS database.
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary purpose of the proposed designation of the area as an
ASPA is to protect the outstanding environmental and scientific
values present on the island.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes: Environment Domain G (Antarctic Peninsula off-shore islands
geologic)
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes: ACBR 2 South Orkney Islands
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
Yes: IBA ANT019 Signy Island
Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area
on Signy Island, South Orkney Islands
Working Paper submitted by Italy, the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom
Summary
A prior assessment for a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) on Signy Island, South Orkney Islands, has been
carried out by Italy, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. The
co-proponents recommend that the CEP: (1) agrees that the values
within the proposed ASPA merit special protection, (2) endorses the
development of a Management Plan for the area, and (3)
encourages interested Parties to work with Italy, the Netherlands
and the United Kingdom informally during the intersessional period
in the development of a Management Plan for potential submission
at CEP 27.
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions in Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Italy, the
Netherlands and the United Kingdom propose the establishment of
an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) on Signy Island, South
Orkney Islands.
The proposed ASPA would be intended primarily to protect
environmental and scientific values.
Scientific values
Signy Island is an area of international scientific activity, with
researchers from the UK, Italy, Japan, Malaysia and the Netherlands
(and others) regularly undertaking collaborative research, including
on the responses of the island’s biological communities to climate
and environmental change.
Signy Island is also a CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme
(CEMP) site where researchers monitor the breeding population
size, breeding success, chick weight at fledging, chick diet and
breeding chronology of Adélie and chinstrap penguins. The
population size and breeding success of gentoo penguins are also
monitored.
Signy is the type locality for 33 terrestrial and freshwater species,
including lichens, mites, tardigrades and a rotifer — more species
than at any other location in Antarctic (ATCMXLIV WP20; Phillips
et al., 2022).
Environmental values
In the report attached to ATCMXL IP16, an assessment was
undertaken in response to Resolution 5 (2015) to provide an update
to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on the extent to which
the Important Bird Areas are, or should be, represented within the
series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA), in particular
those areas that might qualify as ‘major colonies of breeding native
birds’. The report prioritized the 204 Important Bird Areas (IBAs)
that existed at the time, in terms of both the diversity and numbers
of birds, and then identified which had been designated as ASPAs.
Table 9 from the report, shown below, identified Signy Island as the
site with the highest combined score for size of colonies and
diversity of bird species. Signy Island was also the only IBA in the
top eight not to have been designated as an ASPA. Therefore, it is
clear that Signy Island is one of the most important areas in
Antarctica for bird life.
The vegetation of Signy Island is also outstanding. In particular,
Smith (2007) reported that 50% of the Antarctic lichen ‘flora’ occur
within an area of c. 1 km2 at the northern tip of the island Such
high diversity is due to multiple factors, including a favourable
microclimate, high nutrient input from seabird and seal colonies,
unusually complex geology and a regular supply of water during the
growing season. Of particular note are the Chorisodontium
aciphyllum/Polytrichum strictum moss banks, which reach their
thickest (c. 2.5 m) on the west of the island and, at up to 5000
years-old, represent some of the oldest and most extensive
continuously developing moss banks in Antarctica.
Wilderness and aesthetic values
Signy Island is the southern-most of the South Orkney Islands and
affords spectacular views of the mountainous and heavily glaciated
Coronation Island to the north and, frequently, numerous icebergs,
particularly to the west. The island has outstanding wilderness and
aesthetic values in its own right, including numerous hills and
valley and a diversity of freshwater lakes and pools, which provide
a stunning backdrop for the birdlife and extensive terrestrial
ecosystems.
Prior assessment
Following discussions at CEP XX, the Guidelines: A prior assessment
process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs were updated to
include a non-mandatory ASPA prior assessment template to
facilitate the provision of information consistent with the
Guidelines. Italy, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom have
completed the prior assessment template for the proposed ASPA
(see: Attachment A), which includes two maps and a list of selected
publications resulting from scientific work on Signy Island.
If the CEP agrees that the area merits special protection, the co-
proponents intend to develop intersessionally a Management Plan
for the proposed ASPA in collaboration with all interested Parties
with the expectation that this will be submitted for consideration
during CEP 27.
Recommendations
Italy, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom recommend that the
CEP:
agrees that the values within the proposed ASPA merit special
protection, as described under Annex V to the Protocol;
endorses the development of a Management Plan for the area, led
by the Italy, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom; and
encourages interested Parties to work with the co-proponents
informally during the intersessional period in the development of a
Management Plan for potential submission at CEP 27.
References
Phillips, L.M. et al. (2022). Improving species-based area protection
in Antarctica. Conservation Biology 36, e13885. https://
doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13885
Smith, R. I. L. (2007). Half a continent in a square kilometre: the
exceptional lichen diversity of a small Antarctic island. Bibliotheca
Lichenologica, 95, pp. 387-403.
