Comprehensive and Consistent Framework for the Regulation of
Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic
Treaty Area - Suggestions for a Framework Structure
Comprehensive and Consistent Framework for the Regulation of
Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic
Treaty Area
Suggestions for a Framework Structure
Summary
The aim of this paper and the attachment 1 is to show what a
framework structure for a Tourism Framework as referred to in
Decision 6 (2023) could look like. Attachment 1 contains texts that
have largely been agreed previously or are based on established
policies or practices. While the document includes components that
are typical for legal instruments, the text has been developed
without prejudice to our discussions on the legal status or form of
the framework. The co-proponents propose to first discuss substance
of the Tourism Framework (‘form follows content’). The attached
outline structure does, however, not include all the necessary
substance to deliver a comprehensive and consistent Tourism
Framework. A second document (WP4) therefore sets out a range of
policy options, and initial suggestions on additional elements that
may be inserted into the framework structure document.
Aims of this Working Paper
With Decision 6 (2023) it was decided “to start a dedicated process
to develop a comprehensive and consistent framework for the
regulation of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica” (see Attachment 2); a “Tourism Framework”. It was also
decided to establish a Special Working Group for this purpose,
which will have its first meeting of two days during ATCM 46.
Through the Decision, all Consultative Parties have been invited to
develop proposals prior to the convening of that first meeting in
order to ensure due preparation of discussions.
Against this backdrop, the co-proponents have prepared two
separate, but linked documents:
This document and attachment 1 aim to show what a framework
structure for a Tourism Framework as referred to in Decision 6
(2023) could look like, and includes possible components. The
included texts on these components have largely been agreed
previously (e.g., the Madrid Protocol and existing Resolutions and
Measures) or are based on established policies or practices. The
sources of the texts are indicated in footnotes. Nevertheless, these
texts are included here as a basis for discussion, noting that the
final language will need to be adapted to reflect the outcomes of
discussions and the final agreed form of the instrument.
While the document includes components that are typical for legal
instruments, the suggestions for an outline structure in attachment
1 are proposed without prejudice to
further discussions on the final agreed legal status or form of a
Tourism Framework. The co-proponents of this paper would
propose the ATCM first discuss the structure and substance of the
Tourism Framework (‘form follows content’).
This outline structure does not include all the necessary substance
to deliver a comprehensive and consistent framework for the
regulation of tourism and other non-governmental activities, as
much of the substance requires further policy discussion among
Parties. A second document (WP4) therefore sets out a range of
policy options, and initial suggestions on additional elements that
may be inserted into the outline framework document, following
further discussion among Consultative Parties.
Proposal
The proponents propose to discuss attachment 1, with a special
focus on the following question:
Are the framework structure and components of attachment 1
considered useful for developing the Framework as referred to in
Decision 6 (2023), without prejudice to the legal status or form of
such a framework and while acknowledging that the final language
will need further discussions?
