Communication of the start and end dates of observer activities for
inspections
Communication of the start and end dates of observer activities for
inspections
Summary
The regulations on observers do not establish that the notification
of the designation of observers includes their end date.
Consequently, in some cases, notifications of designation have not
included clarifications regarding the duration of the appointment or
were indicated in an imprecise manner. This generates a lack of
certainty in the list of current observers. The proposal is to issue a
new Decision requiring that the communication of the names of
designated observers include both the start date and end date of
their activities. Likewise, it is proposed that, in the absence of
specification of the completion date, the end date is assumed to be
the 30 April after the start date of activities.
Background
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty states that “…each Contracting
Party whose representatives are entitled to participate in the
meetings referred to in Article IX of the Treaty shall have the right
to designate observers to carry out any inspection provided for by
the present Article”, adding that, “The names of observers shall be
communicated to every other Contracting Party having the right to
designate observers, and like notice shall be given of the
termination of their appointment..”
Likewise, Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
establishes that “The Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty
shall take measures, individually or collectively, for inspections by
observers, in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.”
In this regard, Decision 2 (2019), referring to the mechanism for the
Parties to send this information to the Secretariat, establishes “the
communication of the names of designated observers and the notice
of termination of their appointment through the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty (“the Secretariat”) is considered to be a suitable
and adequate means of communication in conformity with Article
VII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.”
Description of the Problem
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it has been noted that the
regulations on this issue do not establish that the notification of the
designation of observers and the notification of termination of their
appointment must be carried out in the same instance.
Consequently, in some cases, notifications of designation have not
included clarifications regarding the duration of the appointment,
or it was indicated in an imprecise manner (e.g. “during the current
campaign”). In other cases, reporting the termination of the
appointment has been omitted. All of this has resulted in the
current list of designated observers available on the Secretariat’s
website, including people who were designated several years ago,
but for whom it is not certain whether their appointment is still
valid.
Recommendation
In order to achieve greater certainty regarding observers authorised
to carry out inspections at Antarctic bases, the following is
suggested:
- That the communication of the names of designated observers
include both the start date and end date of their activities.
- That, in the absence of specification of the end date, the end date
be assumed to be the 30 April after the start date of activities.
- That, should a designated observer cease their duties before the
date communicated for the end of their activities, the Party must
communicate this fact to the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to
keep the current list up to date.
If the Meeting agrees with these proposals, a new Decision must be
adopted, replacing Decision 2 (2019). To this end, Argentina
attaches a draft Decision in Annex A.
Annex A
Draft Decision A (2024)
Notification by the Consultative Parties regarding the list of
observers under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
through the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
The Representatives,
Recalling that Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
provide that the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty shall
inform the other Consultative Parties regarding the designation of
Observers to carry out inspections;
Taking into account that, since the entry into force of the Antarctic
Treaty and since the subsequent creation of the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty (“the Secretariat”), new and more efficient ways of
sending and exchanging information have been developed, such as
circulars that the Secretariat sends to Contracting Parties by email;
Recalling in this regard Article 2.2 (c) of Measure 1 (2003);
Considering that the preservation and distribution of information
constitutes one of the main functions of the Secretariat;
Seeking to give as much certainty as possible to the start and end
dates of the designated Observers, in order to always keep the
current list of Observers updated;
Decide that:
1. Communication through the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
(“the Secretariat”) of the appointment of Designated Observers is
considered an appropriate form of communication, in accordance
with Article VII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;
2. In addition, this information may, but need not, also be
communicated to each of the Consultative Parties via the traditional
diplomatic channels;;
3. Oonce such information has been received, the Secretariat shall
immediately notify all of the Consultative Parties via a circular sent
through electronic mail;
4. The Secretariat will include all information provided in the
communications identified in paragraph 1 of this Decision in the
restricted access area of its website;
5. The communication of the appointment of designated Observers
must include both the start date of their activities and the date of
their end;
6. In the absence of specification of the end date, the end date shall
be the 30 April after the start date of activities;
7. Should a designated Observer cease in their functions before the
date communicated for the completion of their activities or before
the deadline indicated in paragraph 6 of this Decision, the Party
must communicate this development to the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty in order to keep the current list updated.
8. Decision 2 (2019) is to be revoked.
