Revision of the Management Plan for ASPA No.175 High Altitude
Geothermal Sites of the Ross Sea Region (including parts of the
summits of Mount Erebus, Ross Island and Mount Melbourne and
Mount Rittmann, northern Victoria Land)
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 175 High Altitude Geothermal Sites of the Ross
Sea Region (including parts of the summits of Mount Erebus, Ross
Island and Mount Melbourne and Mount Rittmann, northern
Victoria Land)
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand and the United States of
America
Summary
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 175 High Altitude
Geothermal Sites of the Ross Sea Region (including parts of the
summits of Mount Erebus, Ross Island and Mount Melbourne and
Mount Rittmann, northern Victoria Land) was originally designated
to protect the outstanding ecological values, specifically the unique
and rare biological communities that are extremely vulnerable to
the introduction of non-native species and to physical disturbance
from human activity. The sites are also of high scientific interest.
The Management Plan review carried out under Article 6.3 of
Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty concluded that the outstanding ecological and
scientific values of the Area have been maintained and remain
valid. New Zealand and the United States request the CEP to
recommend to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting approval
of the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
New Zealand and the United States have conducted a full review of
the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)
No. 175 High Altitude Geothermal Sites of the Ross Sea Region in
accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. A revised Management Plan has
been prepared in consultation with scientific experts who have
carried out extensive research within the Area. Consideration was
given to whether the values of the Area are being maintained and
whether the values remain valid.
Since the Management Plan was last revised, the SCAR Code of
Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in
Antarctica was adopted through Resolution 3 (2016). The present
review of ASPA No. 175 therefore paid particular attention to
consistency between this SCAR Code of Conduct and the
Management Plan. Updates to the Management Plan are minor and
no changes to the boundaries are proposed.
Harmonization with the SCAR Code of Conduct for Activity within
Terrestrial Geothermal Environments
A high priority for this review was to ensure the Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 175 High Altitude
Geothermal Sites of the Ross Sea Region – first adopted through
Measure 13 (2014), which remains the current Management Plan –
was fully consistent with the guidance contained within the more
recently adopted Resolution 3 (2016) SCAR Code of Conduct for
Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments. At the same
time, it was considered unnecessary and impractical to copy the full
guidance in the Code of Conduct wholesale to the Management
Plan. The review found that the policies within the
Management Plan were consistent with the Code of Conduct, and
where any key gaps were identified some guidance from the Code
has been transferred to the Management Plan.
A revised Management Plan has been prepared in consultation with
scientific experts who have carried out extensive research within
the Area. The review concluded the values of the Area are being
maintained and the values remain valid.
Recommendation
New Zealand and the United States request the Committee for
Environmental Protection to recommend to the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting approval of the attached revised Management
Plan and maps for ASPA No. 175 High Altitude Geothermal Sites of
the Ross Sea Region (including parts of the summits of Mount
Erebus, Ross Island and Mount Melbourne and Mount Rittmann,
northern Victoria Land).
ASPA No. 175 High Altitude Geothermal Sites of the Ross Sea
Region (including parts of the summits of Mount Erebus, Ross
Island and Mount Melbourne and Mount Rittmann, northern
Victoria Land).
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes.
First designation:
Measure 13 (2014).
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 13 (2014).
Any revisions to management plan:
No
Current management plan:
Measure 13 (2014).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Map numbers have been changed to follow a numeric
sequence. Upper Erebus Hut has been removed from Map 2 as it no
longer exists.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the ‘Revised
Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas’.
Section 6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area
The Upper Erebus Hut near Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, no
longer exists.
6(iv) Location of other protected areas in the vicinity
Near Mount Melbourne, ASPA No.178 Inexpressible Island and
Seaview Bay has been added.
7. Terms and conditions for entry permits
Section 7(i) General permit conditions
A new provision has been added specifying that “The number of
visitors permitted to enter the Area should be minimised without
compromising safety and the ability to undertake planned research
or management”.
7(ii) Access to, and movement within or over, the Area
Subheadings have been added to provide structure to provisions on
access.
A new provision has been added on Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS), consistent with other recently adopted
Management Plans.
7(iv) Installation, modification, or removal of structures.
An exception allowing permanent installations in accordance with a
permit was added to allow for permanent boundary markers to be
installed where appropriate. This is to aid identification of site
boundaries in the field.
7(vi) Restrictions on materials and organisms that may be brought
into the Area
A range of provisions have been added to this Section to maintain
consistency with Resolution 3 (2016) SCAR Code of Conduct for
Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments.
7(xi) Requirements for reports
Section 7(xi) has been updated to be consistent with wording used
in other recently adopted Management Plans.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future
comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected
by human activity;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific
research.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Yes. Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus is situated in Environment S –
McMurdo – South Victoria Land Geologic.
Both Mount Melbourne and Mount Rittmann are situated in
Environment U – North Victoria Land Geologic.
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
Yes. Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus is situated in Region 9 – South
Victoria Land.
Both Mount Melbourne and Mount Rittmann are situated in Region
8 – North Victoria Land.
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
No.
