SCAR AntClimNow Antarctic Climate Indicators project
SCAR AntClimNow Antarctic Climate Indicators project
Working Paper submitted by SCAR and WMO
Summary
The SCAR AntClimNow Scientific Research Programme, together
with partners including the World Climate Research Programme
(WCRP) Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) project, has identified a
range of Antarctic Climate Indicators (ACIs) with the aim of
providing an accessible visualisation of broad aspects of the
Antarctic climate system. This will help a range of users to keep
track of ongoing changes in Antarctica, with visualisations that can
be used for communication and to facilitate collaboration and
further studies. The range of indicators may be expanded to focus
on specific aspects of the climate system, through discussions with
scientists and other stakeholders to determine further relevant
variables.
SCAR and WMO encourage the CEP and the ATCM to:
consider the relevance of Antarctic Climate Indicators to inform
their discussions on climate change;
provide feedback on specific indicators that could be considered for
further development and inclusion as Antarctic Climate Indicators;
and
consider whether and how Antarctic Climate Indicators might be
routinely presented to provide context for CEP and ATCM
discussions.
Background
Antarctic climate exhibits large variability with increasingly
widespread signals of externally-forced change emerging. In such a
rapidly evolving system is it more important than ever to
continuously monitor the state of the Antarctic climate system in
near real time. Due to the strong interactions between different
components of the system, it is important that a range of
diagnostics are considered.
At present there is no central place that jointly displays or
documents key climate variables relevant to Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean, such as the Southern Annular Mode / westerly
winds, Southern Hemisphere sea ice extent and ocean temperatures.
Existing initiatives fulfil this role in a global context with the
concept of ‘climate indicators’. Two prominent examples are the
WMO Global Climate Indicators and the UK Met Office Climate
Dashboard.
The ATCM has agreed to continue to engage with the research
community to deepen understanding of the key messages emerging
from research on climate change, as well as to determine what
science and what types of information would best support the
development of robust policies and actions (ATCM XLV, paragraph
175). It further agreed on the importance of developing key
messages for the global community in regard to a changing
Antarctica (ATCM XLV, paragraph 167).
Antarctic Climate Indicators
To fill this gap in accessible information, the SCAR Scientific
Research Programme AntClimNow has identified a range of
‘Antarctic Climate Indicators’ (ACIs). A key guideline is that these
indicators should be derived from consistent observational or
observationally-
constrained datasets that are being continuously monitored and
therefore can be updated regularly into the foreseeable future. A list
of candidate ACIs has been collected from AntClimNow members,
with a subset being taken forward for initial release.
The aim of the ACIs is to provide an accessible visualisation of
broad aspects of the Antarctic climate system. This will help a range
of users to keep track of ongoing changes in Antarctica and have
access to visualisations that can be used for communication. It will
also provide references and contact points for the source data used,
to facilitate collaborations and follow-up studies.
At present the beta version of the Antarctic Climate Indicators
webpage https://scar.org/science/research-programmes/
antclimnow/climate-indicators shows a limited set of initial
variables (Atmospheric river events, Atmospheric zonal wave-
number 3, Antarctic Peninsula regional blocking index, Ocean
transport (Antarctic Circumpolar Current, Ross, Weddell), Antarctic
surface mass balance, Southern Annular Mode (SAM), stratospheric
polar vortex strength, tropospheric westerlies latitude and strength
– see examples in Figures 1 and 2).
The ACI visualisations and online data generally show time series of
a single number or index, and will therefore not be suitable for use
in detailed studies or assessments. For example, information on
seasonal or annual winds over the whole Southern Ocean (Figures 1
and 2) would not be suitable for assessing detailed impacts of wind
variability or change on a local scale. However, the visualisations
are important tools that can be used to:
provide long-term, consistently measured datasets critical for
observing climate variables over time, facilitating the detection of
ongoing climate changes and the attribution of these changes to
specific causes;
contribute to the validation of climate models by providing
observational data against which model outputs can be compared;
assist policymakers and stakeholders in developing adaptive
responses to observed changes, by monitoring essential climate
parameters; and
communicate the complexities of climate change in the Antarctic
through accessible visualizations, helping to inform and educate the
public and decision-makers about the significance of these changes.
In future there is scope for expanding the range of indicators to
focus on other specific aspects of the climate system. This could be
developed through discussions with scientists and other
stakeholders across a range of disciplines and communities, to
determine further relevant variables.
Fig. 1. Time series of latitude of the maximum in the westerly winds
(the westerly ‘jet’) over the Southern Ocean. The plot shows
monthly anomalies from the long-term mean. The jet latitude index
(JLI) is a measure of the latitudinal position of core of the westerly
winds blowing over the Southern Ocean and the jet speed index
(JSI) is the strength of the westerlies at this core. The westerly
winds are strongly coupled to the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
and sea ice (Bracegirdle at al., 2020). Greater sea ice drives a
poleward shift in the jet, especially in winter (Smith et al., 2017).
These shifting winds bring warmer waters from the Southern Ocean,
the incursion of which onto the continental shelf amplifies melting
at the base of coastal ice sheets, contributing to their instability and
collapse. However, the poleward trend of these tropospheric winds
during the summer months is due to ozone depletion in the
stratosphere above (Polvani et al., 2011).
Fig 2. Time series of seasonal mean of the westerly jet latitude.
Future considerations and development
The SCAR AntClimNow programme aims to further develop the ACI
project together with partners including the World Climate
Research Programme (WCRP) Climate and Cryosphere (CliC)
project, and to extend the range of climate indicators available for
visualisation. ACIs could also be shown for future projections as
part of a second phase of the project. Options for dissemination and
display of ACIs are being discussed.
New suggestions for ACIs need to take into account three
requirements, which reflect those used by the WMO:
Relevance: the variable is critical for characterizing the climate
system and its changes
Feasibility: observing or deriving the variable technically feasible
using proven, scientifically understood methods and
Cost effectiveness: generating and archiving data on the variable is
affordable, mainly relying on coordinated observing systems using
proven technology, taking advantage where possible of historical
datasets.
SCAR and WMO encourage the CEP and the ATCM to:
consider the relevance of Antarctic Climate Indicators to inform
their discussions on climate change;
provide feedback on specific indicators that could be considered for
further development and inclusion as Antarctic Climate Indicators;
and
consider whether and how Antarctic Climate Indicators might be
routinely presented to provide context for CEP and ATCM
discussions.
References
Bracegirdle, T. J., Krinner, G., Tonelli, M., Haumann, F. A.,
Naughten, K. A., Rackow, T., … & Wainer, I. (2020). Twenty first
century changes in Antarctic and Southern Ocean surface climate in
CMIP6. Atmospheric Science Letters, 21(9), e984. https://
doi.org/10.1002/asl.984
Polvani, L. M., Banerjee, A., Chemke, R., Doddridge, E. W., Ferreira,
D., Gnanadesikan, A., … & Waugh, D. W. (2021). Interannual SAM
modulation of Antarctic sea ice extent does not account for its long‐
term trends, pointing to a limited role for ozone
depletion. Geophysical Research Letters, 48(21), e2021GL094871.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL094871
Smith, D. M., Dunstone, N. J., Scaife, A. A., Fiedler, E. K., Copsey,
D., & Hardiman, S. C. (2017). Atmospheric response to Arctic and
Antarctic sea ice: The importance of ocean–atmosphere coupling
and the background state. Journal of Climate, 30(12), 4547-4565.
https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-16-0564.1
