Strengthening the usefulness of Site Guidelines for Visitors
Strengthening the usefulness of the Site Guidelines for Visitors
Summary
The CEP and ATCM have taken steps to strengthen the site-specific
guidelines for visitors to Antarctica, including the most recent
update to the Site Guidelines for Visitors Checklist through
Resolution 4 (2021) at ATCM XLIII. This paper describes how the
majority of existing Site Guidelines for Visitors have not been
updated using the updated Site Guidelines Checklist and details
ways in which the usefulness of the Site Guidelines for Visitors
could be strengthened. Recommendations include encouraging
revisions of existing Site Guidelines for Visitors, and the
establishment of an ICG to consider further improvements to the
Site Guidelines for Visitors.
Background
The CEP and ATCM have taken steps over many years to strengthen
the site-specific guidelines for visitors to Antarctica, including most
recently through Resolution 4 (2021) at ATCM XLIII which updated
the General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic and the Site
Guidelines for Visitors Checklist. Previously, Resolution 3 (2019) at
ATCM XLII recognized the need for a consistent approach to Site
Guidelines for new and revised sites, and established the Site
Guidelines for Visitors Checklist to aid in this consistent approach.
Resolution 4 (2021) updated the Checklist and further encouraged
those involved in the preparation or review of Site Guidelines for
Visitors to comply with the Checklist.
State of Site Guidelines for Visitors
An analysis of the existing Site Guidelines for Visitors showed that
out of a total of 44 Site Guidelines, 40, a total of 91% of the
existing Site Guidelines, have not been updated using either the
2019 or 2021 guidance. Additionally, 29 or 66% of the existing Site
Guidelines were established or last updated more than 10 years ago.
While the Parties have agreed to encourage compliance with the
Site Guidelines Checklist for the preparation of new or revised Site
Guidelines, the majority of existing Site Guidelines have not been
recently revised. Revisions to the existing Site Guidelines would
provide the information necessary to potentially improve site
protection and/or effectively evaluate environmental impacts at
these visitor sites and ensure that all Site Guidelines are in a
consistent format.
Additionally, the information contained in the Site Guidelines for
Visitors could be further improved by providing additional
contextual information about the site and the flora and fauna
present.
Recommendation
It is recommended that the Parties:
Encourage proponent Parties to revise existing Site Guidelines for
Visitors using the Checklist adopted through Resolution 4 (2021),
and
Establish an ICG to consider changes to the Site Guidelines for
Visitors Checklist that would improve the consistency,
completeness, and usefulness of the information contained within
the Site Guidelines.
