Promote the Share of Best Practices of the Use of Renewable Energy
in Antarctica
Promote the Share of Best Practices of the Use of Renewable Energy
in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by China
Summary
The use of renewable energy in Antarctica has great potential
benefits of mitigating the impact of climate change by emission
reduction, as well as reducing the environmental risk of incidents
and accidents related to fuel transportation, spills and fires. In
recent years, Parties reaffirmed their commitment to addressing the
impact of climate change and protect Antarctic environment,
through all available methods including reducing their carbon
footprints. With the progress of green science and technology,
increasing use of renewable energy system to sustain the operation
of Antarctic research station to achieve the Net Zero emission is
becoming more and more feasible and affordable in the summer, it
is thus recommended that ATCM and the CEP encourage Parties to:
Collaborate to develop a manual that outlines the practical best
practices in the operation of the renewable energy systems used in
Antarctic operations, taking into account of COMNAP expertise and
experience;
increase the use of renewable energy in Antarctic operations, with a
view to reduce the green gas emission from the human activities in
Antarctica;
promote the innovation, application and share of new green energy
facilities and technologies suitable for the unique Antarctic
environment.
Context
Reducing the use of fossil-based hydrocarbon fuels will, inter alia,
lower the emission of CO2 and gasses that contribute to the green
house effect, and save operating costs, lower the potential impact of
a fuel spill, and reduces pollutants from engine exhausts. The CEP
endorsed and adopted a set of guidance principles on best practice
for use of energy in Antarctica proposed by COMNAP COMNAP, WP
35/CEPX, Best Practice for Energy Management – Guidance and
Recommendations, 2007, including Investigating and where feasible
installing renewable energy systems to reduce the dependence on
fossil-based fuel (paragraph 341-343, CEP X Report).
In the context of climate change, further studies demonstrated the
potential benefits of reducing fuel consumption by introducing
energy efficiency facilities and renewable energy technologies,
particularly in mitigating climate change by emission reduction, as
well as reducing the risk of incidents and accidents related to fuel
transportation, spills and fires ASOC and Uraguay, IP64/ATCM
VLV, Decarbonizing Antarctic Operations: Best practices for
renewable energy deployment at Antarctic Research Stations, 2023.
. ATCM encouraged National Antarctic Programmes to conduct
science in an environmentally-friendly manner in the Antarctica,
and to work more closely with other Parties and organizations to
develop more collaborative projects and to promote the sharing of
experiences and advanced technology, through the endorsement of
the concept of Green Expedition with the aimed of taking all
available methods to reduce human impact in Resolution 4 (2017).
Last year, ATCM adopted Resolution 2 (2023) Helsinki Declaration
on climate change and the Antarctic, which recognised the
objectives and principles of the UNFCCC and the on-going work to
tackle climate change by strengthening the full and effective
implementation of the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC,
reaffirmed its commitment to implement actions with a view to
limiting the adverse impacts of climate change, and encouraged all
Antarctic operators to continue to reduce their carbon footprints
and investigate pathways and move towards carbon neutral (‘net
zero’) operations, as well as to reduce their impacts on the Antarctic
environment and its associated and dependent ecosystems and to
continue deliberations on possible policy recommendations to this
end.
In the past years, the National Antarctic programs of members have
made great efforts to improve the traditional energy efficiency, as
well as to increase the ratio of renewable energy system application
in their research stations to replace the traditional fuel. It is the
right time to draw experiences and share the practical best practices
in the use of renewable energy, with the aim to mitigate the impact
of climate change on Antarctic environment from its source by
reducing green gas emission within the competence of ATCM.
A practice in Chinese Summer Camp Taishan
With the progress of green science and technology, increasing use of
renewable energy system to sustain the operation of Antarctic
research station to achieve the Net Zero emission is becoming more
and more feasible and affordable in the summer, despite providing
renewable energy during winter time is still a great challenge in the
near future.
The Chinese Summer Camp Taishan (hereinafter called “Taishan
Camp”) has achieved Net Zero operation during the 2018/2019
Antarctic summer. The summer camp adopted both high energy
efficient equipment to lower the use of energy and a renewable
energy system, following the COMNAP guidance principles on best
practice for use of energy adopted by the CEP. After the completion
of multi-energy complementary new energy microgrid system in
2019, the operation of Taishan Camp is mainly based on renewable
energy power generation, while the diesel power generation has
been used as supplementary or emergency power supply to ensure
the safety of the summer camp. The microgrid system includes 40
kW photovoltaic power generation, 20 kW wind power generation,
110 kWh energy storage battery and other new energy equipment,
which reached its maximum capacity and sustained the operation of
the whole summer camp for more than a month when it was
functioning during early January to early February 2019.
An ultra-thin, flexible and high-efficiency double-sided power
generation silicon heterojunction ( SHJ ) solar cell and double-glass
photovoltaic module were designed and installed in Taishan Camp.
The thickness of ultra-thin flexible SHJ solar cells is 60-80 microns.
The edge of the solar cells is processed by selective edge smoothing,
which makes the solar cells have good flexibility and avoids the
cracking and crushing of the solar cells in the processing of the
components. At the same time, it avoids the cracking or even
crushing of the photovoltaic modules when the actual Antarctic
vortex wind blows, which may result in a decrease in power
generation of the photovoltaic modules. The photovoltaic system
adopts an easy-to-remove and easy-to-install aluminium alloy
bracket specially designed for the Antarctic environment, which is
convenient for installation and maintenance under extremely cold
conditions, and the bracket structure and installation method are
conducive to ventilation, avoiding wind blowing dead angles,
causing snow deposition to bury photovoltaic modules. Based on
the above design and targeted technology development, the initial
installation of 40 kW photovoltaic power generation system is in
good condition, and the power generation reaches or even exceeds
the predicted value. The and the power generation operation was
stable and met 100% of the power demand of the camp in the
summer.
The microgrid system is equipped with wind turbines, which is able
to operate in the harsh conditions in Antarctic environment and
achieve reliable power generation through innovative design. The
ultimate wind velocity resistance of the wind turbine is ≥ 59.5 m/
s, the lowest survival temperature is -50 °C. When the wind speed
reaches 11m / s, the wind power generation system reaches the
peak value of 20 kW and maintains stable operation. During the
2018/2019 summer
season, the efficiency of the wind power system can reach 100% of
its capacity for more than 15 days within one month.
The Taishan camp has not functioned due to the influence of
covid-19 during 2020 to 2023. In 2023/2024 season, the 40th
Chinese National Antarctic Research expedition return to Taishan
Camp and tested the feasibility of the micro-grid system. The test
result has shown that the system is in good status after three winter
seasons. Meanwhile, the similar technology is also installed in the
new Qingling Station in the Ross Sea Region in last summer, and
obtained satisfactory test results during the summer, which further
proved the feasibility of the innovative micro-grid system.
Encouraged by those positive results, China established a
professional team to study, develop and maintain the renewable
energy system, with the aim to make further contribution to address
the climate change impact in Antarctic operations.
Recommendation
It is recommended that ATCM and the CEP encourage Parties to:
Collaborate to develop a manual that outlines the practical best
practices in the operation of the renewable energy systems used in
Antarctic operations, taking into account of COMNAP expertise and
experience;
increase the use of renewable energy in Antarctic operations, with a
view to reduce the green gas emission from the human activities in
Antarctica;
promote the innovation, application and share of new green energy
facilities and technologies suitable for the unique Antarctic
environment.
