Scientific activities on board tourist vessels
Scientific activities on board tourist vessels
Summary
During the 2023-2024 southern summer, the competent authority in
Spain has detected a significant increase in the participation of its
scientific community in scientific activities on board tourist ships.
Until now, these activities had been very specific and had gone
virtually unnoticed when carried out as part of scientific projects on
board tourist vessels authorised by other Parties. In this document,
Spain proposes that the Parties delve into their knowledge and
management of scientific activities on board tourist vessels and
discuss the desirability of exchanging information on this type of
activity formally and in detail.
Introduction
The Spanish Polar Committee (SPC) is the National Competent
Authority (NCA) responsible for authorising scientific,
governmental, non-governmental and tourist activities in
Antarctica. The southern summer of 2023-2024 was the first time
that the SPC has received a request for scientific activities to be
carried out on board tourist ships.
In order to gather information on the procedures implemented by
other Consultative Parties to authorise this type of activities, and to
know and learn from the previous experience of other Parties,
consultations were sent to the NCAs of France and Germany, which
kindly shared their procedures with Spain. Having analysed the
possibilities, it was decided to apply the same assessment
procedures as for any activity undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty
area, whether it be a programme of scientific research, tourism or
other governmental and non-governmental activities, for which
advance notification is required, in accordance with Article VII (5)
of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistical support
activities.
Spain authorised the scientific activities of the project «Novel
microbial Ecosystems traits and its Implications for the Global
Environment (NEIGE)» to be carried out by Dr David Velázquez, a
Spanish national, on board the vessel “National Geographic
Explorer” operated by Lindblad Expeditions and authorised by the
NCA of the United States (USA). Proposals for scientific activities on
board tourist vessels authorised by the United States, when carried
out by non-US citizens, must have the permits of the corresponding
national competent authority, a requirement that was transferred to
the Spanish researcher and for which reason the SPC received
information about the activity.
Scientific activities on board identified tourist vessels
During the 2023-2024 southern summer, the participation of
Spanish scientists has been identified in 6 scientific expeditions on
board tourist ships. It should be noted that, as previously indicated,
only one of the expeditions needed to request authorisation from
the SPC to carry out scientific activities in the Antarctic Treaty area,
as established in the «Procedimiento para la evaluación de los
impactos ambientales de las actividades españolas en la Antártida»
[«Procedure for the assessment of the environmental impacts of
Spanish activities in Antarctica»] in order to comply with the
regulations established by the Antarctic Treaty and its
Environmental Protection Protocol.
Operator
Vessel
NCA authorises vessel
NCA authorises scientific activities
Lindblad Expeditions
National Geographic Explorer
United States
Spain
Ben Wallis
Australis
Australia
Australia
Ponant
Le Commandant Charcot
France
Ponant
Le Commandant Charcot
France
Ponant
Le Commandant Charcot
France
Alegria Marineros S.L.
El Doblón
Spain
Portugal
Findings and Proposal
Article 13(4) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty states that, “Each Party shall draw the attention of
all other Parties to any activity which, in its opinion, affects the
implementation of the objectives and principles of this Protocol” in
order to draw the Parties' attention to the increase in scientific
activities on board tourist vessels and to be able to adequately
respond to the challenges posed by such activities.
During the informal workshop organised by Germany on science
and tourism in Antarctica on 5 March 2024, the participating NCAs
exchanged information on these activities and several of them
showed their interest in this exchange, which was considered very
useful and interesting.
Therefore, Spain proposes that the Parties extend their knowledge
and management of scientific activities on board tourist vessels and
discuss the convenience of exchanging information on these
activities in a formal and detailed manner. If the proposal is
accepted, Spain offers to submit a precise information exchange
proposal to the 47th ATCM and invites interested Parties to contact
Spain to prepare the proposal.
