The contribution of the ATS to strengthening the principles of a
multipolar world order
The contribution of the ATS to strengthening the principles of a
multipolar world order
Summary
The Antarctic Treaty laid the foundations for a self-sufficient System
with its own goals and values. The main goals and principles of the
Treaty are aimed at preserving Antarctica as a zone of peace,
freedom of scientific research and international cooperation. Not
only Antarctica itself, but the Antarctic community too is viewed as
having enduring value. The ATS has contributed to strengthening
the multipolar world order. Its multipolar nature is expressed
specifically by the circle of participants, the decision-making
procedure, and access to information. The criterion for the
sustainability of the ATS is the search for common approaches. The
tradition of reaching a consensus on applying certain provisions of
the Treaty plays a paramount role. The working document
recommends reaffirming the fundamental importance of the goals
and principles of the Treaty and the contribution of the ATS to the
emergence of a multipolar world order, as well as discussing current
issues.
Historical context
The Antarctic Treaty of 1959 (the Treaty) established a special legal
regime for the area south of 60th parallel south latitude and was
intended to prevent Antarctica from becoming an arena for
international disputes. This strategic and long-term priority
required the foundation of a self-sufficient System (the ATS) with its
own goals and values.
The uniqueness of this event lies in eliminating the influence of the
era of global confrontation and bloc politics from the region. This
joint achievement of the Treaty Parties was made possible by the
agreement to “freeze” rights or claims to territorial sovereignty in
Antarctica by virtue of Article IV of the Treaty.
In the years since the signing of the Treaty, the System and
institutions based thereon have consistently contributed to the
promotion of mechanisms for effective multilateral cooperation
based on the best ideas of law and justice.
The multipolar system and the position of the ATS therein
The main goals and principles of the Treaty are aimed at preserving
Antarctica as a zone of peace, freedom of scientific research and
international cooperation. Together they form the basis for a
holistic and unique legal regime.
One of the strengths of the ATS is that it is action-oriented and
takes into account the complexities associated with activities in
Antarctica. For example, the use of Antarctica only for peaceful
purposes means a ban on any military activities. However, the use
of military personnel or equipment for scientific or other peaceful
purposes is permitted. This condition has demonstrated its
relevance and allowed us to accumulate many years of experience
in the use of military sea vessels in rescue operations.
It is important to consider that not only Antarctica itself, but the
Antarctic community too is viewed as having enduring value, which
includes both State Parties and members of national Antarctic
expeditions. The Russian Federation considers ensuring comfortable
and efficient work for polar explorers as one of the main tasks of
the ATCM. This is a fundamental criterion for rulemaking under the
ATS.
The multipolar nature of the ATS is represented specifically by the
circle of participants, the decision-making procedure, and access to
information.
Features of ATS multipolarity
Circle of participants
It is fundamentally important that the states that signed the Treaty
were not representatives of one political bloc, but represented
twelve participants in the International Geophysical Year who had
experience in scientific activities in Antarctica. This established the
Treaty's openness for accession under Article XIII to all states that
share its objectives.
At the same time, carrying out significant research activities in
Antarctica is not a mandatory criterion for accession to the Treaty,
but is integral from the point of view of obtaining and maintaining
Consultative status.
In this regard, it should be emphasized that the Consultative Parties
play a decisive role in the process of developing measures that
promote the implementation of the principles and objectives of the
Treaty. The ability to hold ATCMs to provide prompt responses to
the emergence of new challenges faced by the Antarctic community
guaranteed the successful development of the ATS.
Decision-making procedure
Each Consultative Party has the right to participate in the ATCM
and in the decision-making process. The Russian Federation, as a
successor state to the USSR, attaches significant importance to
consensus as a key factor in taking into account the interests of all
Parties. To ensure the sustainability of the ATS, it is extremely
important to preserve this fundamental principle and respect the
many years of experience and the established culture of decision-
making and non-politicized discussions, in strict accordance with
the mandate of the ATCM.
The diversity of issues under consideration has led to the emergence
of categories of mandatory norms that require the approval of all
Consultative Parties to enter into force (Measures) and non-binding
documents (decisions and resolutions).
It should be taken into account that an increase in the number of
Consultative Parties has led to a delay in the process of entry into
force of the Measures. This circumstance has already been
considered as a systemic problem requiring a solution. At the same
time, each Party has the right to propose to the ATCM alternative
approaches to regulating a particular issue.
The values of the ATS and legitimate interests of the Parties
The treaty not only sets the framework for activities in the southern
polar region, but also provides a certain freedom.
Thus, the Parties determine their priorities in scientific research and
their geographical scope.
Separately, the variability in the implementation of international
cooperation should be taken into account. Such intentions can be
formalized through legal or political means, but can also be
implemented through specific projects. Mutual assistance among
polar researchers in field conditions and openness to station visits
exemplify the uniqueness of the ATS. It should be emphasized that
the Antarctic scientific community should not be “shackled” due to
the lack of relevant international treaties.
Openness
The sustainability of the multipolar mechanism is also related to
access to information on compliance with the obligations
established by the Treaty and other ATS norms. First and foremost,
this concerns information about planned and implemented
activities.
The importance of this aspect can be seen by the fact that the topic
was repeatedly discussed at the ATCM. The first interpretation of
the obligations under paragraph 5 of Article VII was adopted at the
first Meeting in 1961 (Recommendation I-VI). Currently in effect is
Decision 4 (2023) Updated requirements for information exchange.
The inspection mechanism makes a significant contribution to the
long-term work of the ATS. The right to direct inspections is the
basis for impartial regulation of activities in Antarctica and an
incentive for the exchange of experience and approaches to solving
emerging problems.
Search for common approaches to the ATCM as a criterion for the
sustainability of the ATCM
The emergence of new trends and needs to regulate certain issues
over time is inevitable.
In this regard, the ATCM has come to a unanimous understanding
of the need to address current issues, trends and challenges for the
ATS. Discussions held during previous Meetings at the initiative of
the Russian Federation demonstrated the high interest of the Parties
in continuing work in this area.
It is important for the Antarctic community not to deviate from the
fundamentals of the Treaty. This implies support for international
cooperation and openness to joint activities and joint resolution of
current issues. A different approach, in the opinion of the Russian
Federation, would lead to a weakening of the main Antarctic forum
and the ATS as a whole.
Currently, the ATCM is faced with the task of developing uniform
and understandable approaches on a number of issues.
For example, there was a need for a unified approach by the ATCM
to the application of paragraph 2 of Article IX of the Treaty. We are
talking about different interpretations of the definition of the
“substantial scientific research activity”, which may affect the
practical aspects of the work of the ATCM. Moreover, some Parties
did not provide a reasoned position on this issue. Different
approaches to the interpretation of the Annex to Decision 2 (2017)
are also obvious.
As noted above, the tradition of reaching consensus on the
application of certain provisions of the Treaty is a valuable
experience of the ATCM and is in the interests of the atmosphere of
constructive interaction that has developed within its framework
and the desire to take into account the opinions of all interested
parties.
Recommendations
1. The Russian Federation invites the ATCM to formalize the
understanding that the ATS makes an important contribution to
strengthening the foundations of a multipolar world.
2. The Russian Federation invites the ATCM to confirm the
fundamental importance of the purposes and principles of the
Treaty.
3. The Russian Federation proposes an exchange of views on the
following issues:
- How could the Consultative Parties contribute to the development
of effective mechanisms for multilateral cooperation in accordance
with the letter and spirit of the Treaty?
- What issues do the Consultative Parties believe require priority
attention to ensure the sustainability of the ATS, including for
inclusion in the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Plan?
4. The Russian Federation proposes providing for the possibility of
continuing work on this issue during the intersessional period,
including within the framework of informal discussions at the
ATCM forum.
