Considerations on the Work of ATCM WG3
English version provided by the author
Considerations on the Work of ATCM WG3
Summary
This document raises, in response to Decision 6 (2023), a series of
questions, considerations, and proposals for the specialized Working
Group of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) that
will be in charge of initiating a dedicated process for the
development of a comprehensive and consistent framework for
Antarctic tourism and other non-governmental activities.
Background
During ATCM XLV, the Consultative Parties approved Decision 6
(2023) which initiates a dedicated process for the development of a
comprehensive and consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and
other non-governmental activities. To this end, a specialized
working group (WG3) was established in accordance with the
ATCM Rules of Procedure, which will hold its first meeting during
ATCM 46.
To this end, Decision 6 (2023) also invited all Consultative Parties
to develop proposals prior to that first meeting, in order to ensure
proper preparation of the discussions.
Considerations to begin the debate
Argentina presents, below, three initial questions referring to
Decision 6 (2023), and tentative answers that are put forward for
consideration by the ATCM:
What are the terms of reference that will guide the debate of WG? 
Argentina considers that WG3 should focus on discussing guidelines
that address the general spirit of the regulatory framework and the
structure that said framework should present.
Likewise, it is considered that the guidelines should be debated
taking into account that tourism is a legal activity in the Antarctic
Treaty area and is provided for in the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) (Articles 3, 8 and
15). At the same time, it must be taken into account that the growth
and diversification of this type of activities has an impact on the
environmental care and protection of Antarctica, on the protection
of human life and on the exercise of science.
In terms of environmental protection, the Antarctic ecosystem faces
climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution. Tourism and other
non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area must be
conducted in a manner that does not contribute to the degradation
of Antarctica and its associated ecosystems, considering both
individual and global impacts.
Antarctic tourism should have an educational purpose, highlighting
the importance of protecting Antarctic ecosystems and
disseminating this knowledge among tourists. One of the central
objectives of tourism should be that tourists can value and
disseminate this knowledge once they return to their places of
origin.
In terms of safety, the increase and diversification of tourism poses
security challenges for Parties responsible for search and rescue
(SAR) operations, which must ensure an efficient response in
critical situations to protect the safety of tourists and of those
carrying out scientific and logistical support activities in Antarctica.
Therefore, any regulations in this regard must take into account
Measure 4 (2004) and SAR capabilities.
Regarding the exercise of science, Article 2 of the Protocol
designates Antarctica as a “natural reserve devoted to peace and
science”, so scientific activity carried out by National Programs is a
priority and should not suffer interference from tourism or other
non-governmental activities
In this context, it is important to highlight that there is already a
regulatory framework in development for Antarctic tourism and
other non-governmental activities. This framework is expressed in
various Resolutions and Measures approved by the ATCM, many of
which are still pending entry into force. Some of them are listed
below:
• Measure 4 (2004) - pending approval by numerous Parties;
• Resolution 4 (2007);
• Measure 15 (2009) - pending approval by numerous Parties;
• Resolution 7 (2009);
• Resolution 7 (2014);
• Resolution 6 (2017);
• Resolution 4 (2021);
• Resolution 9 (2021);
Over time, the ATCM has made significant progress in regulating
Antarctic tourism. The fact that the regulations mentioned in the
previous paragraph have been adopted by consensus confers
legitimacy to the established rules, so the Parties should consider
them as a basis for future regulations. Accordingly, we encourage
Parties that have not yet done so to continue work to incorporate
these rules into their national regulations.
The structure of the regulatory framework must be based on the
existing regulatory work, recognizing the permanent innovation
intrinsic to tourism activity. Rigid frameworks can quickly become
obsolete, limiting their effectiveness and increasing inefficient
bureaucracy in the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). 
Consequently, for example, the implementation of a “Convention”,
in addition to the aforementioned inconvenience, would require
expanding the existing structures in the ATS, with greater human,
economic and bureaucratic resources. Likewise, the annexes to the
Protocol address cross-cutting agreements to all activities in the
Antarctic zone, so it is not considered advisable to create a specific
one for tourism.
What is going to be discussed within WG3?
Starting from the guidelines set forth above, Argentina suggests the
following topics and proposals for action:
Cumulative environmental impact: 
It is essential to establish a monitoring network to evaluate the
global environmental impact of Antarctic tourism, with the
collection, analysis and dissemination of data to the Parties. 
To this end, it is proposed to develop agreed environmental impact
indicators, facilitating long-term evaluation. 
Furthermore, it is important to address the financing of
environmental monitoring, considering direct contributions by
tourists or tour operators, so that its cost does not fall
disproportionately on certain Parties.
Zoning:
In order to exercise the precautionary principle in tourism and
other non-governmental activities in Antarctica, the creation of a
spatial planning category called "Area of Potential Scientific
Interest" is proposed. 
These areas, of a non-permanent nature, would be equivalent in
their use to the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, in order to
safeguard possible scientific values present in the area. 
During an initial period of 2 years (extendable for the same period
at the discretion of the ATCM), tourism, other non-governmental
activities and the logistics associated with them, are excluded in
these areas. This is due to the need to preserve them for scientific
study by the National Antarctic Programs.
To designate an area as such, the Consultative Parties must justify
the precautionary need based on scientific research planned by one
or several National Programs, establishing an absolute prohibition
of use for the aforementioned activities.
Guidelines for visitors:
It is important to work to make visitor guidelines mandatory for all
sites where tourism and other non-governmental activities are
carried out in Antarctica, including both the continent and adjacent
seas.
These guidelines should consider cumulative environmental impact,
protection of human life, SAR capabilities, visitor education, and
priority of scientific activity. 
A period of 10 years is proposed for the development, review and
updating of these guidelines, so that they enjoy the consensus of the
Parties. After this time, tourism and other non-governmental
activities should not be permitted at sites without visitor guidelines.
Type of regulatory framework to discuss:
The "Manual of Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism
and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area",
prepared in accordance with Decision 6 (2019), provides an
exhaustive list of existing regulation.
WG3 should begin its work with a detailed analysis of the standards
included in this manual, in order to develop a compendium. 
This analysis will make it possible to identify possible regulatory
gaps, detect contradictions with other ATS rules and determine
aspects susceptible to modification or improvement. This
compendium will serve as a basis for the creation, in the future, of
general and unified regulations to regulate these activities.
It is suggested that, after the compendium is completed, the WG3
begins a work process to recommend to the ATCM the elevation to
the category of “Measure” those resolutions that, like some of those
listed in the previous point, address significant and general aspects
of tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica
It is essential that the formulation of these measures considers the
possibility of incorporating more specific regulations into the
compendium or making modifications or updates based on the
dynamic nature of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica.
What mechanisms and schedules are planned for the work of this
WG3? This taking into account that the 45th ATCM agreed that this
group would be temporary and that its work could require several
years (paragraph 392 Final Report XLV ATCM)
Argentina considers that:
It is necessary to prepare an initial roadmap to define the deadlines
for the WG3 work and the expected results at each stage. 
Mechanisms proposed in Decision 6 (2023) could be used to
accelerate discussions, such as virtual or hybrid workshops.
Argentina also suggests informal debates or ICGs in the online
forum of the Secretariat, which could prepare technical reports on
the topic.
To facilitate the work in future Consultative Meetings, it would be
beneficial to avoid temporal and thematic overlaps of WG3
meetings with meetings of WG2 and the Committee for
Environmental Protection. This coordination will allow full
dedication and without interference by the members of WG3,
facilitating the progress of their tasks and contributing to the
overall effectiveness of the ATCM processes.
PROPOSAL
Argentina invites the Meeting to discuss the elements present in this
document in order to help guide the work of Working Group 3.
