Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra
Nova Bay, Ross Sea
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova
Bay, Ross Sea
Working Paper submitted by Italy and the United States of America
Summary
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 173 Cape
Washington and Silverfish Bay was originally designated primarily
for its ecological and scientific values. In particular, the Area hosts
one of the largest emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) colonies
in Antarctica, and the first documented ‘nursery’ and hatching area
for Antarctic silverfish (Pleuragramma antarctica) is located at
Silverfish Bay. The Area also has important volcanic rock exposures
from Mount Melbourne, which are of geoscientific value.
The Management Plan review carried out under Article 6.3 of
Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty concluded that the outstanding ecological and
scientific values of the Area have been maintained and remain
valid. Italy and the United States request the CEP to recommend to
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting approval of the attached
revised Management Plan.
Background
Italy and the United States have conducted a full review of the
Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.
173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, in accordance with Annex
V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty. A revised Management Plan has been prepared in
consultation with scientific experts who have carried out extensive
research within the Area. Consideration was given to whether the
values of the Area are being maintained and whether the values
remain valid.
Particular consideration was given to whether the recent outbreak
in avian influenza poses new risks to wildlife in the Area and
whether policies on introduced pathogens need to be updated in the
Management Plan. Other policies regulating use of the Area were
considered and whether any modifications were required. It was
concluded that a minor update to the provisions on air access policy
was required to facilitate continued practical scientific use of the
Area. Recent data on the numbers of emperor penguins breeding at
Cape Washington colony were provided by the Korean Polar
Research Institute (KOPRI), showing the population has been stable
with between 15,000 to 17,000 chicks each year from 2018-22. The
maps of the Area have been improved and prepared in color.
Updates to the Management Plan are minor and no changes to the
boundaries are proposed.
Introduced pathogens
The review recognized the elevated risks of avian influenza being
introduced to the Area, with south polar skua (Catharacta
maccormicki) being considered one potential vector. The Republic
of Korea drew attention to the recent COMNAP Guidance on Highly
Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) Preparedness in Response to
Heightened Risk (Version 1, 30 August 2023),
and that this provides expert and practical guidelines designed to
mitigate risks. It was recommended that this guidance be followed,
and as such it was not considered necessary to duplicate provisions
within the present Management Plan. The review concluded that
existing provisions in the Management Plan covering potential
introductions of non-native species were adequate, and currently no
significant modifications were needed.
Access revisions
The current Management Plan requires that all piloted aircraft
landings on sea ice within ½ nautical mile (~930 m) of the
emperor colony are prohibited. During the review, concern was
expressed by Italy that it was difficult to follow the 930 m (2000 ft)
separation distance guidance as a strict prohibition, since even with
the best of intentions it is impossible to make those judgements
precisely from the air. Moreover, Italy noted that it could, on some
occasions, be desirable and necessary to land closer in support of
science (e.g. when moving heavy equipment) and suggested a
revision to the policy that would allow for a closer approach by
permit.
Following discussions with experienced biologists who have long
worked at the site, the review concluded that amendment of the
policy was warranted. The 930 m (2000 ft) limit was retained,
although the policy was amended to state this should be followed to
the “maximum extent practicable”, which better reflects what is
practically achievable in reality. In addition, to allow for closer
approach under controlled circumstances, the caveat was added
“except when authorized by permit”. In this way, specific
applications to make a closer approach can be considered on merit
and controlled through the EIA and permit process. Recognizing
that these amendments in policy would provide a greater degree of
flexibility than under the current Management Plan, the review also
concluded that a firm separation limit was needed beyond which
closer approach by aircraft would be unacceptable: this was set at
500 m (1640 ft). 
It was also considered appropriate to amend air access provisions as
they relate to separation distances from Weddell seals so they are
consistent with those used elsewhere. Drawing on discussions held
with Weddell seal specialists on aircraft access to ASPA No.137
Northwest White Island, which is designated specifically for the
protection of Weddell seals, the review concluded that the aircraft
separation limits from Weddell seals at Cape Washington should be
amended to be consistent with those agreed for ASPA No.137.
The review also reconsidered provisions in the Management Plan
allowing for aircraft access to the headland at Cape Washington. In
particular, consideration was given to the presence of south polar
skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) and snow petrels (Pagodroma
nivea) nesting in the vicinity. The existing air access corridor to the
headland was originally designated taking into account the
presence of these colonies, and avoids any overflight of emperor
penguin breeding sites. It was noted that the corridor enables
continued air access to important volcanic rock exposures from
Mount Melbourne, which are of geoscientific value. On balance, the
review concluded to retain the existing air access guidance to the
headland in the Management Plan.
Recommendation
Italy and the United States request the Committee for
Environmental Protection to recommend to the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting approval of the attached revised Management
Plan and maps for ASPA No. 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish
Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea.
ASPA No. 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay,
Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 17 (2013)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 17 (2013)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 9 (2019)
Current management plan:
Measure 9 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Color maps replace the previous monochrome versions,
although map formats and layouts remain similar.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 6(i) Description of the Area
Data on emperor penguin populations have been updated for the
years 2018-22.
Section 6(iii) Location of structures adjacent to the Area
Qinling Station was opened by China on Inexpressible Island on 07
February 2024, ~40 km southwest of the Area.
6(iv) Location of other protected areas in the vicinity
ASPA No.178 Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay has been added.
7. Terms and conditions for entry permits
Access and overflight by piloted aircraft and Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
Provisions on aircraft overflight and landing separation distances
were amended.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Yes. Environment U – North Victoria Land Geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
Yes. Region 8 – Northern Victoria Land
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
Yes. IBA No. 176
