The COMNAP Working Group Project to Support Understanding of
EDI and to Prevent Harassment in Antarctica
The COMNAP Working Group Project to Support Understanding of
EDI and to Prevent Harassment in Antarctica
Summary
Every person deserves to feel welcomed, safe and respected.
Improving individuals’ understanding of equity, diversity, and
inclusivity (EDI) and incorporating EDI principles in the
organizational structure of COMNAP is part of a COMNAP Project
to ensure, as a community, we achieve this, especially in regard to
everyone who deploys to Antarctica with a national Antarctic
program. The COMNAP Working Group Project was established to
assist COMNAP as an organisation and National Antarctic Program
Members understand the issues involved and improve practices
especially to prevent harassment in Antarctica.
Background Many National Antarctic Programs have their own
initiatives underway aimed at improving EDI and preventing
harassment. COMNAP Members have a unique perspective on these
topics, working at the interface between diverse communities and
cultures, and often in remote Antarctic stations, field camps, and on
vessels. The remote nature of the work is sometimes coupled with
unclear or complicated reporting structures which do not optimally
support people when they need that support the most. For EDI and
harassment prevention to be effective in the deployed Antarctic
environment, all stakeholders – researchers, operators, visitors –
must be considered. This project is important because it will seek to
provide that “whole of community” perspective.  
The principal objective of this project is to leverage COMNAP’s
unique perspective by creating a “hub” for information sharing that
is available to all National Antarctic Programs and enables each
nation’s efforts to advance more quickly and efficiently. COMNAP
began focused work on this topic in 2018, during the COMNAP
Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXX (2018) in Garmisch-
Partenkirchen, Germany, convening the “Prevention of Harassment
in Antarctica Workshop”. The Working Group Project will
accelerate the work started in 2018 and will build upon the
COMNAP policy “Welcoming the Power of Diversity within our
Membership”. 
Working Group as “Hub”
The “hub” will consist of three components:
1) A Community Of Practice that convenes (virtually and on
margins of other meetings) at least twice a year to provide
interested programs a forum to ask questions, share training and
protocol information, and discuss challenges and successes in EDI
and harassment prevention. 2) A COMNAP Resource Library with
tools, trainings, and templates that programs can consider using or
adapting for their own programs.
3) A virtual/online Invited Speaker Series in which individuals with
expertise in EDI and harassment prevention, particularly as they
relate to research activities and remote environments, share their
knowledge with the COMNAP community.
We are currently in phase 1 of the project and have begun to set up
the Community Of Practice. A draft charter for that group will be
prepared during this quarter and will enable the convening of the
first meeting during COMNAP AGM 36 (2024).
Many Antarctic research programs already have initiatives
underway aimed at improving EDI and preventing harassment and
are eager to share their learnings with others. The online Resource
Library is also currently under development and includes relevant
documentation received from National Antarctic Programs to date.
Additional Information
This project also contributes to Item 12 of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting’s Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan, which is to
“address equality, diversity and inclusion issues, by promoting full
participation of underrepresented groups in Antarctic science and
operations activities across all Antarctic issues, including science,
operations, policy and law.” Within our Membership, this project
will also contribute to the work of the COMNAP Safety Expert
Group, which includes in its Terms of Reference “a focus to prevent
harassment in the Antarctic, to concentrate on well-being and to
acknowledge, confirm and support equity, diversity and inclusion in
all Antarctic activities.”
Recommendation COMNAP encourages all the Parties to support
their National Antarctic Programs in taking part and sharing
expertise and best practises to this project.
