International Collaboration
Providing timely information to the ATCMs to contribute to
understanding of the depth and breadth of National Antarctic
Program science support activities
International Collaboration
Providing timely information to the ATCMs to contribute to
understanding of the depth and breadth of National Antarctic
Program science support activities
Summary
This paper proposes consideration of a new informative
presentation to the ATCMs, adding to the valuable contribution
already provided by SCAR and suggests that the ATCM might
consider inviting COMNAP to present lectures in regard to
international collaboration.
Background
International collaboration has been hailed as a hallmark of the
Antarctic Treaty System. There are always occasions at the annual
ATCMs where Parties call for the need for greater international
collaboration in research, operations, logistics, education and
outreach. COMNAP has often reported in papers on the significant
depth and breadth of international collaboration amongst national
Antarctic programs. This reporting could be reenforced through an
invited presentation opportunity during the ATCMs.
The ATCM is free to invite organisations to make presentations that
would be informative to ATCM work. An example is the ATCM
invitation to SCAR to give a lecture on scientific issues (paragraph
462, ATCM XLV (2023) Final Report).
Discussion
Given the value the ATCM sees in these presentations, we would
like to propose to broaden the information exchange by way of the
addition of a COMNAP presentation to the ATCM with a focus on
international collaboration. We would present on the range of
projects and programs that facilitate large Antarctic research
consortium, education and outreach initiatives, sharing of assets
and infrastructures, search and rescue coordination, and provide
practical technical and non-political advice to further support and
enhance these internationally collaborative activities. We would
also envision the presentations to be interesting and of value to
those who do not have the opportunity to go to the Antarctic and to
deliver lessons learned to the Parties in their role as funders/
enablers of strategic, long-term international collaborative efforts.
We invite the ATCM to consider inviting COMNAP, to regularly
present to the ATCMs with a focus on international collaboration. If
the Parties see value in this, we would like to contribute to a
discussion on this idea and mechanisms to achieve this.
