Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer
Archipelago
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer
Archipelago
Working Paper submitted by the United States of America
Summary
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 139 Biscoe Point,
Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago, is designated to protect
extensive vegetation communities, soils and terrestrial ecology
which are of unique and outstanding value, as well as to protect the
value of long term and on-going scientific research on breeding
birds at the site.
Recent changes in patterns of use occurring in the nearshore marine
environment surrounding ASPA No.139 Biscoe Point came to the
attention of the United States, and an ad hoc review of the
Management Plan was undertaken to determine whether a
modification of the site boundaries was required in order to ensure
continued protection of the values of the Area. The review
concluded that the boundaries needed revision to include the
nearshore marine environment and surrounding islets, rocks and
promontories, in order to maintain the values under special
protection. The United States requests the CEP to recommend to the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting approval of the attached
revised Management Plan.
Background
The United States conducted a full review of the Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 139 Biscoe Point,
Palmer Archipelago, in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 2021/22, and a
revised Management Plan was adopted through Measure 14 (2022).
However, in the 2023/24 season concerns were raised over small
boat cruising taking place close to the coastal boundary of ASPA
No.139 Biscoe Point from tour ships stationing nearby. In particular
it was evident that small boats were operating tours in the
nearshore marine environment adjacent to the coastal ASPA
boundary and approaching close to sites under special protection.
These patterns of activity have come to attention relatively recently,
and are occurring in the context of a growing Antarctic tourism
industry.
The nearshore marine environment surrounding Biscoe Point is
intensively frequented by penguins as an access route to their
foraging areas at sea. Other wildlife, including other bird species
and marine mammals, also frequent the marine area surrounding
Biscoe Point, especially Hewitt Bay. The United States has been
carrying out long-term ecological research at Biscoe Point for a
period of more than 50 years, and in particular this research is
considered vital for understanding the influences and signatures of
climate change. The United States is concerned that natural patterns
of behaviour by the birds and seals under study are not unduly
subjected to external human interference that could complicate
scientific interpretations of the ecological signals, patterns and
trends.
As a result, the United States made an informal request through
IAATO that tour operators refrain from small boat cruising in the
vicinity of Biscoe Point while an evaluation of the situation was
initiated and scientific experts were consulted. Tour operators
responded positively to the request and immediately ceased small
boat cruises in the vicinity while this was carried out.
This Working Paper reports the results of the evaluation and the
conclusion that the boundary of ASPA No.139 Biscoe Point needs
revision to include the nearshore marine environment
surrounding Biscoe Point, including all of Hewitt Bay, and
extending to include nearby islets, rocks and ice-free promontories
within several hundred meters of Biscoe Point, which are being
used by local wildlife for activities such as nesting, molting,
preening, congregating in social groups, and for rest. The revision
includes areas of principal importance to local wildlife, and is
limited to the nearshore marine environment less than 50 m in
depth. As a result, and given its limited geographical extent, as well
as the frequent rocky islets and shoals occurring within the revised
boundary, the site is no interest for commercial fisheries.
Revised boundaries
The principal question addressed in this review was whether the
boundaries of ASPA No.139 Biscoe Point are sufficient to provide
adequate protection to the values of the Area, and if not how should
the boundaries be revised in order to provide that protection.
Expert biologists who have been regularly carrying out scientific
work at the site for more than 30 years were consulted on the issue,
and a range of options to address concerns were considered.
Specifically, marine buffer areas of 50, 100, 200, 500 and 1000 m
were each considered on their merits. The surrounding geography
was also taken into account, in particular the presence of small
offshore islands and promontories which host wildlife were
considered. These features provide obvious visual markers which
aid boundary identification from boats at sea and therefore help to
improve practical protection on the ground.
Following consideration of the range of options and local features,
the evaluation group reached consensus that the boundary which
enclosed Hewitt Bay, included Access Point, and extended to
include small islands close to the west and north of Biscoe Point
was the best combination to provide adequate on-going protection
to the site values.
Updated data on wildlife
Preliminary surveys were undertaken of the offshore islets and ice-
free promontories in March 2024 in order to understand how these
areas are being used by local wildlife. These surveys showed these
areas were being used by wildlife, including for breeding, and the
results both informed selection of the revised boundary and were
also incorporated into an updated description of the Area in the
Management Plan.
Access revisions
Because the full Management Plan was last reviewed recently, the
current review focused mainly on the boundary question. However,
revisions to boundaries have implications for access, and for this
reason the evaluation also considered these aspects of the
Management Plan.
Current provisions for scientific access to the Area by small boat
were considered adequate, and no changes to the designated small
boat landing sites are proposed. It was not considered necessary to
designate additional small boat landing sites within the revised
boundary. Palmer Station (United States) boating capabilities have
been significantly improved in recent years, and small boat access
to Biscoe Point from Palmer Station today is much more practical
today than it has been in the past.
At the same time, there has been significant recent expansion of the
Gentoo penguin population on Biscoe Point, and breeding birds now
occupy sites within ~150 m of the previously designated helicopter
landing site. Considering access by small boat is practical, the
review concluded that helicopter access to Biscoe Point is no longer
required or justified in the context of sensitive breeding birds. The
two designated helicopter landing sites and the Helicopter Access
Zone have therefore been discontinued. These are replaced by a
general overflight restriction within the Area, whereby all overflight
below 2000 feet (~610 m) and landings by piloted aircraft are
prohibited.
The revised Management Plan and maps for ASPA No. 139 are
attached. The boundary changes to the Management Plan are
considered minor in the sense that the overall spatial extent of the
Area remains small (3.9 km2) and the marine area included within
the revised boundary is very shallow and studded with frequent
rocks, islets and shoals.
Recommendation
The United States requests the Committee for Environmental
Protection to recommend to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting approval of the attached revised Management Plan and
maps for ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer
Archipelago.
ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 20
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 20
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2004), Measure 7 (2010), Measure 6 (2014), Measure
14 (2022)
Current management plan:
Measure 14 (2022)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Resolution 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998), Resolution 3 (1996) Designation of Antarctic
Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 7 Southwest Anvers Island and
Palmer Basin through Measure 1 (2008); Measure 2 (2009);
Measure 14 (2010); Measure 11 (2019), Measure 1 (2022).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. The boundary has been revised to include the nearshore
marine environment surrounding Biscoe Point, Hewitt Bay and
nearby offshore islets, rocks and promontories up to one kilometer
from Biscoe Point, including the ice-free area of Access Point. The
size of the Area has increased to 3.9 km2.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. See above re changes to include the nearshore marine
environment. Wildlife locations have been updated.
Color versions of the maps replace the previous monochrome
versions, although map formats and layouts remain similar.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. See above.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. ASPA No.139 lies within ASMA No.7 Palmer Basin and
Southwest Anvers Island and the boundary changes should in due
course be included in maps for the ASMA, although these changes
do not affect the ASMA boundary.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Description of the Area has been updated, including on the revised
boundaries and information on bird and mammal populations.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Yes. Environment E – Antarctic Peninsula.
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
Yes. Region 3 – Northwest Antarctic Peninsula.
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
Biscoe Point has not, under the criteria used, been identified as an
IBA.
