Comprehensive and Consistent Framework for the Regulation of
Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic
Treaty area - Suggestions for Additional Elements to be Included in
a Tourism Framework
Comprehensive and Consistent Framework for the Regulation of
Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic
Treaty area
Suggestions for Additional Elements to be
Included in a Tourism Framework
Summary
This WP and attachment build on the “Suggestions for an Outline
Structure” document (WP3) to suggest additional components to
achieve the objective to deliver a comprehensive and consistent
framework for the regulation of tourism and other non-
governmental activities. The attachment to this WP highlights a
number of areas and issues that have been previously proposed or
raised for consideration to strengthen tourism regulations, but on
which the ATCM has yet to draw final conclusions. The proposal to
the ATCM is to discuss these areas and issues and to consider
whether these should form part of the Tourism Framework. Not all
co-proponents agree on every element of this document and Parties
may wish to propose additional elements that require discussion in
this context.
Aims of this Working Paper
With Decision 6 (2023) it was decided “to start a dedicated process
to develop a comprehensive and consistent framework for the
regulation of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica” (a “Tourism Framework”). It was also decided to
establish a Special Working Group for this purpose, which will have
its first meeting of two days during ATCM 46. Through the
Decision, all Consultative Parties have been invited to develop
proposals prior to the convening of that first meeting in order to
ensure due preparation of discussions.
Against this backdrop, the above co-proponents have prepared two
separate, but linked documents: WP3 and WP4.
This document and attachment build on the “Suggestions for an
Outline Structure” document (WP3) to suggest additional
components to achieve the objective to deliver a comprehensive
and consistent framework for the regulation of tourism and other
non-governmental activities. These additional components have
been included in the attachment to this WP and have been prepared
in a draft outline form that could, once agreed, be inserted into the
outline structure presented in the attachment 1 of WP3. The
components relate to areas and issues that have been previously
proposed or raised for consideration to strengthen tourism
regulations, but on which the ATCM has yet to draw final
conclusions. Not all co-proponents agree on every element of this
document
and Parties may of course wish to propose additional elements that
require discussion in this context.
Proposal
The proposal to the ATCM is to discuss the attachment, with a
special focus on the following question:
Could or should the areas or issues in the attachment be considered
useful components of the Tourism Framework as referred to in
Decision 6 (2023), without prejudice the legal status or form of
such a framework and while acknowledging that the final language
will need further discussions?
