Key elements
in a comprehensive uniform system for Antarctic tourism
Key elements in a comprehensive uniform system for Antarctic
tourism
Brief summary of the issue
The Meetings addressed various aspects of tourist activities,
including systemic challenges and operational issues. According to
the Russian Federation, the lack of a holistic and strategic approach
does not allow tourism to be managed effectively, especially in the
long term. In this context, it is important to note Decision 6 (2023)
Dedicated process for the development of a comprehensive and
uniform system for Antarctic tourism and non-governmental
activities. Such a unified process could facilitate the step-by-step
development of mandatory and advisory standards for the long-
term management of Antarctic tourism. The working paper aims at
outlining some of the elements that the Russian Federation proposes
to include in the comprehensive, uniform system for Antarctic
tourism.
The position of tourist activities in the SDA
Tourist activities as such do not contradict the principles and
purposes of the Antarctic Treaty (Treaty) and are permissible within
the meaning of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty 1991 (Protocol). This understanding is confirmed
by the adoption of documents by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings (ATCM, Meetings) containing the applicable regulation. At
the same time, special attention is paid to certain aspects of
environmental protection in Antarctica and the elimination of
additional burden on national Antarctic programs.
In addition, as part of discussions following the work of the
intersessional contact group on current issues, trends and challenges
for the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), the Meeting also considered
increasing the accessibility of Antarctica for tourists, increasing
their number, as well as threats posed to the organization of tourist
activities by states which are not Parties to the Agreement. These
issues were discussed as challenges for the ATS requiring a timely
response.
Applicable ATS regulations and prospects for improved regulation
Environmental obligations are established by the Protocol and
primarily relate to impact assessment procedures at the planning
stage, taking into account cumulative impacts.
In the context of the operational aspects of Antarctic tourism, the
ATCM addressed issues of reporting, the use of land-based
infrastructure and different types of tourism. The result of the
discussions was the adoption of Resolutions 10 (2021) and 6
(2022), which approved Post Visit Site Report Form for Tourism
and Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica and Revised
Standard Visit Report Form, Resolutions 4 (2023) Urgent measures
to be taken with respect to certain tourist and non-governmental
activities.
Notably, Measure 4 (2004) Insurance and emergency planning for
tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty
area and Measure 15 (2009) Landing of Persons from Passenger
Vessels in the Antarctic Treaty Area have not entered into force.
According to the Russian Federation, current regulations do not
cover all relevant issues, and the lack of a holistic and strategic
approach does not allow for effective management of tourism,
especially in the long term. In this context, it is important to note
Decision 6 (2023) Dedicated process for the development of a
comprehensive and uniform system for Antarctic tourism and
other non-governmental activities. Such a unified process could
facilitate the step-by-step development of mandatory and advisory
standards for the long-term management of Antarctic tourism.
The ATCM's leadership role within a comprehensive, uniform
system for Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities
The Russian Federation believes that tourist activities should not
interfere with or complicate scientific research in the Treaty area,
nor burden national Antarctic programs. Responsibility for
achieving this goal should not rest solely on the tourist and national
operators themselves. In this regard, it is necessary to reaffirm the
leadership role of the ATCM in tourism management and
specifically note the ability, if necessary, to impose restrictions on
tourism in Antarctica. At the same time, it seems relevant to ensure
the flexibility of the mechanism. Thus, regulatory measures can be
applied both in relation to the entire Treaty area or on a regional
scale, and also affect any tourist activity or specific types of
tourism.
The Parties to the Agreement in the context of the system have a
special role in ensuring compliance with applicable requirements.
In addition, it is the Parties who are called upon to present the most
pressing and relevant issues related to tourism to the ATCM for
consideration.
Objectives of a comprehensive, uniform system for Antarctic
tourism and non-governmental activities
Environmental objectives
The Russian Federation considers it a priority to ensure that tourist
activities or their results do not interfere with the conservation of
Antarctica as a natural reserve dedicated to peace and science.
It is important to take into account the cumulative impact of
tourism both on its own and in combination with other activities.
As part of the precautionary approach, it is relevant to prepare
recommendations on the procedure for assessing the environmental
impact of tourism activities. Involvement of the CEP is also
important to ensure uniformity of practice among Parties.
It is necessary to take into account the characteristics of various
types of tourism, especially when assessing the risks of activities:
cruises, with landing for a short or longer stay, and extreme
tourism.
An effective monitoring system can help identify possible
unintended consequences of activities. For this purpose, as a basic
step, it is necessary to establish clear requirements for tour
operators.
Informational objectives
Effective regulation is possible only on the basis of reliable
information that meets the criteria of sufficiency. Tour operators'
reporting obligations are important in this regard.
The involvement of observers is no less important. In particular, a
regulatory framework of the activities of Russian operators provides
for the possibility of sending national observers. Useful information
is produced by the International Association of Antarctic Tour
Operators (IAATO).
Observers of the Parties to the Treaty could make additional
contributions. Experience has already been gained in inspections of
government activities by virtue of Article VII of the Treaty.
According to Article 14 of the Protocol, inspections are intended to
promote the protection of the Antarctic environment and its
dependent and associated ecosystems. This explains the relevance of
extending this practice to certain types of tourism that are
associated with high risks of causing harm to the Antarctic
environment (in particular, extreme tourism, and also tourism
involving stays on land).
Compliance with ATS requirements
Establishing liability for non-compliance with ATS requirements is
an essential element of managing tourism activities. The
determination of specific penalties, including the sizes of fines, is
the responsibility of the national legislation of the Parties. At the
same time, the ATCM's task is to ensure that those who violate the
requirements of the ATS are held accountable.
In relation to tour operators, liability may arise on the basis of the
legislation of (a) the state that issued the permit, (b) the state of
registration, (c) the state in which the activity is organized.
In the context of tourism, liability issues also require attention. For
example, a contract for the provision of services may provide for
liability based on the legislation of a particular state. However, we
believe that it is relevant to exchange information between the
Parties on the norms of the national legislation of the Parties on
issues of jurisdiction in relation to tour operators and tourists.
Recommendations
The Russian Federation proposes the following key elements in a
comprehensive, uniform system for Antarctic tourism:
1. The leadership role of the ATCM in the control and management
of tourism, and the distribution of functions of the ATCM, the
Parties and the tour operators.
2. Tourism management while ensuring sufficient data based on
reporting from tour operators, observers and other information
from national Antarctic programs.
3. Ensuring effective protection of the Antarctic environment and
non-interference in the activities of national Antarctic programs.
4. Taking into account the characteristics of various types of
tourism, with close attention to the regulation of extreme tourism
and tourism involving extended stays on land.
5. Ensuring the liability of tour operators for non-compliance with
the requirements of the ATS, and exchange of information on the
national legislation of the Parties on issues of liability of tour
operators and tourists. Harmonization of approaches of the Parties.
