Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
Working Paper submitted by the United States of America
Summary
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 137 Northwest White
Island, McMurdo Sound, is designated to protect the most southerly
known pinniped population; a small, completely enclosed,
naturally-occurring colony of Weddell seals (Leptonychotes
weddellii) which is of high scientific importance.
In the 2023/24 summer season concerns were expressed by
scientists working within the Area that the air access provisions
were being found to be impractical. As such, the United States
initiated an ad hoc review of the Management Plan to determine
whether a modification of the air access requirements was
necessary in order to maintain on-going practical scientific work,
while ensuring continued protection of the values of the Area.
The review concluded that the air access provisions needed revision
in order to ensure practical scientific work can continue in a way
that is safe and effective, and so as to ensure the values under
special protection are maintained. The United States requests the
CEP to recommend to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
approval of the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
The United States conducted a full review of the Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 137 Northwest
White Island, McMurdo Sound, in accordance with Annex V to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in
2022/23, and a revised Management Plan was adopted through
Measure 7 (2023). However, in the 2023/24 season concerns were
expressed by scientists that the air access provisions were being
found to be impractical. In particular the requirement to trek
~1000 m each way from a landing site to the position of a seal
caused concerns about the practicality of carrying equipment, time
on the ground and for safety. As such, the US reviewed the policy
requirement, in particular whether a more practical approach could
be taken at this site while recognising the values under special
protection.
Values and practicality
The primary value at the site is the unique Weddell seal colony.
Scientists who have worked at the site were consulted about
potential revisions, including those who have worked at the site
regularly over more than 30 years. A consensus was reached that
the current air access provisions were unnecessarily restrictive and
impractical, and consensus was reached on alternative provisions as
put forward in the attached revised plan and maps. These
provisions take into account the sensitivity of Weddell seals, the
unique nature of the site, and practical operational aspects.
Evidence in support of revisions
There are few, if any, hard scientific data on the effects of aircraft
on Weddell seals. We therefore have relied on the expert judgement
and advice from a panel of experts who have
extensive experience in working with Weddell seals, and in
particular at McMurdo Sound and at NW White Island. These
scientists are, of course, extremely aware of the scientific value of
the site and several of them were instrumental in proposing the
original protected area.
Data show the Weddell seals concentrate primarily on the ice shelf
along the corridor within ~200 m of the coastline of northwest
White Island. Only rarely are seals found on the ice shelf beyond
that zone, and extremely rarely on White Island itself (although it is
noted that these latter observations may result from positional
errors in the records). Thus, overflights and landings do not pose a
significant risk over most of the Area, as the seals are found only
along the coast. As such, it was evident that flight rules could be
less onerous over most of the ASPA, and regulation could focus
more specifically upon the coastal zone by creating an ‘Air Access
Exclusion Zone’ around the coastline. In consultation with the seal
biologists, it was concluded that a zone of 1000 m in width (500 m
either side of the coastline) would be more than sufficient to protect
the seals. An equal buffer of the Air Access Exclusion Zone over the
ice shelf and on White Island recognises that the seals are typically
concentrated along the coastline, and therefore any aircraft
constraints in relation to the seals should apply on either side of the
coastline.
Distance judgement and the need for a firm limit
It was recognised that judging landing sites from the air while in
flight is prone to error, and as such the proposed 500 m buffer takes
into account that sometimes judgements may err slightly either side
of that limit. Accepting that some error will inevitably occur, the
revised air access policy provides that the Air Access Exclusion Zone
should be ‘avoided to the maximum extent practicable’ to allow for
a modest degree of flexibility of in-flight judgements.
However, it was considered necessary to define a firm and
mandatory limit for clarity and enforcement reasons, and this has
been set at 350 m either side of the coastline (a corridor of 700 m
width). The vertical and horizontal separation distances are set to
be consistent. It was considered logical to set this same firm limit
for Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) for consistency.
In order to carry out the science, it is necessary to "spot" seals from
the air so landings can be made reasonably nearby. Scientists
advised that the current height limit made it more difficult to spot
seals, and recommended lowering the limit to be consistent with the
horizontal limits. This change could help to reduce overflight needs
because seals could be spotted more quickly and effectively. The
same separation distances are set in relation to landings near
individual seals, thus maintaining consistency.
Revised boundaries
In addition to the principal question about aircraft access addressed
in this review, the United States also considered whether the
boundaries of ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island need to be
amended in order to provide adequate protection to the values of
the Area. In particular, it was recognised the Air Access Exclusion
Zone is buffered either side of the White Island coastline, and the
existing ASPA boundary follows the coastline.
Air access guidance for a number of ASPAs covers areas beyond the
designated protected area boundaries (e.g. ASPA 106 Cape Hallett,
ASPA 121 Cape Royds, ASPA 116 New College Valley, ASPA 156
Botany Bay). This guidance is advisory in nature, and permits are
not required for entry into those areas where the air access
guidance applies. The guidance is intended to assist pilots making
approaches to ASPAs and nearby landing sites, and to help ensure
the values of the ASPAs are not disturbed.
In the case of ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, the new Air
Access Exclusion Zone spans either side of the coastline. For clarity
and in order to ensure the legal permitting process for entry into
the ASPA is as straightforward as possible, it was decided to amend
the eastern boundary of the ASPA so that it coincides with the
extent and eastern limit of the Air Access
Exclusion Zone over White Island. In this way, all of the Air Access
Exclusion Zone is included within the ASPA.
In other respects the eastern ASPA boundary alteration has little
practical effect on access to the Area, since all surface access to the
ASPA is made over the ice shelf. Moreover, the coastal area of
White Island brought into the ASPA is a line of ice and rock cliffs,
which are not currently used for research or any other practical
purpose. In any event, should access to this part of White Island be
needed for other research, for example in geology or glaciology, a
permit can be granted for access provided the terms of the
management plan are observed.
Recommendation
The United States requests the Committee for Environmental
Protection to recommend to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting approval of the attached revised Management Plan and
maps for ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound.
ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 18
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 18
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2002), Measure 9 (2008), Measure 7 (2013), Measure 7
(2023).
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2023).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-7 (1991), Measure 3 (2001), A 0 (2018)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound.
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. The eastern boundary of the Area has been extended by 500 m
to accommodate the new Air Access Exclusion Zone which is
buffered 500 m either side of the northwest White Island coastline.
Corner coordinates of the boundary have been edited accordingly.
The size of the area has increased slightly from ~141 km2 to 152
km2.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Map 1 has been altered to show the revised boundary. A new
Map 2 has been added to show the Air Access Exclusion Zone and
provide easy reference to air access guidance.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
5. Maps and photographs
Technical information on data sources for the maps has been
updated.
6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural
features
Boundaries and coordinates
Boundaries descriptions and coordinates have been updated.
6(v) Special zones within the Area
Air Access Exclusion Zone added.
7(ii) Access to, and movement within, or over the Area
Aircraft access and overflight
This section was replaced by new provisions covering overflight and
access to the Area by air.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Environment P – Ross and Ronne-Filchner Ice Shelves.
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
N/A. The Area lies outside of the areas covered by the ACBR
classification.
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
N/A
