Assessing Built Infrastructure and Potential Environmental
Consequences from a Changing Antarctica
Assessing Built Infrastructure and Potential Environmental
Consequences from a Changing Antarctica
Summary
This paper aims to provide preliminary information to the Parties
on the work COMNAP has carried out to date to aid our
understanding, and support the assessment, of built infrastructure in
a changing Antarctica and the potential environmental
consequences of any impact to that infrastructure from those
changed conditions. In parallel with COMNAP’s work on this,
several National Antarctic Programs are also working on this topic.
Further information and advice from COMNAP will be brought back
to a future ATCM and CEP Meeting and we request Parties through
their National Antarctic Programs to share learnings as they are
developed.
Background
Parties have made significant investment in Antarctic built
infrastructures. These built infrastructures are assessed through
processes including through Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA). They are then constructed, and National Antarctic Programs
maintain, repair and periodically upgrade them throughout various
areas and environments in the Antarctic Treaty area.
Built infrastructures in the Antarctic serve a range of purposes,
including science support. Generally, infrastructure in the Antarctic
is like infrastructure globally and similar to the range of purposes it
serves. Differences involve the materials used and performance
criteria that can withstand particular Antarctic conditions.
National Antarctic Programs are considering how a changing
Antarctica may impact their built infrastructure as a matter of
safety of human life, to ensure continuing support to research, and
to meet their environmental obligations related to their Antarctic
activities.
Through COMNAP, National Antarctic Programs are working to
understand how local and regional changes in their areas of
operations might create new impacts to existing Antarctic
infrastructure and how they can “future-proof” planned, or
currently under consideration, built infrastructure.
As a community, consideration of how our current tools related to
environmental protection as found in the Environmental Protocol,
such as EIA, waste management including the Clean-up Manual,
and the area protection and management provisions, can be best
applied to consider the impacts of a changing Antarctic
environment and address any environmental consequences that
might result from built infrastructure that may be at increased risk
of damage or failure from changing Antarctic environmental
conditions.
It is possible that some changes to the Antarctic climate may make
conditions more favourable to built infrastructures by improving its
ability to perform in traditionally harsh Antarctic conditions. This
might result in less risk of failure or damage and lessening of
possible environmental consequences.
COMNAP Work to Date
Following the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on
Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and
Governance (2010), COMNAP convened in 2011 the Management
Implications of a Changing Antarctic Region Workshop (see ATCM
XXXV (2012) COMNAP IP 4 Management Implications of a
Changing Antarctica - COMNAP Workshop). The workshop aimed at
addressing the challenges and changes National Antarctic
Programs were experiencing then, into the then near future (2011–
2021), and in the long term (to 2060 and beyond). The
unpredictability of changes and absence of trends were identified as
key challenges for Antarctic operations. The workshop also noted
that Antarctic regions are changing differently and that “barriers” to
some parts of Antarctica may be removed due to milder
environmental conditions. As a result of the workshop, the topic of
the management implications of a changing Antarctica was added
to the COMNAP Work Plan.
In 2015, COMNAP convened the Sea Ice Challenges Workshop. The
workshop discussed how changing sea ice conditions meant that
National Antarctic Programs have had to implement alternative
solutions to their normal activities which might have impacts not
only on their ship movements but also on their ability to support
science. Understanding sea ice extent and duration allows National
Antarctic Programs to make smart decisions about when and where
to operate and to have confidence in investments related to
infrastructure and to any necessary contingencies. Recent
significant changes in sea ice extent and duration around Antarctica
is already presenting National Antarctic Programs with challenges
and influencing decision-making in seasonal planning.
In 2016, COMNAP released the results of the COMNAP Antarctic
Roadmap Challenges (ARC) project, drawing from the initial results
provided from the SCAR Horizon Scan (2014), which translated the
highest priority Antarctic research questions into actionable
requirements for supporting access, technologies, logistics and
infrastructure. There was an identified need for expansion into
remote field areas to undertake research and the greater use of
automation for data collection. This will require changes to
operation and built infrastructure to support remote and year-round
research.
In 2018, COMNAP surveyed its Members on modernisation of
stations. The survey results, (see ATCM XLII (2019) COMNAP IP 47
Modernisation of Antarctic Stations: Survey results) showed that
73% of the then thirty COMNAP Member National Antarctic
Programs were planning or were already modernising their
Antarctic stations, 22% of the responses cited climate change as the
main reason for modernisation.
In 2020, COMNAP convened the 19th Symposium “Future-proofing
Infrastructure to Support Research and to Reduce Environmental
Impact”. The Proceedings from that Symposium note,
“Modernisation of Antarctic infrastructure is critical…[it] provides
the opportunity to include innovative technologies and services that
are sustainable and that reduce direct environmental impact, and
technologies that support modern research requirements. It requires
solid planning and decision-making and the need to understand
Antarctic conditions now and for the next 50 years – the anticipated
life expectancy of much of the Antarctic infrastructure currently
under development.”
During the 2021 COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXXIII,
discussion during the Environmental Protection Expert Group
session led to the introduction of a target in the COMNAP Work
Plan to, “Consider implications of climate change for management
of Antarctic activities (practical consequences of change in
Antarctica)” as work to be progressed and is on-going. This
COMNAP Work Plan item aligns with the Climate Change Response
Work Plan (CCRWP) Action 5a “National operators to assess risk of
change in climate (eg. Permafrost) to their infrastructure and
environmental consequences”.
Also, in line with CCRWP Action 5a, COMNAP jointly presented
with SCAR, ATCM XLV (2023) IP 95 Understanding Future Sea-
level Change Around Antarctica, outlining research to identify the
potential risks to coastal infrastructure and operations due to sea-
level changes around the Antarctic continent. That research is on-
going (see joint COMNAP/SCAR/WMO IP184 to this ATCM with an
update on the work).
In 2023, COMNAP convened the 20th Symposium “Antarctic
Innovations and Collaborations” (see Background Paper) with a
topical innovation session on “Building and Energy Efficiencies”
during which National Antarctic Programs presented their work on
modernising infrastructure and making these more energy efficient.
Next steps
The agenda for the Environmental Protection Expert Group during
the COMNAP AGM 36 (2024) includes consideration of risk to built
infrastructure in the context of changing Antarctic environments.
National Antarctic Programs are invited to share their work to date
on this topic and domestic case studies will be presented. This work
will assist national Antarctic programs in their decision-making
related to current infrastructures and potential vulnerability and
will also identify aspects of operations and the logistics “supply
chains” that might be at increased risk from changing Antarctic
conditions. Advice will be brought back to the CEP Meeting 2025 to
support the CEP’s work on priority topics from the CCRWP.
Coupled with the environmental consequences that may occur
related to increased risk or vulnerability to built infrastructure due
to a changing Antarctica, COMNAP recognises that the issue is
broader than environmental alone. Improving efficiencies in
operations and decarbonising activities while introducing
innovative technologies, will carry with it requirements for changes
to current infrastructure and installation of new infrastructures
(wind turbines and solar panels are just two examples).
Best practices related to renewable energy and decarbonisation of
Antarctic activities, while maintaining safety of expeditioners, has
to be coupled with critical technologies and understanding how
those technologies will perform under particular Antarctic
conditions and how they will respond to changing Antarctic
conditions. Therefore, the contributions of the COMNAP Advancing
Critical Technologies Expert Group will play a key role in future
discussions and provision of advice.
Recommendation
COMNAP advises that the assessment of infrastructures in a
changing Antarctica is important and on-going work for the
Member National Antarctic Programs. COMNAP recommends that
the Parties support their National Antarctic Programs to participate
in and continue to provide their technical and practical expertise to
the topical discussions at COMNAP AGMs and throughout the year.
