Revised prior assessment of a proposed multi-site Antarctic
Specially Protected Area within the Collins Bay and Graham Coast
(Kyiv Peninsula)
Revised prior assessment of a proposed multi-site Antarctic
Specially Protected Area within the Collins Bay and Graham Coast
(Kyiv Peninsula)
Working Paper submitted by Ukraine
Summary
A revised prior assessment for a proposed Antarctic Specially
Protected Area (ASPA) within the Collins Bay and Graham Coast
(Kyiv Peninsula, north-west part of the Antarctic Peninsula) has
been carried out by Ukraine follow-up on the CEP XXV (2023)
discussion. The proponent recommends that the CEP: (1) agrees
that the values within the proposed ASPA merit special protection,
(2) endorses the development of a Management Plan for the area,
and (3) encourages interested Parties to work with Ukraine
informally during the intersessional period in the development of a
Management Plan for potential submission at CEP 27.
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions in Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Ukraine would
like to propose the establishment of an Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) within the Collins Bay and Graham Coast (Kyiv
Peninsula, north-west Antarctic Peninsula).
The proposed ASPA would be a multi-site ASPA and have combined
values to be protected. Each site has either biodiversity or non-
biological value, and each of them has on-going scientific research.
Protection unique environmental values:
Valuable for the Antarctic Peninsula vascular plants habitats. The
vegetation in general represents a pattern of sharp discontinuities;
discontinuous and only known stands of some species, the peatlands
are valuable for paleoclimate reconstructions.
The flora is among the richest, the most studied and specific in the
Antarctic Peninsula region. It is peculiar, different from other
fragments of vegetation of the Antarctic Peninsula. There are
unique distribution sites for many rare bryophytes in the region,
places where they were first discovered in the region, or places
where bryophytes exist in unusual conditions. For many moss and
lichen species, their populations are disjunctively distributed here.
Several species of Umbilicaria lichen were found here, which is
quite a big diversity of these lichens.
For both vascular Antarctic plants, Antarctic hairgrass
(Deschampsia antarctica) and Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus
quitensis), this is the middle part of one of the richest in the region
vascular plants’ areas (D. antarctica and C.quitensis) from Booth
Island to Garcia Point.
The southernmost edge of the nesting range for Gentoo penguin
(Pygoscelis papua) on the Berthelot Islands. There are dramatic
changes in this region in the context of global climate change,
which result in rapid expanding of nesting area of gentoo penguins.
It provides a unique opportunity to observe processes influenced by
climate change.
Local Adelie penguin (P.adeliae) colonies are dwindling, which also
requires immediate reaction. This provides a great opportunity to
observe processes influenced by climate change as well, especially
considering that their nesting site is located on a small island next
to the biggest of the Berthelot Islands.
Protection scientific values and on-going/planned scientific
research:
The data archive inherited from the British Antarctic Survey, the
botanical and meteorology data in particular, became the basis for
further long-term plant monitoring, which has been conducted by
Ukrainian researchers for more than two decades.
Four monitoring sites of the Argentine Islands Magnetic research
site, which is the part of a magnetic observatory complex of the
Akademik Vernadsky station.
Two monitoring sites of geodynamic research, laid to monitor the
Penola-Lemaire Fissure, are located within this area.
Microclimate loggers for studying the microclimate and ecology of
Antarctic vascular plants and further climate impact studies.
Areas of the geologic and paleomagnetic research sites where
scientists actively search for bedrocks originating from different
epochs and magnetic rocks that are evidence of paleomagnetism.
Protection of wilderness, geology, and aesthetic values:
Several geological outcrops new to the Antarctic Peninsula and
important for the reconstruction of its geological history were
discovered here.
Spectacular views of big rocky islands and capes, which are also
snowy to different extent; glaciers and amazing views of high
mountains of mainland in the closest vicinity.
The prior assessment follow-up on the CEP XXV (2023) discussion
Following discussions at CEP XX, the Guidelines: A prior assessment
process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs were updated to
include a non-mandatory ASPA prior assessment template to
facilitate the provision of information consistent with the
Guidelines.
In 2023, Ukraine introduced WP-058 with the completed prior
assessment template for the proposed ASPA within the Argentine
Islands and Kyiv Peninsula area (Antarctic Peninsula).
While expressing general support for the prior assessment, the
Committee noted the need for better clarity on some key issues. In
particular, some Members raised concerns regarding a lack of
clarity about the core values to be protected. They also noted that
the number of sites incorporated might present some complexity in
terms of implementation, while other Members noted the scattered
nature of terrestrial biology in the area. Another Member
commented on the lack of representativeness (paragraphs 112-114
of the CEP XXV Report).
Ukraine thoughtfully considered the Committee’s comments and
decided to realize this overall proposal in several stages. To this
end, for the first stage, it is proposed to designate as a core ASPA
only five relatively small and located close to each other sites –
three sites on Berthelot and Darboux Islands, and two mainland
sites (Cape Tuxen and Cape Perez), located on Graham Coast, Kyiv
Peninsula (north-west part of the Antarctic Peninsula). This core
multi-site ASPA represents various values and lays aside the most
landing tourist sites with ATCM Site Guidelines. However, the
proposed ASPA included the most fragile sites, where growing
tourism can have a negative impact on the environment. This multi-
site ASPA is expected to be extended over time to develop an
effective framework for the whole area’s protection.
Recommendations
Ukraine recommends that the CEP:
agrees that the values within the proposed ASPA merit special
protection, as described under Annex V to the Protocol;
endorses the development of a Management Plan for the Area, led
by Ukraine; and
encourages interested Parties to work with Ukraine informally
during the intersessional period in the development of a
Management Plan for potential submission at CEP 27.
