Proposed Guideline for Visitors to the Emperor Penguin Colony on
Snow Hill Island
Proposed Guideline for Visitors to the Emperor Penguin Colony on
Snow Hill Island
Summary
In this working document, Argentina submits for consideration by
the Environmental Protection Committee (CEP) a guideline for
visitors to the emperor penguin colony on Snow Hill Island, which
establishes the code of conduct for visitors on the ground and the
areas to visit, identifying the possible impacts that they could
generate and listing the requirements for disembarkation.
To assist in the evaluation and preparation, the checklist for visitor
guidelines for new sites - Annex A of Resolution 2 (2019) - was
used. Likewise, the guide for visiting the colony for IAATO
members, presented in its latest update in DI 51 (2023) Annex D,
was considered as a reference.
Introduction
The emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) is the penguin species
with the greatest affinity for ice, being adapted to living in
temperatures below -50°C common in the Antarctic winter. Its
reproductive cycle is one of the longest, beginning in March-April
and ending in December. Most colonies develop on the marine
pack, although there are some colonies that reproduce on ice
shelves or on land. Current climate models predict a decline in the
population of this species, as a result of the reduction in sea ice
distribution, which would affect the reproductive success of the
colony, and the decrease in food availability, as Antarctic krill
depend on the ice directly for their larval stage of development
(Forcada and Trathan 2009).
The Snow Hill Island colony is the northernmost breeding colony of
the emperor penguin in Antarctica and makes up Important Bird
Area (IBA) 069. It is located directly on the ice pack, about 40-50
metres from the southwest coast of the island, northeast of the
Antarctic Peninsula (64°30’S and 57°26’W; Libertelli et al., 2014). It
was one of the last colonies to be discovered in the 1990s (Coria
and Montalti 2000). The last recorded population count was carried
out in 2018 using aerial photography, in which 2679 chicks and
339 adults were counted (Schiel et al., 2019).
Located in one of the regions of the world where the effects of
global climate change are most evident (Vaughan et al. 2003), this
is one of the only emperor penguin colonies visited by tourists, thus
increasing anthropogenic pressure on the area of influence of this
colony, especially considering that most visits are made by
helicopter.
Scientific evidence indicates that helicopter flights modify the
behaviour of chicks (Giese and Riddle, 1999), even when carried
out at altitudes much higher than those suggested in the Guidelines
for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds (Resolution
2, 2004).
Background
As a result of the population monitoring tasks and the reproductive
states of the colony that are being developed, Argentina presented
Working Document 44 “Protection Mechanisms for the Snow Hill
Island Emperor Penguin Colony, North East of the Antarctic
Peninsula” during ATCM XL - CEP XX, proposing a series of
protection mechanisms for the colony, with different courses of
action within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System, such as
the designation of Specially Protected Species, the generation of
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and the formulation of Site
Guidelines. It also indicated that field work would be reinforced
and progress would be made in the development of guidelines for
visitors to the Snow Hill Island Emperor penguin colony.
As an interim measure, the Committee recommended the
application of the Behavioural Guidelines in the vicinity of the
emperor penguin colony on Snow Hill Island until the need to
develop more restrictive protection mechanisms is assessed (ATCM
XL Final Report 2017, paragraph 75).
In order to advance the development of the most restrictive
protection mechanisms recommended by the CEP, during the XXV
CEP meeting Argentina presented DI 124 “Comprehensive approach
to the study of the Emperor Penguin colony in Snow Hill Island”, in
which it reported that field work would be reinforced and progress
would be made in the development of guidelines for visitors to the
emperor penguin colony of Snow Hill Island, with a view to their
presentation at the 26 CEP meeting in 2024.
Guideline for visitors to the emperor penguin colony on Snow Hill
Island
Considering the need to have a higher-level management tool, and
considering that during ATCM XLIV the emperor penguin was not
designated a Specially Protected Species, the Snow Hill Island
colony, due to its particular characteristics, would benefit from
having a specific Guideline, containing detailed instructions for
Antarctic visitors and tour operators. The objective of this is to
avoid additional stress factors for the colony.
Thus, in this working document, Argentina proposes a guideline for
visitors to the emperor penguin colony on Snow Hill Island, which
establishes the code of conduct for visitors on the ground, the areas
to visit, and identifies the possible impacts that they may generate
and the requirements for disembarkation.
To assist in the evaluation and preparation of the same, the
checklist for visitor guidelines for new sites - Annex A of Resolution
2 (2019) was used. Likewise, the guide for visiting the colony for
IAATO members was used as a reference, its latest update presented
in DI 51 (2023) Annex D. We appreciate the contributions made by
the IAATO that enhanced the final result.
It is expected that, with the application of this Guideline, the
potential environmental impacts of tourist visits to the colony will
be minimised, avoiding the generation of additional stress or
cumulative impact with the effects climate change could be
generating in the colony as a global threat to the colonies of this
species on the Antarctic continent.
Recommendation
Argentina recommends:
i) that the CEP adopt the Visitor Guideline for the Snow Hill Island
emperor penguin colony attached in Annex A and advise the ATCM
for its approval;
ii) that IAATO incorporates the colony’s directive into its “Field
Operations Manual”.
iii) that the Competent National Authorities request its application
to all Operators and visitors to the colony and consider it during the
corresponding environmental impact assessment for each activity.
