Proposed update to HSM 75
Proposed update to HSM 75
Summary
New Zealand recommends that Historic Site and/or Monument
(HSM) 75 Hut A designation be updated to include its two
remaining ancillary structures, the geomagnetic huts (Huts G and
H) situated to the northwest of Scott Base. Huts G and H date from
the 1957 IGY and Commonwealth Transantarctic Expedition and
remain structurally unaltered on their original 1957 sites to the
north-west of Hut A. Their physical positions are inextricably linked
to a continuous record of scientific observations of the earth’s
magnetism, unbroken between 1957-2023.
Significance assessment
The heritage significance of Huts G and H at Scott Base derives from
their history, their physical characteristics, and the science that has
been carried out in them. The huts have survived in sufficiently
authentic condition for them to constitute an important site in the
history of science on the Antarctic continent.
The two geomagnetic huts were built alongside the current HSM 75
Hut A in the late 1950s during the International Geophysical Year
(IGY) and in support of the Commonwealth Transantarctic
Expedition (TAE). They have been fulfilling their original purpose
collecting data for some 65 years until 2023. It is proposed that
Huts G and H being inextricably linked to Hut A, and with the
distinction of being the only surviving original Scott Base buildings
to still be in their original locations, meet all of the international
heritage criteria that Hut A does, and therefore should fall within
the same heritage management framework.
It should also be noted that the primary objective of setting up Scott
Base was supporting the International Geophysical Year and the
TAE Expedition. The two geomagnetic huts were, therefore, an
important part of the international push to further understand the
Antarctic.
As part of the Scott Base Redevelopment, new geomagnetic huts
were designed, commissioned and installed at ASPA 122 Arrival
Heights, Hut Point, Ross Island to ensure data quality was not
impacted and to allow the ongoing long term science data collection
to continue without disruption.
IGY Science
The IGY was an international scientific project that ran from 1 July
1957 to 31 December 1958. It brought together some 67 countries
from around the world and encompassing key areas of scientific
activity.
The magnetic observations have continued at Scott Base since the
IGY until 2023 from the same two huts, G and H, established as part
of the original base. The instruments have changed significantly but
the long-term dataset has proved invaluable, particularly as the
magnetic pole is relatively close to Scott Base compared with most
other permanent bases. The magnetic observations form part of the
global INTERMAGNET geomagnetic observatory network.
The huts are strongly representative of a particular branch of
scientific research in Antarctica, namely the study of the Earth’s
magnetism, its variation with time, and the causes and effects of
these variations. They have been the setting for 65 years of
continuous use by Antarctica New Zealand (and its forerunner the
Antarctic Division of the DSIR). During this time, New Zealand in
association with the global community of magnetic observatories,
has made contributions to understanding Antarctica and its physical
environment that are of international significance. The huts having
been unaffected by physical change or re-location contributes to the
value and reliability of the data set. Their built structure and
remnant fixtures are an original and rare
example remaining in the world of how early magnetic observation
experiments were run. They maintain the possibility of a return to
the buildings for data collection in future.
Recommendations
Based on the above information, New Zealand recommends that
HSM 75 Hut A designation be updated as outlined in Table 1, to
include two geomagnetic huts (Huts G and H) to the northwest of
Scott Base.
Table 1: Coversheet for HSM 75 updates
1. Has this site or monument been designated by a previous ATCM
as a Historic Site or Monument?
(If yes, please list the relevant Recommendations and Measures.)
Yes Measure 1 (2001)
Measure 23 (2021)
2. If the proposal is for a new Historic Site or Monument, please
include the following information, worded for inclusion in the
Measure:
Amendment to the existing designation: HSM 75: Hillary's TAE/IGY
Hut 'A', - Scott Base, Ross Island
(i) Name
HSM 75: Hillary's TAE/IGY Hut 'A', Geomagnetic Huts ‘G’ and ‘H’ –
Scott Base, Ross Island
(ii) Description
Describe materials, construction, function, use.
Hut A of Scott Base, being the only existing Trans Antarctic
Expedition 1956/1957 building in Antarctica sited at Pram Point,
Ross Island, Ross Sea Region, Antarctica. Huts G and H are both
original buildings from the International Geophysical Year. They
remain in the original sites as built in 1957, to the north-west of
Hut A. Their physical positions are inextricably linked to a
continuous record of scientific observations of the earth’s
magnetism, unbroken since 1957. They were prefabricated
buildings, designed specially for Antarctic conditions and without
ferrous components of any sort, thereby enabling their use for
geomagnetic purposes.
(iii) Site Location:
Provide one latitude and one longitude coordinate only.
77°50′60″ S, 166°46′0″ E
(iv) Designation/ Amendment
Amendment
(v) Original proposing Party
List proponent(s)
New Zealand
(vi) Party undertaking management:
Name the country/countries which are committed to following up
(with management approach specified for the object/site)
New Zealand
(vii) Type
building (hut, station, other building remains)
site
commemorative item (plaque, bust, cross, other)
other remains (expedition cairn, tent, lighthouse, shipwreck, other)
Buildings: Station and huts
(viii) Conservation status
Following major conservation work by the New Zealand-based
Antarctic Heritage Trust 2016-17, Hut A is structurally sound and
weather tight and artefact collection has been conserved. Annual
monitoring and maintenance ensures ongoing stability of this
building.
Conservation works have yet to be carried out on Huts G and H.
The buildings are structurally sound and serviceable, showing the
wear and tear expected for buildings some 65 years old. The New
Zealand-based Antarctic Heritage Trust intend to carry out asbestos
removal and conservation works on the buildings in the coming
years.
(ix) Description of the historical context
These buildings represent the beginnings of the New Zealand
Antarctic programme in 1957. The base from which Sir Edmund
Hillary mounted his traverse to the South Pole by tractor, in support
of the Trans Antarctic Expedition. The geomagnetic huts were the
hub of the contribution from NZ scientists to the International
Geophysical Year (1957-58) and constitute an important site in the
history of science on the Antarctic continent; they have provided a
continuous international record of scientific observations of the
earth’s magnetism, unbroken between 1957-2023.
The huts are closely associated with a number of scientists from
1957–58 to the present day; Dr Trevor Hatherton’s name in
particular is well known and highly regarded internationally in the
annals of Antarctic science.
(x) Applicable criteria in accordance with Resolution 3 (2009):
a) a particular event of importance in the history of science or
exploration of Antarctica occurred at the place
b) a particular association with a person who played an important
role in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica
d) representative of, or forms part of, some wide-ranging activity
that has been important in the development and knowledge of
Antarctica
e) particular technical, historical, cultural or architectural value in
its materials, design or method of construction
(xi) Management tools:
Describe management and/or monitoring actions planned for the
object/site in question – cf. Section 6 and 7, as well as pt. 5 in
Annex to Resolution 3 (2009), as well as measures that will be
taken to limit any environmental impacts that the management of
the HSM may cause. It will not always be appropriate to have a
formal management plan, but this can be noted in the proposal.
Conservation Management Plan
Code of Conduct
Hut guide system
Briefing to all Scott Base arrivals
Historic Sites and Monuments in the Ross Sea Region poster
displayed at stations in the region
(xii) Photos:
Provide images, preferably with short captions and picture credits,
showing the site and/or monument and its location/surroundings.
See Appendix 1
(xiii) Physical features of the environment and cultural and local
context
The huts are in the immediate vicinity of Scott Base. The Hut A is
frequently visited by local base staff from Scott Base and McMurdo,
and by seasonal tourist visits. The Hut A is kept heated and well
maintained. Huts G and H are both still on their original sites, as
built in 1957, to the north-west of Hut A.
3. If the proposal is to revise an existing designation of an HSM,
please list the relevant past Recommendations and Measures.
Measure 1 (2001)
Measure 23 (2021)
Appendix 1: Map and photos of Huts G and H.
Figure 1: Map showing Huts A, G and H in relation to Scott Base.
Figure 2: Hut G (magnetic variometers). Photo: R Innes, Antarctica
New Zealand (Dec 2023).
Figure 3: Hut H (absolute magnetic instruments). Photo: R Innes,
Antarctica New Zealand (Dec 2023).
Figure 4: Huts G (left) and H (right). Photo: R Innes, Antarctica
New Zealand (Dec 2023).
