Updating the CCRWP with new actions relating to sea-ice change
Updating the CCRWP with new actions relating to sea-ice change
Working Paper submitted by Norway and the United Kingdom
Summary
ATCM XXLIV noted, with concern, the rapid and significant changes
to Antarctic sea-ice, which demonstrated the vulnerability of
Antarctic ecosystems to climate change. The Climate Change
Response Work Programme (CCRWP) provides a mechanism for
identifying and revising goals and specific actions by the CEP to
support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty System to prepare for,
and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a changing
climate and the associated implications for the governance and
management of Antarctica. Parties have requested that the CEP
keep the CCRWP under regular review. Norway and the United
Kingdom propose that the CEP adds the actions requested by ATCM
XXLIV into the CCRWP and initiate processes to move these actions
forward.
Background
At ATCM XXLIV Norway and the United Kingdom submitted
Working Paper 35 to the joint CEP/ATCM climate day, addressing
management implication of loss of sea-ice. The Meeting thanked
Norway and the United Kingdom for their paper. It noted, with
concern, the rapid and significant changes to Antarctic sea-ice,
which demonstrated the vulnerability of Antarctic ecosystems to
climate change.
The Meeting agreed to request the CEP, with the support of SCAR,
to provide advice on how human activity could avoid or mitigate
unintended or unforeseen negative impacts on vulnerable species or
habitats affected by local or regional sea-ice loss.
In the first instance, the Meeting:
invited SCAR to provide a first level assessment of vulnerabilities in
space and time, exposed by changing sea-ice extent in the Antarctic
Peninsula region; and
asked the CEP to consider potential management implications for
the Antarctic Peninsula region, noting that it experienced high and
increasing levels of human activity.
Sea-ice status, trends and potential implications of change
Summarized, Working Paper 35 (2023) highlighted the following
about sea-ice status, trends and potential implications of change
Note that bullet point 4, regarding sea-ice minimums, has been
updated to reflect observations from 2024. :
Antarctic sea-ice plays a controlling role in the regional and global
climate. Sea-ice provides an important ecological niche for many
species, and it forms a barrier between the atmosphere and the
ocean, modulating the exchange of heat, momentum, fresh-water,
and gases such as CO2.
Despite global warming, Antarctic sea-ice expanded slightly during
most of the first four decades of satellite observations. However, in
2016 the Antarctic sea-ice area
plummeted, in a change far outside the range of previously
observed variability. Since this time, the Antarctic sea-ice extent has
not recovered.
Loss of sea-ice is not uniformly distributed around the continent; it
varies between regions. Before the major sea-ice shift around 2016
it was already recorded that sea-ice extent to the west of the
Antarctic Peninsula had decreased 6–10% per decade, with the
greatest changes in autumn and summer, and that the length of the
sea-ice season on the west of the Peninsula had reduced by ~4 days
between 1979 and 2010.
The 2023 Antarctic sea-ice minimum (1.79 million square
kilometers) was the lowest in the 45-year satellite record. The 2024
Antarctic sea-ice minimum ended up as tied with 2022 for second
lowest in the satellite data record, just above 2023. Thus, the
minimum sea-ice extents of the last three years are the three lowest
in the 46-year record and the first three years that minimum sea-ice
reached an extent below 2.0 million square kilometers. Minimum
sea-ice extent has been especially low in the Ross, Amundsen, and
Bellingshausen Seas, whereas over the Weddell Sea and along the
East Antarctic coast the ice cover is at average levels (see https://
nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/, March 4 2024 edition).
Changes in the timing (phase) of sea-ice advance and retreat might
be driving contemporary trends in Antarctic sea-ice. The anomalous
decay of sea-ice in 2016 was associated largely with a change in
when sea-ice retreated (phase) rather than the amount of retreat
(amplitude), with an earlier (August rather than at the end of
September) and faster than usual seasonal retreat.
In the information summary on sea-ice trends and future projections
on the Antarctic Environments Portal (https://environments.aq/) it
is noted that model projections generally agree that over the next
50 to 100 years, Antarctic sea-ice will decrease, with significant
physical and biological implications for the polar region and
beyond (e.g., for global climate, indirectly sea-level rise, and
ecosystems).
There is currently substantial uncertainty as to the magnitude,
regionality, seasonality, and timing of future change in Antarctic
sea-ice coverage and properties. The latest IPCC assessment report
(IPCC AR6 WG1) noted that there remains low confidence in
existing future projections of Antarctic sea-ice extent.
There are indications that the western Antarctic Peninsula region is
seemingly and potentially moving towards (i) lower minimum sea-
ice extent, (ii) a later sea-ice advance, and (iii) earlier retreat.
Taken together, the consequence is a shorter sea-ice season with
more areas experiencing extended ice-free periods.
While there are few data available to assess trends at this stage,
experience elsewhere indicates that when new areas are made
available in space and time due to a decline in sea-ice extent,
human activity will follow. Consequently, a longer ice-free period
has the potential to lead to an expanded visitation season in
Antarctica, i.e., visitation taking place earlier in the austral summer
and visitors departing later (thus extending the so-called ‘shoulder
season’). This will/can expose new areas or species/habitats to
increased human disturbance, including during more vulnerable
periods. Some examples include, but are not limited to the
following:
Earlier access to penguin and other seabird colonies may contribute
to a higher level of visitation and thereby higher level of stress in
one of the more vulnerable periods in their life-cycle.
Earlier access to areas previously inaccessible during the early
summer season may lead to additional pressures on species that are
also having to adapt to changes in their breeding and feeding area
as a result of reduced sea-ice extent.
Earlier access to landing sites may contribute to a higher level of
pressure on existing vegetation communities at a point when snow
melt and the resulting
high moisture availability make plants, mosses and lichens more
vulnerable to trampling impacts.
Periglacial features may be more vulnerable to trampling damage
during wetter times earlier in the season when snow is melting.
Expanded and longer shipping routes could have implications for
marine ecosystems at the start and end of the season, for example,
through marine noise, whale strikes, etc.
Since ATCM XLV, numerous studies looking at the sea-ice changes
in Antarctica and the implications of these have been published.
Although there still are many knowledge gaps, findings generally
suggest that the issues identified in Working Paper 35 are still fully
relevant and support the need to focus on the implication of sea-ice
change.
Climate Change Response Work Programme
The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) provides
a mechanism for identifying and revising goals and specific actions
by the CEP to support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty System to
prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a
changing climate and the associated implications for the
governance and management of Antarctica. The CCRWP was
adopted through ATCM Resolution 4 (2015). Parties have requested
that the CEP keeps the CCRWP under regular review, with the
understanding that as appropriate, the Committee should discuss
and consider the inclusion of additional climate change impact
issues to the CCRWP, and thereafter consider and include relevant
actions and tasks.
Conclusion
There is substantial evidence of changing status and trends in
Antarctic sea-ice, and ample indications that such change may have
implications on where, when and how activities in Antarctica will
and may be conducted. The ATCPs have already underscored the
importance of initiating action with respect to this issue through its
decision at ATCM XXLV.
Consequentially, it seems sensible that the actions requested by the
ATCM should be included in the CCRWP. The CCRWP already
includes an identified need for improved understanding of potential
expansion of human presence in Antarctica as a result of changes
resulting from, e.g., changes in sea-ice distribution under climate
related issue #7 (Marine, terrestrial and freshwater habitats at risk
due to climate change), under which these actions could be
included.
The action item is rather large and complex, and further discussions
are needed to identify specific actions this may entail. We suggest
that the CEP discusses and identifies potential concrete tasks to
respond to this action. For example, as a start, it could be relevant
to:
Identify particularly important bird breeding areas that are likely to
be exposed and accessible at more vulnerable stages in breeding
process due to sea-ice loss, and consider whether it could be
relevant to prohibit or limit access to all or some of these areas;
Identify particularly rich vegetation areas that are likely to be
exposed and accessible at more vulnerable stages in growth season
due to sea-ice loss, and consider whether it could be relevant to
prohibit or limit access to all or some of these areas;
Identify poorly chartered areas that are likely to be exposed and
accessible for ship traffic, and consider whether it could be relevant
to prohibit or limit access in order to reduce risk of accidents
causing environmental damage;
Identify whether there are sea-ice areas particularly important for
Antarctic wildlife which may become more important as sea-ice
disappears, and consider whether it could be relevant to limit/
prohibit ice-breaking in such areas; and
Assess and advise the ATCM whether it could be advisable to
prohibit access to areas that now become accessible because of sea-
ice loss, pending further review of the areas’ vulnerabilities and
values.
The Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) has
been established to facilitate the efficient and timely
implementation of the CCRWP. It would therefore be beneficial to
ask the SGCCR to consider and suggest how the tasks that the CEP
identify as potential tasks could be moved forward, and in doing so
also provide an overview of ongoing work that may be relevant in
informing these tasks.
Furthermore, in order to support the work of the CEP in
understanding and acting upon the implication of sea-ice change for
management of human activity, it is important to have up-to-date
information. Therefore, the Committee might want to consider
whether it could be useful to task the SGCCR, potentially in
collaboration with SCAR, to prepare an annual update on the most
recent sea-ice changes (e.g. from existing satellite imagery) for the
CEP’s attention and consideration.
Recommendations
Norway and the United Kingdom suggest that the CEP:
agree to update the CCRWP by including the sea-ice related actions
requested by ATCM XXLIV, which were the production of i) a
vulnerability assessment and ii) an implication assessment as
management actions/tasks (CCRWP column 4) under the climate
related issue #7 (in CCRWP column 1) as proposed in Figure 1;
discuss and identify potential specific tasks to implement to respond
to this action, including considering the tasks suggested in this
paper;
task the SGCCR to consider and suggest how the proposed tasks
could be moved forward, and in doing so also provide an overview
of ongoing work that may be relevant in informing this action item;
and furthermore
task the SGCCR, in collaboration with SCAR, to prepare an annual
update on the most recent sea-ice changes for the CEP’s attention to
support its work in understanding and act on the implication of sea-
ice change for management of human activity.
Figure 1: Proposed addition of sea-ice related tasks in the CCRWP
Climate related issue
Gaps/needs
Response area
Action/Task
7. Marine, terrestrial and freshwater habitats at risk due to climate
change
Understand habitat status, trends, vulnerability and distribution
Improved understanding of the effects of climate change on habitat,
eg. sea ice extent and duration, snow cover, ground moisture,
microclimate, changing melt flows and consequences to lake
systems
Improved understanding of potential expansion of human presence
in Antarctica as a result of changes resulting from climate change
through e.g. changes in sea ice distribution; collapse of ice shelves;
expansion of ice free area).
Research
Encourage research by national programmes, SCAR and SC-
CCAMLR
Management
Review and revise where necessary existing management tools to
consider if they afford the best practical adaptation measure to
habitats at risk of climate change.
Assess vulnerabilities in space and time, exposed by changing sea-
ice extent in the Antarctic Peninsula region and on this basis
consider potential management implications for this region, noting
that it experiences high and increasing levels of human activity.
