Use of Alternative Fuels in Antarctic Operations to Reduce Carbon
Emissions
Use of Alternative Fuels in Antarctic Operations to Reduce Carbon
Emissions
Summary
British Antarctic Survey (BAS) has an ambitious target to reach net
zero carbon emissions by 2040. In order to meet our interim targets
in hard to decarbonise areas such as shipping and aviation, BAS has
been investigating the role of alternative fuels as part of the short
and long term decarbonisation roadmap. This paper describes
experience in using Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil (HVO) in their
polar research vessel and on station to support construction projects
and plans to use Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF) in aircraft (and
potentially vehicles and on station) as a short-term method to
reduce carbon emissions. It describes the trials in progress or
planned, results obtained and the benefits and challenges of
alternative fuel use. The UK recommends that:
Parties note the benefit of using sustainably sourced alternative
fuels to reducing carbon emissions and consider trialling alternative
fuel use in their operations.
Parties share the results of their experience in alternative fuel trial
or use.
Operators of gateway ports consider improving the availability and
traceability of alternative fuels increasing their accessibility for
Antarctic operations.
Introduction
BAS's polar research vessel, the RRS Sir David Attenborough (SDA),
accounts for around 60% of BAS's carbon footprint, and BAS aircraft
around 9%, making reductions in ship and aircraft emissions a
priority for carbon reduction projects. While innovative
technologies may provide long-term low-carbon solutions (including
marine automation see related IP submitted by the UK on Using
Artificial Intelligence (AI) to Support Decision Making in Marine
Operations to Reduce Carbon Emissions), interim measures,
including the use of alternative fuels, are being sought. This paper
describes the background, objectives, scope and methodology and
results of HVO trials on the SDA, and plans to use SAF in aircraft.
HVO trial on the SDA
Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil (HVO) is biofuel derived from waste
vegetable and animal oils and fats through hydroprocessing. It is a
renewable, low-carbon alternative to conventional diesel fuel or
Marine Gas Oil (MGO). HVO is a direct drop-in replacement for
diesel engines and can be used immediately without engine
upgrades or investments. Whilst HVO is a relatively new alternative
fuel not commonly used in the maritime sector, it has been trialled
by some marine transport and logistics companies.
According to figures published by the UK government, HVO is
considered net-zero for carbon emissions. Utilising HVO in place of
MGO in the SDA has the potential to reduce CO2e emissions
significantly. If it were possible to replace all MGO with HVO,
annual ship-engine emissions would be reduced by nearly 90%. 
In 2023, the UK investigated the potential of using sustainably
sourced HVO as an interim approach to achieving carbon emissions
reductions while maintaining UK scientific capability and trialled its
use on board the SDA in the northern hemisphere and transit to,
and around, Antarctic stations. Further trials are planned for
2024/2025, subject to funding.
The objectives of the trial were to: 
 
Assess the technical feasibility and compatibility of HVO fuel with
ship engines, including usage in international and polar waters. 
Evaluate the performance and efficiency of ships using HVO fuel
compared to MGO. 
Determine the environmental impact and potential reduction in
carbon emissions associated with HVO fuel usage. 
Assess the economic viability of using HVO fuel, including potential
fuel cost savings and operational implications. 
Identify challenges, limitations, or opportunities related to HVO fuel
usage. 
During trials to date, the ship's engines showed similar performance
and efficiency to periods using marine gas oil (MGO). Neither the
engine nor vessel performance was impacted beyond the lower
calorie density of HVO, resulting in approximately 8% higher
volume use than equivalent energy requirements using MGO.
HVO was sourced from International Sustainability and Carbon
Certification (ISCC) certified suppliers. Commercial laboratory
testing showed that the supplied fuel met all regulatory
requirements, was low in sulphur and FAME, and contained no
biological contaminants. The ISCC-certified fuel is manufactured
from waste materials and is regarded as having virtually zero life
cycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, potentially saving up to
90% of GHG emissions over the entire lifecycle compared to
traditional diesel fuel. 
The due diligence applied to sourcing also investigated the fate of
HVO in the environment were it to be spilt to ensure that existing
oil-spill response equipment on the SDA and station would be
effective.
 
The use of HVO during the fuel trials in 2023 has resulted in a
~35% reduction in BAS's ship based emissions.
One drawback of HVO is that it is considerably more expensive than
MGO, varying between 1.5-3 times per tonne, depending on
markets. Compounded with the greater volume required relative to
MGO, it is estimated that operating on HVO year-round would
double fuel costs.
A further challenge is that the availability of sustainable HVO is
limited geographically to parts of Europe, Singapore, the USA, and
possibly Brazil. No source has been identified for southern gateway
ports. We estimate that around 40% of ship fuel can be bunkered as
HVO in the next two years, based on current availability and
planned bunkering locations. 
 
SAF Trial
Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF) is an umbrella term used to
describe alternative low carbon aviation fuels that are made from
biological sources, such as waste cooking oils and waste byproducts,
rather than being purely derived from petroleum as conventional
aviation fuels like Jet-A1 are.
The engine (Pratt and Whitney) and aircraft (De Havilland Canada)
manufacturers have both approved the use of SAF in the BAS
aircraft fleet of Twin Otters (DHC6-300) and Dash 7 (DHC-7 110).
Use of SAF can provide significant carbon emission reductions and
promotion of the circular economy (when derived from waste
products). SAFs are designed as ‘drop-in’ fuels, so do not
require changes to be made to existing aircraft or airport
infrastructure, as long as SAFs when used by aircraft are blended
with traditional aviation fuel up to a maximum threshold of 50%.
SAF can be blended with traditional jet fuel for any ratio from 2% -
50%, which will impact on the expected carbon emission associated
with the use of the fuel.
Using an assumed SAF blend of 35% SAF and 65% avtur could
provide an approximate carbon saving of 28%. As BAS are still in
the early stages of the procurement process, we do not yet have a
confirmed SAF blend with which to forecast expected carbon
emission reductions resulting from the trial.
BAS have been granted £500,000 to conduct a SAF trial in the
24-25 financial year. The details of this trial are still being
confirmed, but the trial aims to:
Determine procurement strategy for purchasing SAF, including
identification of potential suppliers with sustainable supply chain,
robust credentials and external verification of authenticity.
Establish which infrastructure at BAS will use the fuel in addition to
aircraft –vehicles and/or stations and determine any barriers and
opportunities to different areas using SAF.
Investigate availability of different SAF types and blends and
determine what will be most suitable (if any) for BAS to use
business-as-usual.
Measure performance against multiple KPIs including; storage
properties, carbon savings, wider environmental impacts, sourcing
and cost.
Summary
BAS trial of alternative fuels has demonstrated that:
HVO can be successfully used in polar research vessels to
significantly lower carbon emissions without impacting ship
performance. 
Extensive due diligence was needed to ensure that the HVO was
sourced from genuine waste materials and not from materials that
forced land use change and consequent impacts on biodiversity.
ISCC certified fuel was sourced.
HVO is considerably more expensive financially to use and is
limited in availability.
Further use of alternative fuels is planned within BAS, specifically
SAF use in aircraft, and SAF trials in vehicles and/or stations.
Recommendations
The UK recommends that:
Parties note the benefit of using sustainably sourced alternative
fuels to reducing carbon emissions and consider trialling alternative
fuel use in their operations.
Parties share the results of their experience in alternative fuel trial
or use.
Operators of gateway ports consider improving the availability and
traceability of alternative fuels increasing their accessibility for
Antarctic operations.
