Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 160 Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes
Land, East Antarctica
ASPA No. 160 Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, East
Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2003)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 13 (2008), Measure 14 (2013)
Current management plan:
Measure 14 (2013), CEP XXII (2019) agreed the existing
management plan would remain in place with the next review to be
initiated in 2024
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes – changes to captions and graphics to represent removal of
infrastructure, and updates to wildlife distributions and publication
details
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Introduction revised to omit information not directly relevant to
Area, include minor editorial changes
Section 1 revised to include minor editorial changes
Section 2 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 3 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 4 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 5 revised to reflect updated maps
Section 6 revised to omit information not directly relevant to Area,
include minor editorial changes
Section 7 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans (including RPAS recommended wording), and
include Area-specific conditions
Section 8 revised to update and consistently format references
Appendix 1 minor editorial changes
Appendix 2 minor editorial changes
Appendix 3 minor editorial changes
Editorial amendments made throughout the document
Map A caption updated
Map B caption and wildlife distributions updated, structures
removed
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2(c) – Areas with important or unusual assemblages of
species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or
mammals
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
N/A
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes – Biogeographic Region 7 East Antarctica
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
N/A
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 160 Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes
Land, East Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has
undertaken a five-yearly review of the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 160 Frazier Islands,
Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. The review was
conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following
sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor
amendments to the Management Plan. Australia recommends that
the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
The Frazier Islands are situated in the Windmill Islands region on
the Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. ASPA 160 Frazier
Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica, which
comprises three islands (Nelly Island, Dewart Island and Charlton
Island), is located approximately 18 km offshore from Australia’s
Casey station, and was originally designated under Measure 2
(2003) following a proposal made by Australia. Revised
Management Plans were adopted under Measure 13 (2008) and
Measure 14 (2013). Following a five-yearly review conducted by
Australia, CEP XXII (2019) agreed the existing Management Plan
would remain in force with the next review to be initiated in 2024.
The Area is primarily designated to protect the breeding population
of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), which is the
largest known in the continental Antarctic. The Frazier Islands are
one of only four known breeding localities of southern giant petrels
around the coastline of continental Antarctica and are the only
known site in nearly 3000 km of coastline between Australia’s Davis
station and France’s Dumont d’Urville station.
Review of Management Plan
During the process of this review, subject matter experts and
personnel permitted to enter the Area during the past five years
were consulted. Regulatory and operational advice was also sought,
a literature review conducted, and associated maps updated. The
proposed revisions to the Management Plan are intended to
enhance protection of the values that the Area was designated to
protect.
Summary of amendments to Management Plan for ASPA 160
A revised Management Plan for ASPA 160 is presented at
Attachment A. Only minor changes are proposed and there are no
changes to the Area boundary. Proposed amendments are
summarised as follows:
Introduction revised to omit information not directly relevant to
Area, include minor editorial changes
Section 1 revised to include minor editorial changes
Section 2 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 3 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 4 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 5 revised to reflect updated maps
Section 6 revised to omit information not directly relevant to Area,
include minor editorial changes
Section 7 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans (including standard wording on use of remotely
piloted aircraft systems (RPAS)), and include Area-specific
conditions
Section 8 revised to update and consistently format references
Appendix 1 minor editorial changes
Appendix 2 minor editorial changes
Appendix 3 minor editorial changes
Editorial amendments made throughout the document
Map A caption updated
Map B caption updated, structures removed.
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
Management Plan for ASPA 160 Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands,
Wilkes Land, East Antarctica.
