Report on the informal ICG to develop an ASPA Draft Management
Plan for the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge (Dronning Maud Land, East
Antarctica)
TEMPLATE A: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON AN
ASPA OR ASMA
Please ensure that the following information is provided on the
cover sheet:
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? Note: this
information may be found on the ATS website in the Documents
database by searching under the name of the area. While the ATS
has made every effort to ensure the completeness and accuracy of
the information in the database, occasional errors or omissions may
occur. The proponents of any revision to a protected area are best
placed to know the history of that area, and are kindly requested to
contact the Secretariat if they notice any apparent discrepancy
between the regulatory history as they understand it and that
displayed on the ATS database.
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as a SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(a), (b), (c), (e) and (g) of Article 3.2 of Annex V
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes, U - North Victoria Land geologic and T - Inland continental
geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes, ACBR 6 - Dronning Maud Land
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
Yes, ANT113: Gruber Mountains
Report on the informal ICG to develop an ASPA Draft Management
Plan for the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge (Dronning Maud Land, East
Antarctica)
Working Paper submitted by Germany and the United States of
America
Summary
After compiling a first Draft Management Plan for the new ASPA
proposal Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge, Germany and the United States
opened an Informal ICG asking experts to comment on the Draft
Management Plan. After finishing the discussion and considering
the incoming comments, an updated Draft Management Plan (see
Attachment) was compiled. At ATCM XLVI - CEP XXVI Treaty
Parties are recommended to (1) take note of the Draft Management
Plan for the proposed ASPA at the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge (see
Attachment) and to agree that the Draft Management Plan will be
passed on to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans for further
intersessional considerations.
Introduction
In May 2022, at ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV Germany and the United
States submitted WP12 ‘Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic
Specially Protected Area at Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge (Dronning
Maud Land, East Antarctica)’. The Treaty Parties agreed on the
proposed Prior-assessment for Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge and the
Committee ‘welcomed the prior assessment and encouraged
Members to work with the proponents towards a management plan
during the intersessional period’. Further, it was stated that ‘In reply
to a concern about older data on snow petrels and the size of the
proposed site, Germany mentioned that an expedition was planned
for 2022-23 to gather more data. Germany expressed its
appreciation for offers of assistance from Members and IAATO in
further work.’ (see paragraphs 111-112 of the Final Report CEP
XXIV and WP12 XLIV ATCM).
In order to gather new data on the Area, German scientists from
ThINK and the University of Jena, in November/December 2022,
carried out an expedition to the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge, Dronning
Maud Land (see also ATCM XLV – CEP XXV IP060 submitted by
Germany). As a result, the collected data, e.g. about the actual size
of the local snow petrel population (Rümmler et al. 2024), were
used to extend the data basis for the compilation of the Draft
Management Plan.
Report on the Informal ICG
In October 2023, the proponents and conveners of the Informal ICG,
Germany and the United States, kindly invited experts (scientists,
environmental experts, ASOC, SCAR, IAATO representatives) to
comment on the first Draft Management Plan for the Otto-von-
Gruber-Gebirge which they had compiled beforehand. After
evaluating and considering the incoming comments and proposals
from the experts, the conveners updated the Draft Management
Plan two times.
Recommendations
Germany and the United States of America recommend that the CEP
and the Treaty Parties:
take note of the present Draft Management Plan for the proposed
Antarctic Specially Protected Area at the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge
(Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica) at Attachment,
agree that the Draft Management Plan will be passed on to the
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) for further
intersessional considerations.
References
Rümmler, M.-C., Esefeld, J., Pfeifer, C., Mustafa, O., (2024) Survey
of a snow petrel nesting site in a remote high mountain region to
inform designation of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area. Front.
Conserv. Sci., https://doi.org/10.3389/fcosc.2024.1298962
