Proposal for Beginning the Development of a Framework for the
Regulation of Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in
Antarctica
Proposal for Beginning the Development of a Framework for the
Regulation of Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in
Antarctica
Summary
At ATCM XLV, the Representatives decided “to start a dedicated
process to develop a comprehensive and consistent framework for
the regulation of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica.” Decision 6 (2023). This Working Paper proposes a
Resolution through which the Parties can articulate the concepts
and considerations that should be addressed in any effective
framework. The Resolution would guide the development of the
framework, providing direction on information that should be
gathered and issues that should be addressed. After adopting a
resolution, the Consultative Parties can begin to consider the form
that an effective framework should take.
Background
At ATCM XLV, the Representatives decided “to start a dedicated
process to develop a comprehensive and consistent framework for
the regulation of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica.” Decision 6 (2023). Decision 6 (2023) also established a
“Special Working Group on the Development of a Tourism
Framework”, which will have its first meeting of two days during
ACTM 46. Further, the Representatives invited all Consultative
Parties to develop proposals prior to the convening of ATCM 46.
This Working Paper is prepared in response to that invitation.
Decision 6 (2023) reflected widely held concern among the
Consultative Parties regarding increasing levels of tourism in the
Antarctic Treaty area. Current estimates suggest that almost
120,000 tourists will visit the area in the 2023/2024 austral season,
a number that represents an approximately 57% increase over
2019-2020, the last full pre-pandemic season. It is of critical
importance that the Parties engage meaningfully now on the risks
posed by tourism, in order to ensure that such risks are addressed,
and to mitigate the potential for adverse environmental or human
safety impacts.
The majority of tourists who visit Antarctica are from the United
States, and more Antarctica tour operators are from the United
States than from any other country. With a mandate to protect the
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, as
well as to protect our nationals, the United States supports the
development of a framework for the regulation of tourism and other
non-governmental activities in Antarctica. It is unclear at this time
what form the framework should eventually take (e.g., a non-legally
binding set of intentions, a binding set of commitments, an
amendment or addition to an existing instrument). Once a
conceptual approach has been developed and accepted, the Parties
will be in the best position to determine the appropriate form for
the framework.
Proposal
There is a wide range of matters that should be addressed in any
potential framework for the regulation of tourism and other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica. This Working Paper proposes
that development of the framework embody a conceptual approach
that may, if appropriate, evolve into a more detailed arrangement
at a later time. To that end, the Working Paper proposes that the
Parties include the following concepts in the framework.
Data and information collection and use
While taking action based on the best scientific and technical advice
available in accordance with Article 10(1) of the Environmental
Protocol, the Parties can simultaneously also consider what
improvements could and should be made to data and information
collection and analysis to support science and policy development.
Examples could include improved presentation of data on the
numbers of tourists and tour vessels by location and activity, such
as Post Visit Report data being made available by the Secretariat for
all past years on the number of visitors by activity by site. The
Parties could also consider new approaches to increasing data and
information collection on impacts to the environment by tourists,
tour vessels and tourism activities. Further, data from reliable non-
governmental sources can be used to inform the framework as
appropriate.
Site-specific Information
The Parties can consider a more consistent approach to updating
and improving information available to tourists and non-
governmental actors regarding appropriate activities at sites in the
Antarctic Treaty area. While consistent updating of all Site
Guidelines for Visitors is an important goal, it makes sense to
prioritize such updates for highly visited sites, in light of the growth
in tourism. Further, consistent presentation of the information
about activities that are environmentally acceptable and safe (e.g.,
in the form of a checklist) will improve outcomes, as would creating
Site Guidelines for Visitors for tourist sites that do not currently
have them. See ATCM XLIII Resolution 4 (2021) and ATCM 46 WP
52 Strengthening the usefulness of Site Guidelines for Visitors.
Voluntary On-board Observer Program
As France, New Zealand, and IAATO reported (ATCM XLV IP 105
Feedback on the monitoring on board tourist vessels conducted
during the 2022/2023 season), monitoring carried out in
accordance with Resolution 9 (2021) Voluntary on-board observer
operational framework for vessel-based tourism in the Antarctic
Treaty Area resulted in the identification of a range of benefits and
challenges. The voluntary on-board observer program is an
excellent way of identifying issues and determining additional
tourism-related protections that should be considered, while also
encouraging compliance with protections already in place. Broad
participation in the Voluntary On-Board Observer Program should
be encouraged. See ATCM XLIII Resolution 9 (2021).
Specific Tourism Topics
A new framework should reaffirm or expand existing tourism-
related Measures, Resolutions and Guidelines.
Beyond that, the Parties may wish to consider any number of other
tourism matters for inclusion in the framework provisions, taking
into account the best available science and data on environmental
impacts and potential safety and environmental risks. This Working
Paper proposes that the Parties develop a list of topics that should
be explored for potential inclusion. Examples of such topics for
further discussion and consideration include: limiting the numbers
of ships or tourists that can be in a particular area during a
particular time period; exploring a fee structure to be collected by
tour operators and provided to the Secretariat to support tourism
management; analysing the impact of various tourism activities;
examining how tourism and non-governmental activities implicate
national program infrastructure, including with regard to safety and
accessibility; and improving and implementing environmental
monitoring programs. This Working Paper proposes that the Parties
develop an annex to the resolution listing topics for further
consideration in an eventual tourism framework.
Recommendation
This Working Paper recommends that the Parties determine the
concepts they wish to address in an eventual tourism framework,
and adopt the resolution below to reflect that determination. The
resolution would include an Annex to be developed by the Parties
during their discussions.
Resolution X (2024)
Considerations for Developing a Framework for the Regulation of
Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica
The Representatives,
Noting that in Article 2 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”), the Parties committed
themselves to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and
designated Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and
science;
Acknowledging that the concerns arising from, inter alia, the
growth, diversification and compliance in relation to Antarctic
tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica require
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (“ATCM”) with urgency
to take action consistent with the Treaty and the Protocol;
Recalling that ATCM XLV adopted Decision 6 (2023) to start a
dedicated process for the development of a comprehensive and
consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and other non-
governmental activities;
Reaffirming that protection of the environment is essential, and that
we must act with precaution to preserve Antarctica for future
generations;
Underscoring that the Environmental Protocol calls on the Parties to
rely upon the best scientific and technical advice available to take
action to protect the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems, with regard for the safety of human life in
the Treaty area;
Noting the current estimated number of almost 120,000 tourists
who have visited the Antarctic Treaty area in the 2023/2024 austral
season, which represents an approximately 57% increase over
2019-2020, the last full pre-pandemic season;
Acknowledging that previous discussions of Antarctic tourism have
often focused on a single issue or location, which has resulted in an
inability to measure the broad and cumulative effects on the
environment of Antarctic tourism or to address tourism as a system;
Desiring to develop a framework for the regulation of tourism and
other non-governmental activities in Antarctica (hereinafter
“tourism framework”) that addresses the risks posed by the growth
and change in tourism activities in Antarctica in an expeditious
manner;
Recommend that their Governments:
1. improve data and information collection and use in support of a
tourism framework, while acting in reliance upon the best scientific
and technical advice available.
2. update and improve information available to tourists and non-
governmental actors regarding appropriate activities at sites in the
Antarctic Treaty area. This effort should include updating the Site
Guidelines for Visitors every five years for the twenty most-
visited sites, and eventually other sites, in a consistent manner that
presents information on activities that are environmentally
acceptable and safe.
3. encourage participation in the Voluntary On-board Observer
Program.
4. taking into account the best available science and data on
environmental impacts and potential safety and environmental
risks, consider for inclusion framework provisions on the topics
listed in Annex A.
