Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South
Shetland Islands
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South
Shetland Islands
Working Paper submitted by Poland
Summary
Poland has conducted a review of the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 151 Lions Rump,
King George Island, South Shetland Islands and has determined that
only minor amendments are needed. Poland recommends that the
CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
Poland has conducted a review of the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 151 Lions Rump,
King George Island, South Shetland Islands, in accordance with
Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty and the ‘Revised Guide to the Preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’
appended to Resolution 2 (2011).
ASPA No. 151 Lions Rump (62°08’S; 58°07’W) was originally
designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No 34 through
Recommendation XVI-2 (1991, SSSI No 34) after a proposal by
Poland on the grounds that it contains diverse biota and geological
features and is a representative example of the terrestrial,
limnological, and littoral habitats of the maritime Antarctic.
The current review revealed that the outstanding ecological and
scientific value of these Area has been maintained, and they
continue to remain valid.
The new aerial images acquired on 10.02.2024 using a remotely
piloted aircraft system enabled us to make a detailed orthomosaic
of the area and allowed for correction of the area boundary. After
the corrections involving the same topographic points, due to the
greater detail of the base material, the boundary is slightly larger
than originally approved and amounts to 1.61 km2. This newly
created color map also replaced the previous version (Map 2. Lions
Rump in greater detail), which contained inaccurate borders. The
format of the map has also changed to show the details of the area.
The revised Management Plan and improved map for ASPA No. 151
are attached. There are no major changes to the Management Plan.
Minor amendments are summarized as follows:
Information within the Description of the Area has been updated,
including information on bird and mammal population counts.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the ‘Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’.
Recommendation
Poland requests that the Committee for Environmental Protection
recommend the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting approval of
the attached revised Management Plan and map for ASPA No. 151
Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
ASPA No. 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland
Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 151
First designation:
Recommendation XVI-2 (1991, SSSI No 34)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-2
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000), Measure 11 (2013), Measure 5 (2019)
Current management plan:
Measure 5 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland
Islands
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 1 (1998), Decision 4 (1998), Decision 1 (2002), Decision
9 (2005), Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. The boundary was applied to the newly created high-resolution
orthomosaic and detailed based on it. The corrected boundary
includes the same land points. Based on the orthomosaic, the
extreme boundary points were updated.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
A new detailed map of the area based on the orthomosaic made on
10.02.2024 was proposed.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. Due to the retreat of the White Eagle Glacier, the boundary
now ends at the foreland of the glacier, as clearly indicated in the
text
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to
it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of
or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Description of the Area has been updated, including information on
bird and mammal populations within the Area.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the ‘Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(a)  areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future
comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected
by human activities;
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Yes. Environment A – Antarctic Peninsula northern geologic;
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
Yes. Region 3 – North-west Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
No.
