Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 -
Svarthamaren
ASPA No. 142 Svarthamaren
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (1999)
Measure 2 (2004)
Measure 8 (2009)
Measure 8 (2014)
Measure 4 (2019)
Current management plan:
Measure 4 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation 3 (1996)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 142
Other relevant measures:
None
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
None
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Further work to make map user-friendly, and adjustments in the
indication of main breeding areas of the seabirds that are the main
protection target for the ASPA.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
None
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Minor modifications in the Introduction to reflect changes in colony
size.
Added objectives to i) aiming to understand ongoing decrease in
colony size and ii) aiming to avoid introduction pathogens which
may cause disease (Section 2).
Noting the need to provide information about boundaries (Section
3).
Map information has been updated to reflect new maps (Section 5).
The numbers of breeding birds in the seabird colonies have been
modified on basis of new knowledge (Section 6 (i)).
Information about new instrumentation has been added (Section 6
(iii)).
Noting if allowing other research than primary research such
research cannot be carried out elsewhere (Section 7 (ii)).
Allow, if required, posting of warning signs informing about danger
of rock avalanches (Section 7 (ii)).
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (ie, which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
To avoid human induced changes to the population structure,
composition and size of the seabird colonies present at the site, to
allow for undisturbed research on the adaptations of the Antarctic
petrel, snow petrel and south polar skua to the inland conditions in
Antarctica.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))?
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes, both Environments T- Inland continental geologic - and U-
North Victoria Land geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))?
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes, Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region 6 – Dronning
Maud Land
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
Yes, IBA 112 Svarthamaren
Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)
No. 142 - Svarthamaren
Summary
The management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) No. 142 Svarthamaren Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning
Maud Land has been reviewed in accordance with the provisions in
Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty. No substantive changes to the plan are proposed.
Changes are mostly editorial in nature, and Norway recommends
that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for
ASPA No. 142 and forwards it to the ATCM for adoption.
Introduction
Norway has conducted a review of the management plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 Svarthamaren,
Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land in accordance with the
provisions in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty.
The review process for the ASPA has been completed and is
described in this paper. A draft revised plan for the Area is
attached.
The Area
Svarthamaren is protected for its seabird colonies, in particular the
colony of Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica), which
constitutes a large proportion of the known world population of
Antarctic petrel and which is one of the largest known inland
seabird colony on the Antarctic continent, although currently
experiencing a negative trend in the colony size. The area was first
designated in 1987 (Recommendation XIV-5) as Site of Special
Scientific Interest No. 23. The management plan was last revised in
2019 (Measure 4 (2019)).
Review of Activities
Four permits to enter the Area have been issued in the period since
the last revision of the management plan. These permits have been
granted for scientific field work connected with the Norwegian
Polar Institute’s regular population monitoring program, including
the establishment of an automated camera-based monitoring
infrastructure.
Assessment of Area
Norwegian researchers who have worked in the Area since its
designation have been involved in the assessment as to whether
information in the management plan still is current and whether the
values identified have changed since the last revision. In general, it
has been assessed that the values of the Area are still warrant
continued protection.
It should be noted that the last decade of monitoring (2015-2024)
has shown that the productivity (number of chicks produced/year)
of Antarctic petrels at Svarthamaren shows large inter-annual
fluctuations but has been generally declining and much lower than
in the 1990s. Preliminary information about this situation was
submitted to the CEP in 2016 through ATCM
XXXIX IP113 (Norway). It is yet too early to provide solid
explanations for the decline, which indicates that continued regular
monitoring is warranted in order to capture the variability in the
Area and consequently give an accurate picture of trend and status
of the colony. In the austral summer of 2021/2022 exceptional
storm activity caused almost complete and large-scale breeding
failures in the Area (Descamps, 2023), with breeding activity back
to normal in the 2022/23 season.
Proposed Revision
The Management Plan text has been modified. The changes include:
Maps
The maps have been updated with a better topographic basis and
adjustments in the indication of main breeding areas of the seabirds
that are the main protection target for the ASPA.
Introduction
Seabird population numbers have been updated to reflect changes
in colony size.
Section 2: Objectives and aims
Adding objectives to i) understand ongoing decrease in colony size
and ii) avoid risk of pathogen introductions that can lead to disease.
Section 3: Management activities
Text noting the need to provide pre-visit information about
boundaries in lieu of boundary markers and information sign.
Section 5: Maps and illustrations
Map information has been updated to reflect new maps.
Section 6: Description of area
The numbers of breeding birds in the seabird colonies have been
modified on basis of new knowledge (Section 6 i).
Information about new instrumentation has been added (Section 6
iii).
Section 7: Permit conditions
Text noting that only research that cannot be carried out elsewhere
should be allowed if other research than primary research is
allowed (in addition to previous requirement that it should not
negatively impact primary monitoring and research activity).
Text allowing, if required, posting of warning signs informing about
danger of rock avalanches.
Conclusion and proposal
No substantive changes to the text of the management plan for
ASPA No. 142 Svarthamaren have been proposed, although note in
particular that:
the maps have been updated to make maps more user-friendly, and
adjustments in the indication of main breeding areas of the seabirds
that are the main protection target for the ASPA;
additional objectives have been included to i) aiming to understand
ongoing decrease in colony size and ii) aiming to avoid introduction
pathogens which may cause disease.
The changes made are mostly of an editorial nature, and Norway
proposes that CEP 26 approves the attached revised management
plan for ASPA No. 142 Svarthamaren and forwards it to ATCM 56
for adoption.
References:
Sébastien Descamps, Stephen Hudson, Joanna Sulich, Ewan
Wakefield, David Grémillet, Alice Carravieri, Sebastian Orskaug,
Harald Steen. 2023.Extreme snowstorms lead to large-scale seabird
breeding failures in Antarctica. Current Biology. Volume 33, Issue
5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2022.12.055.
