Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No. 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand has
conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA 154: Botany
Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land.
The review was conducted as a desktop exercise with reference to
Annex V of the Protocol and the Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
Resolution 2 (2011).
The management plan was circulated for comment to scientists and
environmental managers of National Antarctic Programmes
operating within the Ross Sea region who conduct research in the
Area and have visited the site, including China, Italy, Korea, New
Zealand and the United States.
The revisions are minor and outlined in the table below.
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached
revised Management Plan for ASPA 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology,
Victoria Land.
ASPA 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
ASPA
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 37, Botany Bay by
Measure 3 (1997)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 3 (1997)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Measure 11 (2008)
Measure 12 (2013)
Current management plan:
Measure 6 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land
Other relevant measures:
Designation of HSM 67 Granite House by Measure 4 (1995)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
This ASPA is within the boundaries of ASMA 2, but the changes do
not impact the ASMA.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Introduction: Minor editorial edits.
Section 1: Minor editorial edits.
Section 6(i-v): Minor editorial updates.
Section 7 (ii) Inclusion of statement to prohibit RPAS use except in
accordance with a permit.
Section 7(iii-xi) Minor updates for consistency with ‘Guide to the
preparation of Managements Plans’(Resolution 2, 2011)
Section 7 (xi) Updated text for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 8: Minor edits
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation is to protect ‘the Area's unusual
ecological features and its exceptional scientific and historic values.’
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis
for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
EDA: Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))?
Yes
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
ACBR: Region 9 – South Victoria Land
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
No
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.)
N/A
