Redesign of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES)
Redesign of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES)
Summary
This paper proposes that the ATCM initiate a comprehensive review
of the information exchange requirements, established by Decision
4 (2023), in order to further ensure that such exchange takes place
in a simple and efficient manner, and to facilitate the ATCM having
access to the most complete, reliable and necessary information on
Antarctica in formats that allow for a rapid and thorough
understanding of the information exchanged. The presentation of
this document responds to the decreasing trend in the use of the
Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) of the Antarctic
Treaty observed during the last decade.
Background
The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) set up the
Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) in 2012 in
accordance with the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes.
Since then, the Parties have worked with the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat (ATS) to refine and enrich the EIES.
The document submitted by the Secretariat to ATCM XLV, SP8
“Review of the use of the EIES”, highlighted the decrease in or low
use of many sections of the EIES. In fact, according to this review,
there has been a decrease of more than 20% in the number of
Parties that have submitted their annual report in the last decade.
Articles III (1)(a) and VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty refer to the
Parties’ agreement for the exchange of information. Since
Recommendation VIII-6 (1975) initially established a standard
format for annual exchanges of information, and Decision 10 (2005)
created the Electronic Information Exchange System, many
modifications have been made to facilitate and optimise the EIES,
the latest being Decision 4 (2023).
Over the past decade, the ATCM has intensively discussed
improving exchange requirements. In fact it was one of the priority
items of the ATCM multi-year strategic work plan between 2013
and 2018. Four Intersessional Contact Groups (ICGs) have
addressed the issue of information exchange since 2012, the last in
2022-2023 with the aim of improving the scientific information
exchanged.
It is also important to consider that some of the current exchange
requirements derive from regulations established more than 60
years ago; current communication between the Parties is more
continuous, fluid and effective and the use and usefulness that the
large amount of information exchanged offers to the Parties is not
clear.
EIES Exchange Requirements
Decision 4 (2012) decided that Parties shall update, on a regular
basis throughout the year, relevant sections of the EIES so that the
information might be known and accessible and made available to
Parties as soon as possible. This information is divided into three
categories in the EIES:
Pre-season Information
Annual Report
Permanent Information
Decision 4 (2023) adopts the most recent consolidated list
specifying the information to be exchanged by the Parties.
As indicated in the analysis provided by the Treaty Secretariat in
SP008 (ATCM XLV), the efforts made by Parties during the last
decade do not seem to have been enough to improve the level of
information exchange.
Recommendation and proposal
In order to simplify, update and promote compliance with the
information exchange requirements, it is recommended that the
ATCM agree to initiate a comprehensive review of said
requirements, established by Decision 4 (2023), to continue to
ensure that such exchange is carried out in a simple and efficient
manner, and to facilitate the ATCM's access to the most complete,
reliable and necessary information on Antarctica in formats that
allow for a rapid and comprehensive understanding of the
information exchanged.
To this end, it is proposed to request from the ATS a detailed
analysis of the requirements for the exchange of information given
in the annex to Decision 4 (2023), which includes, among other
issues, the possibility of processing the data received through the
EIES, the clarity of each requirement, the possible duplication with
information provided through other bodies such as SCAR and
COMNAP, possible inconsistencies between categories of
information and the current degree of compliance with each
requirement.
From this analysis the Parties may:
identify outdated, unnecessary and repeated requirements;
ensure that information is exchanged in a simple and efficient
manner;
simplify the information exchanged as much as possible;
recognise the usefulness of the information exchanged.
The ATS will present these analysis results to the 47th ATCM.
