Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Italy has
undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 161 Terra Nova Bay,
Ross Sea (Northern Victoria Land). The following sections briefly
describe the Area, and the minor amendments to the previous
management plan. The revision of the management plan confirms
the outstanding values of the Area and its need of protection against
direct human impacts.
Background
ASPA No. 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea is a coastal marine area
encompassing 29.4 km2 between Adélie Cove and Tethys Bay, Terra
Nova Bay, south of the Italian Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS). The
site remains ice-free in summer, a rare feature for coastal areas in
the Ross Sea region, making it an ideal and accessible site for
research into the rich near-shore benthic communities with sponge
and anthozoan communities showing a unique structure. High
diversity at both species and community levels makes this Area of
high ecological and scientific value. The region is particularly
vulnerable to disturbance by pollution, over-sampling and alien
introductions.
Review of Management Plan
No major changes to the Management Plan is proposed. The review
of the Management Plan involved a literature review, and
consultation with scientists permitted to enter the Area during the
past five years. The literature has significantly improved, reflecting
the extensive research carried out in this outstanding area, as
shown also by the long reference list reported at the end of the
revised plan. The main change respect to the previous management
plan regards the update of section 6(i) Description of the Area and
of the Marine benthic communities, including the insertion of a new
Table listing species and new taxa (together with their type locality
and reference) investigated within the ASPA.
Bird, fish and mammals section reports new findings on
Pleuragramma distribution and nursery; Environmental
characterization section includes an update on long-term
monitoring activities using non-destructive sampling techniques
such as ROV, benthic cameras and ROV surveys.
Human activities have been updated to include the presence of the
new year-round Qinling Chinese station at Inexpressible Island.
ASPA No. 178 Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay has been
included as a new protected area in the vicinity of ASPA 161.
Recommendation
Italy recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
Management Plan for ASPA No. 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
(Northern Victoria Land).
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? Note: this
information may be found on the ATS website in the Documents
database by searching under the name of the area. While the ATS
has made every effort to ensure the completeness and accuracy of
the information in the database, occasional errors or omissions may
occur. The proponents of any revision to a protected area are best
placed to know the history of that area, and are kindly requested to
contact the Secretariat if they notice any apparent discrepancy
between the regulatory history as they understand it and that
displayed on the ATS database.
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2003)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 14 (2008)
Measure 15 (2013)
Measure 7 (2019)
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Minor editorial changes have been made throughout the text.
The main substantial change regards the update of section 6(i).
Description of the Area.
In Marine benthic communities (0-500
m) a table listing species and new taxa (together with type locality
and reference) studied within the ASPA has been included;
Bird, fish and mammals section reports new findings on
Pleuragramma distribution and nursery; Environmental
characterization section includes an update on long-term
monitoring activities using non-destructive sampling techniques
such as ROV, benthic cameras and ROV surveys.
Human activities have been updated to include the presence of the
new year-round Qinling Chinese station at Inexpressible Island.
6(iv) Location of other protected areas in the vicinity section now
includes ASPA No. 178 Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay.
8. References and relevant supporting bibliography has been widely
updated to account for the substantial scientific research carried out
within the ASPA during the last 5 years
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
Yes/No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Yes/No
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
Yes/No
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
E - areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes ASPA 161 is listed within the Environmental Domain S and T in
Morgan F. et al. (2014) Environmental Domains of Antarctica
Version 2.0, Final Report.
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
No
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
ASPA 161 protects adjacent Important Bird Area 177 Adélie Cove
