Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George
Island, South Shetland Islands
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George
Island, South Shetland Islands
Working Paper submitted by Poland and the United States of
America
Summary
Poland and the United States have conducted a review of the
Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.
128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South
Shetland Islands, and have determined that only minor amendments
are required. Poland and the United States recommend that the CEP
approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
Poland and the United States have conducted a review of the
Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.
128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South
Shetland Islands, in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the ‘Revised
Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas’ appended to Resolution 2 (2011).
ASPA No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay (16.8 km2, centered
at 62° 11' 50" S, 58° 27' 40" W)) was designated Site of Special
Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 8 in Recommendation X-5 (1979) after
a proposal by Poland, primarily to protect ecological and scientific
values. In particular, large and diverse avian and mammalian fauna
and locally rich vegetation are present, and the Area is a
representative example of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem. Long
term scientific research has been, and continues to be, carried out
within the Area. These values are vulnerable to human disturbance
(e.g. oversampling, disturbance to wildlife, introduction of non-
native species).
The current review finds the outstanding ecological and scientific
values have been maintained and continue to remain valid. The
small area of the non-native grass species Poa annua identified
within the Area at the previous management plan review has been
given priority management attention since 2014 and all known
plants within the Area have now been removed. Monitoring of this
situation is on-going.
Since the last review the non-native fly Trichocera maculipennis has
been identified at a few localities within the Area. It is not yet
known whether the population present within the Area is breeding,
and investigations are on-going. The fly is present at other localities
on King George Island and strategies for eradication are being
developed in collaboration with other National Antarctic Programs
active on King George Island.
Glacial recession as a result of climate change has continued to
occur since the previous review, and as a result the coastline
forming the eastern boundary of the Area has altered. This coastline
has been updated using recent satellite imagery, and as a result the
boundary has also changed along the coast where glaciers have
retreated. The new imagery enabled mapping improvements to
coastline details, and the coastal boundary of the Area and the maps
have been revised accordingly.
The revised Management Plan and maps for ASPA No. 128 are
attached. There are no major changes to the Management Plan.
Minor amendments are summarised as follows:
Supporting Information has been updated.
Information within the Description of the Area has been updated,
including information on bird and mammal population counts, on
vegetation within the Area, and on the number of tourists visiting
Arctowski Station. New details on non-native species observed
within the Area are provided.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the ‘Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’.
Recommendation
Poland and the United States request the Committee for
Environmental Protection to recommend to the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting approval of the attached revised Management
Plan and maps for ASPA No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay,
King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
ASPA No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island,
South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 128
First designation:
Recommendation X-5 (1979, SSSI No.8)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation X-5 (1979)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000), Measure 4 (2014), Measure 2 (2019)
Current management plan:
Measure 2 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985),
Resolution 7 (1995)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island,
South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:
Measure 2 (2006) Designation of ASMA No 1 (Admiralty Bay),
Resolution 2 (2011), Measure 14 (2014), Measure 1 (2023).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. The Eastern coastline boundary has been revised to reflect
glacial retreat as a result of climate change and improved mapping
data. The changes have not significantly affected the size of the
Area.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. See above re coastal changes. Wildlife locations have been
updated and locations of the non-native fly have been added.
Color versions of the maps replace the previous monochrome
versions, although map formats and layouts remain consistent.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. ASPA No.128 lies within ASMA No.1 Admiralty Bay and the
coastal changes as a result of glacial recession should in due course
be included in maps for the ASMA, although these changes do not
affect the ASMA boundary.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Supporting Documentation has been updated.
Description of the Area has been updated, including information on
bird and mammal populations, on vegetation within the Area, and
on the number of tourists visiting Arctowski Station. Details on non-
native species observed within the Area are provided in this section
of the management plan.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
Management Plans and with the ‘Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Yes. Environment A – Antarctic Peninsula northern geologic;
Environment E – Antarctic Peninsula, Alexander and other islands;
and Environment G – Antarctic Peninsula offshore islands
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
Yes. Region 3 – Northwest Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
Yes. IBA No. 046
