Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Summary Site
Requirements
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)
Summary Site Requirements
Working Paper submitted by the United States et al.
Summary
The United States et al. have observed that at some Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) there would be benefit to
providing permitted visitors with ‘Summary Site Requirements’ as a
practical aid to understanding and implementing the detailed
measures contained in the site Management Plan, as is required
when visits are made. This communication aid would be fully
consistent with, supplement and not in any way replace, the full
Management Plan. A template for ‘ASPA Summary Site
Requirements’ has been prepared using ASPA No.121 as a model
which could be applied wherever Parties may, at their option,
consider it useful at ASPAs for which they are responsible. The
‘ASPA Summary Site Requirements’ would, at the option of Parties,
be included as an annex to the full Management Plan, thus ensuring
they are always consistent as plans are reviewed, revised and
updated. The template is suggested for inclusion in the revised
Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2 (2011)).
Background
Article 5 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty requires Management Plans to be prepared for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs). The ASPA
Management Plan provides the justification for special protection,
sets the objectives of management, describes site features, and sets
measures to regulate activities within the area.
Article 5 specifies that Management Plans shall include, as
appropriate, a description of the values for which special protection
is required, the aims and objectives of management, management
activities, the period of designation, a description of the area,
identification of zones, maps, and supporting documentation. For
ASPAs, mandatory policies are also required on access, activities,
installations, field camps, materials brought in or removed, taking
of or harmful interference with flora and fauna, waste disposal, and
requirements for reports. Management Plans often include an
introduction which gives an overview of the site and the need for
protection. Reference lists, appendices with detailed data, and
photographs are often included.
Current Status of ASPA Management Plans
The general format for ASPA Management Plans under Annex V is
now well-established and is set out in the CEP Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas (Resolution 2 (2011)). The length of Management Plans
varies, depending on aspects such as the range of values, site size,
complexity, the inclusion of sub-sites and or restricted areas, the
extent of scientific knowledge available, and the nature of
management policies. Typically, plans are ~10 – 15 pages of text,
although with inclusion of supplementary materials they can extend
up to ~30 pages or more.
The depth and breadth of information contained in Management
Plans may be considered a strength, for this provides within one
document complete documentation of the site values, background
to scientific understanding of the area and its features, and all of
the measures vital for operations within an ASPA and for site
protection. However, after extensive experience in
the administration of ASPA management at a wide variety of sites
throughout the Antarctic, a possible disadvantage to this level of
detail when conducting practical activities in the field has been
observed.
Many visitors find the level of detail and complexity in the
complete Management Plan makes it more difficult for them to
access and understand the specific requirements essential for their
practical conduct of activities and protection of site values and
features. This may be particularly the case for support and logistics
personnel visiting ASPAs under a permit issued to principal
scientists or managers. Much detail in a Management Plan (e.g.,
reviews of scientific literature, history of site designation, lists of
nearby protected areas) is not directly relevant to the practicalities
of carrying out particular tasks on site, such as flying or landing a
helicopter, or helping to install instrumentation or construct a
camp. More simple and practical guidance focused on field
implementation of the requirements would be helpful for many
visitors.
The Proposal
It is noted that widespread use of Visitor Site Guidelines in
Antarctica has proven successful in facilitating practical site
management in the field outside of ASPAs. Summary guidance for
Restricted Zones has been set out within ASMA No.2 McMurdo Dry
Valleys and ASMA No.7 Palmer Basin and Southwest Anvers Island
Management Plans and has proven useful to communicate essential
management measures to visitors. A significant benefit of these
documents is that they are succinct and provide only the
information that is most essential to on-site management and
protection.
To address this need at ASPAs, it is suggested there would be
benefit to preparation of ‘ASPA Summary Site Requirements’
specifically for use by permitted personnel entering the ASPA. The
ASPA Summary Site Requirements would focus on the key reasons
for special protection and the practical requirements that need to be
followed to ensure this is achieved.
It is important to stress that the ASPA Summary Site Requirements
would not in any way replace the need for a full Management Plan,
which is essential for protection and management of sites. Rather,
the ASPA Summary Site Requirements are considered a tool to aid
implementation of the full Management Plan and make it even
more effective.
In particular, the ASPA Summary Site Requirements would not
relieve principal permit holders from their obligation to be fully
conversant with the full Management Plan. The ASPA Summary Site
Requirements would, however, help them to communicate the key
requirements for activities within the ASPA to members of their
team, including to support and logistics personnel.
It is recognized there is a large number of ASPAs and some are only
visited infrequently. Therefore, it is not envisaged that the ASPA
Summary Site Requirements would be needed at all ASPAs, and it is
not suggested they should be a mandatory requirement.
Rather, the ASPA Summary Site Requirements are proposed as an
optional tool for practical application only where Parties consider
there would be particular benefit. The intention in this paper is to
offer a model for how this could be implemented, as necessary and
on a voluntary basis, in a consistent manner across the Antarctic
protected areas system.
When implemented, the ASPA Summary Site Requirements as
proposed would form an Annex to the Management Plan under
Section 8 ‘Supporting documentation’. As such, review and update
of the ASPA Summary Site Requirements would be undertaken at
the same time as any
Management Plan review. This would ensure that ASPA Summary
Site Requirements are always fully consistent with all the
mandatory and advisory measures defined under the Management
Plan.
It is suggested that the format of the ASPA Summary Site
Requirements should aim to be presented on two pages, as
illustrated in the attached model for ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds.
However, it is recognized that in some cases this may not be
practical (e.g. those ASPAs with multiple sub-sites, zones, or with
more complex requirements). For those sites it is important to
ensure that all of the key measures are included in the ASPA
Summary Site Requirements rather than omit measures simply to
comply with a two-page format.
Notwithstanding the potential usefulness of the proposed ASPA
Summary Site Requirements at many sites, it should be noted that
Management Plans themselves should be prepared so they are as
succinct, practical and useful for site management as possible while
still retaining all of the detailed information and measures that are
essential for site protection.
Recommendations
The model ‘ASPA Summary Site Requirements’ attached in Annex A
is provided as a worked example of a standard format for
consideration for use at ASPAs as Parties deem appropriate at those
sites for which they are responsible,
The United States, et.al. recommend that the Committee for
Environmental Protection:
Notes the importance of ensuring that those entering ASPAs are
aware of the requirements of the Management Plan
Considers the attached template for endorsement as a
recommendation to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Agrees that ‘ASPA Summary Site Requirements’, if prepared, be
included as an Annex to the relevant ASPA Management Plans
Considers revising the Guide to the Preparation of Management
Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2 (2011))
to include the option of preparing ‘ASPA Summary Site
Requirements’ as an aid for those working in ASPAs.
