Proposed designation of the emperor penguin as an Antarctic
Specially Protected Species
Proposed designation of the emperor penguin as an Antarctic
Specially Protected Species
Working Paper submitted by Australia, France, Germany, Monaco,
New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States
Summary
Recent research has shown a decline in the emperor penguin
population in the period 2009-2018 and subsequent increasing
failure of emperor penguin colonies due to the break-up of the fast
ice upon which they breed. In light of these findings and earlier
advice from SCAR the Working Paper co-authors recommend that
the Committee:
recognises the detrimental impact of climate change on emperor
penguin population numbers and breeding success;
forwards the draft Specially Protected Species Action Plan for the
emperor penguin (appended to ATCMXLIV WP34) and SCAR’s
assessment of the conservation status of the emperor penguin as
vulnerable to the ongoing and projected effects of climate change
(as provided in ATCMXLIII WP37) to the ATCM for their
consideration;
recommends to the ATCM (i) the designation of the emperor
penguin as a Specially Protected Species under Annex II to the
Protocol through adoption of the draft Measure in Appendix A and
(ii) that it encourages Parties to undertake the timely
implementation of the Specially Protected Species Action Plan.
Background
Current population models, linked to Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) climate change predictions and based upon
the relationship between emperor penguins and sea-ice
concentration, suggest that the emperor penguin population will
decline dramatically across Antarctica by the end of this century
(Jenouvrier et al. 2021).
At CEP XXIII, SCAR introduced WP 37 Projections of future
population decline emphasise the need to designate the emperor
penguin as an Antarctic Specially Protected Species. SCAR described
how the primary threats to emperor penguins are loss of breeding
habitats and the profound transformation of the foraging habitat
associated with significant change in and loss of sea ice as a
consequence of climate change. In its review on the status of the
emperor penguin, SCAR found that the emperor penguin was
vulnerable to ongoing and projected climate change, which may be
exacerbated through additional human pressures to further degrade
the species’ conservation status, thereby warranting protection as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Species. SCAR recommended that the
Committee establish an ICG to review the draft Action Plan
prepared by SCAR (provided in Annex A to ATCMXLIII WP37) and
provide a draft Action Plan.
The Committee agreed to establish an ICG to prepare a draft Action
Plan for the emperor penguin, which was presented subsequently to
the Committee in ATCMXLIV WP34, together with SCAR’s
assessment of the emperor penguin’s conservation status as
‘vulnerable’ (see ATCMXLIII WP37). The Committee did not reach
consensus on the recommendation in ATCMXLIV WP34 to propose
the listing of the emperor penguin as a Specially Protected Species.
However, many Members and Observers expressed intent to use the
draft Action Plan provided in WP34 as guidance to support their
actions on the management of this species, including conducting
further monitoring of emperor penguin populations, and
encouraged other Members to do so (e.g., see ATCMXLV IP89).
Recent developments
Since 2016, spring and summer sea-ice extent and concentration in
all seasons around Antarctica have fallen significantly. Four of the
lowest sea-ice extent minima recorded occurred since 2016 and
both 2022 and 2023 had record low summer sea-ice extents.
Recording these events provides important evidence to inform
future assessment of the conservation of this species (ATCMXLV
WP52).
In a recent paper by La Rue et al. (2024), researchers combined
remote sensing, validation surveys, and using Bayesian modelling
estimated a comprehensive population trajectory over a recent 10-
year period (2009-2018), encompassing the entirety of the species’
range. This period was before the most dramatic decline in sea ice
that commenced in c. 2021. The research indicated a 9.6% decline
in penguin population over the study period.
In a further study, Fretwell (in press), presented a six-year
assessment (2018-2023) of the impact of low sea ice and early fast-
ice break-up on emperor penguin colonies around Antarctica.
Unlike the study by La Rue et al. (2024), this study period included
the recent years of record low sea ice around Antarctica. Using
satellite imagery, emperor penguin colonies can be located by the
brown staining on the ice, the result of their guano and a unique
identifier in this environment. Other seabirds do not breed on sea
ice and, therefore, any staining would correspond to an emperor
penguin colony. The satellite images also clearly show where the
fast ice broke up. Prior to fledging, emperor penguin eggs and
chicks are not able to survive seawater immersion. Therefore, it was
assumed that total sea ice break-up prior to fledging would result in
total or almost total breeding failure (i.e., egg or chick mortality). If
ice breaks up during the fledging period, then this is likely to have
an impact on fledging success, but the severity of that impact
cannot be assessed purely by satellite imagery. Therefore, three
classes of break-up were defined: break-up before fledging, break-
up during fledging and break-up after fledging. The exact dates of
fledging at each colony will vary and are not currently known, so a
conservative date for the beginning of fledging of 5 December was
used.
Satellite data showed that there was an increasing trend of colonies
affected by early ice loss from 2018 until 2023 (Figure 1). Emperor
penguin colony failure was at its highest levels in 2021- 2023
during which period record low sea ice extends were recorded (see
Table 1).
Figure 1. Maps showing the locations of colonies affected by early
fast-ice loss over the period 2018–2023. Purple dots show sites
where the ice broke up before 5 December (break-up before
fledging); orange dots show sites where the ice broke up between 5
December and 1 January (break-up during fledging); and light
green dot shows colony sites that were not affected by 1 January
(ice intact when fledging complete) (Fretwell et al., in press).
Table 1. The mean number of emperor penguin colonies each year
that either failed or were impacted due to the early break-up of
their fast ice breeding habitat.
2018-2020
2021-2023
(including years of record low sea ice extent)
Mean number of colonies per year that failed due to early ice loss
5.7
15.0
Mean number of colonies per year that experiencing full ice loss
before the fledging period
2.7
8.3
These results indicate a marked increase in the numbers of colonies
affected over the six-year period, which corresponded with years of
extremely low sea ice extent. Increasing numbers of colony failures
are likely to have further negative impacts upon emperor penguin
population numbers. However, the link between sea ice-related
breeding failure and overall Antarctic sea-ice extent should be
considered to be indicative rather than a direct relationship, with
regional and local effects and climatological considerations such as
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) strength and persistence also
being important.
Further considerations
It is noted that Specially Protected Species designation for the
emperor penguin will have little impact upon the changes in sea-ice
extent and duration recorded in recent years that have resulted in
emperor penguin colony failure.  However, Specially Protected
Species designation will provide an opportunity to manage human
activities in Antarctica in order to minimise any additional impacts
on the species.
The Guidelines for CEP Consideration of Proposals for New and
Revised Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected Species under
Annex II of the Protocol (2005; Annex 8 to CEP VIII Final Report)
make it clear that it is SCAR’s assessment of a species’ conservation
status, rather than that of the IUCN, that should determine whether
or not the CEP should recommend Specially Protected Species
designation to the ATCM. Furthermore, the criteria put forward in
the Guidelines need not be restrictive in allowing the CEP to act
with a precautionary approach given the availability of new
scientific information.
Conclusions
Recent research indicated a 9.6% decline in the emperor penguin
population during the period 2009-2018. Further research has
shown a marked increase in colony failure during the period
2018-2023, which included years of record low sea ice extent
towards the end of the study period. IPCC models predict that sea
ice will continue to decline under current levels of greenhouse gas
emission, which is predicted to result in further dramatic declines in
emperor penguin breeding success (Jenouvier et al., 2021). The
results of recent research add to the
existing body of science that highlights the effects of the changing
climate on the breeding success of emperor penguins. The research
provides an indication of the challenges that the species will face in
future decades and provides a justification for Specially Protected
Species designation.
Recommendations
In light of these findings and earlier advice from SCAR, the Working
Paper co-authors recommend that the Committee:
recognises the detrimental impact of climate change on emperor
penguin population numbers and breeding success;
forwards the draft Specially Protected Species Action Plan for the
emperor penguin (appended to ATCMXLIV WP34) and SCAR’s
assessment of the conservation status of the emperor penguin as
vulnerable to the ongoing and projected effects of climate change
(as provided in ATCMXLIII WP37) to the ATCM for their
consideration; and
recommends to the ATCM (i) the designation of the emperor
penguin as a Specially Protected Species under Annex II to the
Protocol through adoption of the draft Measure in Appendix A and
(ii) that it encourages Parties to undertake the timely
implementation of the Specially Protected Species Action Plan.
References
ATCMXLIII WP37. Projections of future population decline
emphasise the need to designate the emperor penguin as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Species.
ATCMXLIV WP34. Report of the CEP Intersessional Contact Group
established to develop a Specially Protected Species Action Plan for
the emperor penguin. Attachment A: Specially Protected Species
Action Plan.
ATCMXLV WP52. A five-year assessment of the impacts on emperor
penguins of low sea-ice extent.
ATCMXLV IP89. Draft Specially Protected Species Action Plan for
the Emperor Penguin: complementary actions by Australia.
Fretwell, P.T. A 6-year assessment of low sea-ice impacts on
emperor penguins. Antarctic Science, in press.
Jenouvrier et al. 2021. The call of the emperor penguin: Legal
responses to species threatened by climate change. Global Change
Biology 27: 5008-5029.
La Rue et al. 2024. Advances in remote sensing of emperor
penguins: first multi-year time series documenting trends in the
global population. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Science 291: 20232067.
