Revised Procedure for Selection and Appointment of the Executive
Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
Revised Procedure for Selection and Appointment of the Executive
Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
Working Paper submitted by Argentina and the United States
Summary
The current and final term of the Executive Secretary of the
Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty is due to expire on 31 August
2025. This paper proposes selection and appointment procedures
for adoption at ATCM 46 to permit the ATCM to appoint a new
Executive Secretary at ATCM 47 in 2025.
Background
Article III (1) of Measure 1 (2003) indicated that the Executive
Secretary:
“…shall be appointed by the ATCM from among candidates who are
nationals of Consultative Parties. The procedure for the selection of
the Executive Secretary shall be determined by a Decision of the
ATCM.”
Decision 4 (2016) outlined a detailed procedure for the selection
and appointment of the third Executive Secretary taking into
account Measure 1 (2003).
At ATCM XL, the Meeting appointed Mr. Albert Lluberas Bonaba as
Executive Secretary for a fouryear term pursuant to Decision 6
(2017), with effect from 1 September 2017. Pursuant to Decision 4
(2021), this appointment was extended at ATCM XLIII for an
additional fouryear term with effect from 1 September 2021.
Accordingly, Mr. Albert Lluberas’s appointment expires on 31
August 2025.
Regulation 6.1 of the Staff Regulations for the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty states that:
“6.1 In accordance with Article 3 of Measure 1 (2003), the ATCM
shall appoint an Executive Secretary and shall establish the
remuneration and such other entitlements as it deems appropriate.
The Executive Secretary’s term of office shall be for four years
unless otherwise decided by the ATCM and the Executive Secretary
shall be eligible for reappointment for one additional term. The
total length of employment may not exceed eight years.”
The Rules of Procedure are silent on the procedure for appointment
of the Executive Secretary.
Proposed Decision
Annex A is a proposed Decision on a revised procedure for the
selection and appointment of the Executive Secretary of the
Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Suggested wording of an advertisement for use by Consultative
Parties for the forthcoming appointment is attached as Annex B.
Annex A
Draft Decision A (2024)
Revised Procedure for Selection and Appointment of the Executive
Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
The Representatives,
Recalling Decision 6 (2017) on the appointment of the Executive
Secretary.
Recalling also Decision 4 (2021) on the reappointment of the
Executive Secretary.
Recalling further Article III of Measure 1 (2003) regarding the
appointment of an Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty.
Recalling Decision 4 (2016) on the Selection and Appointment of
the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Noting Regulation 6.1 of the Staff Regulations for the Secretariat of
the Antarctic Treaty.
Decide that the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty shall be selected and appointed in accordance with
the following procedure:
Advertisement
The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty will advertise the vacancy on
its website and include information on duties; selection criteria; the
application process; staff regulations; and other relevant
information.
The Secretariat shall use the Draft Advertisement (Annex B) and the
Standard Application Form (Annex C).
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties may advertise, at their own
cost, the vacancy in publications, websites and other media they
consider appropriate.
Eligible Applicants
Applicants must satisfy the following selection criteria:
Demonstrated experience or detailed knowledge of the operations of
international meetings or intergovernmental organisations.
Demonstrated high level managerial and leadership experience and
competence in areas including:
(a) selection and supervision of professional, administrative and
technical staff;
(b) preparation of financial budgets and the management of
expenditures; and
(c) organisation of meetings and provision of secretariat support for
high level committees;
(d) oversight and management of computer services and
information technology;
Familiarity with Antarctic affairs, including the principles of the
Antarctic Treaty and the scope of activities in the region;
Fluency in one of the four official working languages of the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, i.e. English, French, Russian
or Spanish;
Hold a university degree, academic degree, or equivalent
qualification; and
Be a national of a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
Submission of Eligible Applications
Nationals of a Consultative Party may apply for the post of
Executive Secretary only to their national authority, who will be
responsible for forwarding the applications to the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty, no later than 180 days before the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting at which the selection of the Executive
Secretary will be considered. Applications received after this date
will not be considered. Applications must be submitted
electronically using the Standard Application Form (Annex C)
accompanied by a cover letter and curriculum vitae.
Receipt of Applications
The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty will notify Consultative
Parties of the receipt of applications.
Distribution of Applications
A copy of each application received by the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty no later than 180 days before the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting at which the selection of the Executive
Secretary will be considered will be forwarded electronically
without delay by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to the
Representative of each Consultative Party.
Ranking of Applicants
Each Consultative Party may notify the Depositary Government of
up to ten preferred candidates in order of preference, no later than
120 days before the relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
In relation to those rankings received by the deadline, the
Depositary Government will aggregate individual applicants’
rankings, awarding ten points for a first preference, nine points for
a second preference, etc.
ShortListing
The candidates with the five highest aggregate scores will form the
shortlist for selection. Should the application of any shortlisted
candidate/s be withdrawn, the next ranking candidate/s will be
substituted.
Interview Process
The Depositary Government will notify, through the Secretariat of
the Antarctic Treaty, the names of the short-listed candidates to
Consultative Parties no later than 60 days before the relevant
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty will invite the shortlisted candidates to attend an
interview at that Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
The shortlisted candidates invited for interview are required to
meet the costs of their travel and expenses. Each relevant
Consultative Party is encouraged to assume these costs.
Shortlisted candidates will be interviewed by those Heads of
Delegation wishing to participate in the selection process at the
relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
The outcome of the selection process will be notified to shortlisted
candidates at the conclusion of the first week of the relevant
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting by the Chair of that meeting.
Selection
The relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will take a
Decision regarding the appointment of the selected candidate.
The chosen candidate will be required to enter into a contract
outlining the terms of employment.
Start Date
The chosen candidate will report to the Secretariat headquarters in
Buenos Aires, Argentina, for commencement of duties no later than
the date agreed by the relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.
2. That Decision 4 (2016) and its annexes are no longer current.
Annex B
Draft Advertisement
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY OF THE SECRETARIAT OF THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY
The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) invites
applications for the position of Executive Secretary of the
Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
The ATCM, consisting of 29 Consultative Parties, meets annually to
consult on the application and implementation of the Antarctic
Treaty. The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty is located in Buenos
Aires, Argentina. Further information is available at www.ats.aq.
The Executive Secretary manages a small administrative staff to
carry out the duties of the Secretariat assigned to it by the ATCM.
The Executive Secretary presents and manages the Secretariat’s
budget, supports the organisation of the ATCM, and performs other
duties identified by the ATCM.
Selection Criteria
Applicants must satisfy the following selection criteria:
Demonstrated experience or detailed knowledge of the operations of
international meetings or intergovernmental organisations;
Demonstrated high level of managerial and leadership experience
and competence in areas including;
selection and supervision of professional, administrative and
technical staff;
preparation of financial budgets and the management of
expenditures;
organisation of meetings and provision of secretariat support for
high level committees; and
oversight and management of computer services and information
technology;
Familiarity with Antarctic affairs, including the principles of the
Antarctic Treaty and the scope of activities in the region;
Fluency in one of the four official working languages of the ATCM,
i.e. English, French, Russian or Spanish;
Hold a university degree, academic degree, or equivalent
qualification; and
Be a national of a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
Salary and Allowances
Details of remuneration and allowances are available from the
Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty on request.
The appointment will be for a term of four years with the possibility
of one additional fouryear appointment.
Application
Applications must be submitted electronically using the Standard
Application Form accompanied by a cover letter and curriculum
vitae.
Interview
The Depositary Government will draw up a shortlist of applicants
by DD MM 2025 This date, as well as the “closing date”, will be
determined once the dates of the ATCM 47 are defined.. Interviews
of the shortlisted candidates will occur during ATCM 47 to be held
in Italy, on DD MM 2025. The successful candidate will be
announced at that meeting.
Availability
The individual chosen for the post of Executive Secretary should be
available to commence duties no later than 1 September 2025.
Additional Information
Please consult the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty website:
www.ats.aq for complete information on remuneration and
allowances; duties; selection criteria; the application process; staff
regulations; and other relevant documents.
Closing Date
Each Consultative Party government will accept applications from
its nationals and submit them to the Secretariat of the Antarctic
Treaty no later than DD MM 2024.
Applicants should check the national closing date for applications
with their own Consultative Party government.
Please consult the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty website:
www.ats.aq for the national government contact details of the
relevant Consultative Party.
Annex C
STANDARD APPLICATION FORM
(to be accompanied by a cover letter and curriculum vitae)
Personal Details
Name:
Address:
Phone:
Facsimile:
Email:
Nationality: Taking into account the provisions of Article III of
Measure 1 (2003), Art 16 Headquarters Agreement for the ATS,
Regulation 2.8 of the Staff Regulations for the Secretariat ,and, in
order that the selected candidate be able to carry out procedures on
behalf of the Secretariat involving public and private agencies of
the Argentine Republic, if the chosen candidate were not of
Argentine nationality, it would be preferable that once selected, the
Party to which he/she belongs grant him/her a diplomatic passport.
This will facilitate the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Argentina
processing the credentials that will enable him/her to function as
Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Selection Criteria
(Include additional information elaborating on these criteria and
attach a cover letter and curriculum vitae.)
1) Demonstrated experience or detailed knowledge of the
operations of international meetings or intergovernmental
organisations;
2) Demonstrated high level of managerial and leadership experience
and competence in areas including;
(a) selection and supervision of professional, administrative and
technical staff;
(b) preparation of financial budgets and the management of
expenditures;
(c) organisation of meetings and provision of secretariat support for
high level committees; and
(d) oversight and management of computer services and
information technology;
3) Familiarity with Antarctic affairs, including the principles of the
Antarctic Treaty and the scope of activities in the region;
4) Fluency in one of the four official working languages of the
ATCM, i.e. English, French, Russian or Spanish;
5) Hold a university degree, academic degree, or equivalent
qualification; and
6) Be a national of a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
