Improvement to the CEE review procedures
Improvements to the CEE review procedures
Summary
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process is set out in
Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty, and supported by guidelines for EIA in Antarctica
(Resolution 1 (2016)). Discussions on the continual improvement of
the effectiveness of the EIA system are ongoing. This paper
describes potential improvements to the CEE review procedures
noting that national competent authorities do not have a common
approach to handling changes within the CEE process after it has
been approved. This may become an issue given the extent of multi-
year construction related CEEs being haandled by the CEP.
Recommendations made include the potential to establish an EIA
‘Expert Group’, consideration of what would trigger the submission
of a new CEE and enhanced post-season CEE reporting.
Background context on CEE Regulatory Requirements and recent
discussion on EIA improvements
Article 8 of the Protocol and Annex I to the Protocol outline the
requirements for Environmental Impact Assessments in Antarctica.
Article 3 and 4 of Annex I provide specific elements to include
within a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEE) and the
process for circulation and review of CEEs.
The Revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica (Resolution 1 (2016)) provides guidance on the ‘EIA
process’ and the ‘EIA feedback process’; there are Procedures for
intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs (Appendix 2 CEP
XXV Report) and Procedures for CEE follow up (Resolution 2
(1997)) encouraging Parties to include provisions for the review of
the activities undertaken following the completion of a CEE.
However, recent discussions on the continual improvement of the
effectiveness of the EIA system has identified but not yet progressed
the following issues related to CEEs including, but not limited to:
Consideration of the usefulness of identifying and providing more
detailed guidance on the kinds of ‘trigger points’ which may
indicate the need to carry out a subsequent EIA, once the main EIA
has been completed and in place (refer ATCM 37, WP24
Improvements to the Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment
process);
Providing enhanced guidance on the circumstances under which a
new or revised EIA may be required (refer ATCM 41, WP41
Environmental Impact Assessment - Update on broader policy
discussions);
Consideration of the application of the EIA processes (or
reapplication) in situations where any activity changes as is
required by Article 8(3) of the Protocol (refer ATCM 44, WP33
Report on the effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica); and
Consideration could be given to establishing a CEP EIA Expert
Group to provide information and advisory support to national
competent authorities as required (refer ATCM 44, WP33).
Since the signing of the Protocol on October 4, 1991, Parties have
submitted 26 Final CEEs (see Table 1). 18 of these are for activities
related to the construction, maintenance or renovation of Antarctic
infrastructure. Only 8 CEEs have been submitted for science related
activities.
Large scale construction activities and station refurbishments or
builds are typically multi-year, big budget projects subject to
domestic timelines in which design and funding timelines may not
always align with the timeline requirements of Article 3(3-6) of
Annex I. The design process is not static and matures throughout
the duration of the project, meaning that plans frequently change,
sometimes significantly, after the final CEE has been approved, and
there is no common understanding of how national competent
authorities handle changes within the CEE process. CEE authors
face the dilemma of either including only activities where there is a
high confidence in the completeness of design (potentially issuing a
further EIA for activities not currently well scoped or funded) or
including all potential activities to better account for cumulative
impacts but where the detail is potentially lacking.
Two recent examples
New Zealand circulated its Draft CEE for the Scott Base
Redevelopment on 12 February, 2021. In order to circulate a Draft
CEE within the timelines as outlined in Annex I and before works
on the project started, the information available at the time was at
30% of the detailed design phase and the funding for the project
was not finalized through New Zealand government processes.
Work on the design and site preparation has continued through
until present with site preparation work continuing as recently as
the 2023/24 season. Changes to the design and methodology have
occurred since the Final CEE was approved. Six-monthly reporting
on activities conducted under the CEE and the associated
monitoring are provided to the Minister who authorised the
activity. While the design and methodology has changed, as
anticipated, the overall assessment of impact has not.
The United Kingdom submitted a Final CEE for the Rothera Wharf
Reconstruction and Coastal Stabilisation Project in 2018 and Parties
were kept informed of progress and compliance with the CEE
through updates to the CEP, the most recent being ATCM 43, IP097
Update and CEE Compliance Report.
The CEE was submitted at 65% design phase i.e., when there was
reasonable confidence in the description of the activities, impacts
and mitigation measures to be adopted. However there was little
information known about future projects that were likely to occur
at Rothera (including modernisation activities) so these were
excluded in the CEE and were covered instead by separate IEEs
submitted in later years (See IP XX An Update on British Antarctic
Survey’s Antarctic Infrastructure Modernisation Programme (AIMP)
for more info). A site investigation that remained in progress at the
time of writing the CEE and may have resulted in the need to
redesign some of the planned works. The CEE authors noted there
was no mechanism to handle deviations from the CEE so suggested
that “an EIA update will be provided if the final solution differs to
proposed option presented in this CEE”. Fortunately, little change
from the CEE
resulted (and the minor changes that did occur were assessed by a
Project Variation Register as described in ATCM 43 IP097).
These recent experiences of large scale multi year construction
related CEEs submitted by New Zealand and the United Kingdom
demonstrates that:
Percent of design or planning when CEEs are submitted may not
reflect accurately the details of the activity that takes place due to
unforeseen construction variations.
Procedures and timelines for the submission and review of CEEs are
rigid as they are linked to the annual meetings and do not
necessarily align with domestic timelines.
Final project funding decisions may impact the final design and
implementation of the project resulting in a change in the scope or
methodology of the project.
Reporting after completion of the CEE (refer Resolution 2 (1997)) is
important for consistency to understand how design details have
changed, and to report on the actual impacts and benefits from CEE
level activities .
Recommendations
In order to continue to improve the effectiveness of the Antarctic
EIA process, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the
United States recommend the Committee:
Consider and discuss if an interim process could be useful to
support CEE reviews in addition to the requirements outlined in
Annex I of the Protocol. This might include consideration of a CEP
EIA Expert Group or interim shortened process to support robust
reviews of CEEs when the scope of the activity changes.
Discuss whether there are any examples of processes or activities
that would trigger a CEE update, including re-writing a CEE,
updating the CEE, post CEE tiering of IEEs or other variations; and
Reinforce the need for post-activity reporting on CEE-level activities
as set out in Resolution 2 (1997) and consider if developing a
reporting template and procedure would be useful and identifying if
further improvements are needed.
Table 1: EIA database record of final CEEs submitting since the
signing of the Protocol. ** Indicates science related activities.
PERIOD
PARTY
FINAL VS DRAFT
TITLE
ACTIVITY
2023/2024
ARGENTINA
FINAL
Renovation of Petrel Antarctic Base, Dundee Island
Renovation of the Petrel Antarctic Base, on Dundee Island, in order
to improve its performance
2021/2022
CHINA
FINAL
Proposed Construction and Operation of a new Chinese Research
Station Victoria Land, Antarctica
Construction and operation of a new Chinese research station in
Antarctica
2021/2022
NEW ZEALAND
FINAL
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the Scott Base
Redevelopment
Construction of a new research station to replace existing facilities
2020/2021
TURKEY
DRAFT
Draft CEE- Construction and Operation of the Turkish Antarctic
Research Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica
Construction and Operation of Turkish Antarctic Research Station at
Horseshoe Island, Antarctica
2019/2020
UNITED STATES
FINAL
Continuation and Modernization of McMurdo Station Area
Activities
Infrastructure modernization
2018/2019
UNITED KINGDOM
FINAL
Rothera Wharf Reconstruction and Coastal Stabilisation Draft
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
Replacement of Rothera Wharf and stabilisation of the area around
the runway at Rothera Station
2017/2018
ITALY
FINAL
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction
and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli
Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica
Construction of a gravel runway for heavy aircrafts.
2015/2016
BELARUS
FINAL
Construction and Operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research
Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land. Final Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation
Construction, operation and maintenance of facilities
2011/2012
**
UNITED KINGDOM
FINAL
Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth. Final
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation.
Direct measurement and sampling of Lake Ellsworth.
2010/2011
INDIA
FINAL
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian
Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica
Construction of Antarctic facility
2010/2011
KOREA (ROK)
FINAL
Comprehensive environmental evaluation; Construction and
operation of the Jang Bogo Antarctic Research Station, Terra Nova
Bay, Antarctica
Activity aims to establish a plan that will minimize the impact of
the construction and operation of a new Korean research station on
the Antarctic
2010/2011
**
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
FINAL
Water Sampling of the Subglacial Lake Vostok. Final Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation
Water Sampling of the Subglacial Lake
2008/2009
CHINA
FINAL
Final Comprehensive Enviornmental Evaluation of Proposed
Construction and Operation of the new Chinese Dome A Station
Construction of Kunlun Station at Dome A
2006/2007
BELGIUM
FINAL
Final CEE: Construction and Operation of a new Belgian Research
Station, Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica
Construction of a new facility
2006/2007
**
NEW ZEALAND
FINAL
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for ANDRILL
McMurdo Sound Portfolio
Science: climatology
2006/2007
UKRAINE
DRAFT
Draft CEE. TECHNOLOGICAL BINDING OF A TANK WITH
CAPACITY V=200.
Construction of new fuel tank
2006/2007
UNITED KINGDOM
FINAL
Proposed Construction and Operation of Halley VI Research Station,
and Demolition and Removal of Halley V Research Station, Brunt
Ice Shelf, Antarctica
Construction / Operation of Facilities
2005/2006
GERMANY
FINAL
Final CEE. Construction of the Neumayer III Station, Operation of
the Neumayer III Station, Dismantling of the Existing Neumayer II
Station
Station construction
2004/2005
NORWAY
FINAL
FINAL Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
upgrading of the Norwegian summer station Troll
Station upgrade
2004/2005
UNITED STATES
FINAL
CEE for Development and Implementation of Surface Traverse
Capabilities
Operational: Infrastructure
2004/2005
**
UNITED STATES
FINAL
CEE for Project IceCube
Science: Astronomy
2003/2004
CZECHIA
FINAL
Czech Scientific Station in Antarctic: Construction and Operation
FINAL VERSION
Station construction and operation
2000/2001
**
GERMANY
FINAL
Final CEE for European Project on Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA)
- Dronning Maud Land
Ice drilling
1998/1999
UNITED STATES
FINAL
Modernization of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station Antarctica
Reconstruction and replacement of key facilities.
1994/1995
**
FRANCE
FINAL
Concordia Project - Drilling activity at Dome C, Antarctica - Final
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
Ice drilling
1994/1995
FRANCE
FINAL
Concordia Project. Construction and operation of a scientific base at
Dome C, Antarctica - Final Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation
Construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities
1994/1995
**
NEW ZEALAND
FINAL
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation Antarctic
stratigraphic drilling east of Cape Roberts in South West Ross Sea,
Antarctica
Rock drilling
1993/1994
SOUTH AFRICA
DRAFT
Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) of the
proposed new SANAE IV facility at Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud Land,
Antarctica
Construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities
1991/1992
**
UNITED STATES
FINAL
Final supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for the U.S.
Antarctic Program
National Antarctic Programme
