Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 171, Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King
George Island
ASPA No. 171, Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George
Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 171
First designation:
Measure 13 (2009)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 13 (2009)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 11 (2014)
Measure 8 (2019)
Current management plan:
Measure 8 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Section 6(i) Climate has been updated with the latest
Meteorological data. Penguins and Other birds, and Vegetation have
been updated according to recent five years’ data.
The following text has been added under section 7(vi) Restriction
on material and organisms which may be brought into the Area’s
sixth bullet: In the event of a warning regarding HPAI (Highly
Pathogenic Avian Influenza), consulting the guidance provided by
COMNAP on HPAI is recommended.
Supporting Documentation has been updated.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
management Plans and with newly adopted Resolutions after last
revision.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(c) areas with major colonies of breeding native birds, (e) areas of
particular interest to ongoing scientific research
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes. Domain A (Antarctic Peninsula northern geologic)
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes. ACBR 3 (North-west Antarctic Peninsula Regions)
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
N/A
Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) No. 171, Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George
Island
Summary
The Republic of Korea has conducted the second review of the
Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA)
No. 171, Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island.
Since only minor amendments are required, the Republic of Korea
recommends that the Committee for Environmental Protection
(CEP) approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
ASPA No. 171 Narębski Point (6213′40″- 6214′ 23″ S, 5845′25″ -
5847′00″ W) is located at the Barton Peninsula in King George
Island, South Shetland Islands, and the Area was designated as
ASPA under Measure 13 (2009), following a proposal by the
Republic of Korea, and the management plan was first revised
under Measure 11 (2014) and Measure 8 (2019).
The primary reason for the designation of Narębski Point as ASPA
No. 171is to protect its ecological, scientific, and aesthetic values.
Long-term protection and monitoring of the diverse range of species
and assemblages at the Area will contribute to developing
appropriate regional and global conservation strategies, and provide
comparative information with other locations.
The Republic of Korea has conducted a review of the Management
Plan for ASPA No. 171, Narębski Point, as required under Article
6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty.
Summary of amendments
A revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 171 is provided at
Attachment A. Minor amendments are summarized as follows:
Information within the Description of Values to be Protected and
Description of the Area has been updated.
New information on meteorological data and faunal changes, such
as the number of breeding penguins and the list of reported species
confirmed through recent monitoring activities, are updated
(Section 1 & 6(i)).
The following text has been added under section 7(vi) Restriction
on material and organisms which may be brought into the Area: In
the event of a warning regarding HPAI (Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza), consulting the guidance provided by COMNAP on HPAI
is recommended.
The section Supporting documentation has been updated.
A range of editorial amendments have been made throughout,
including for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA
management Plans and with newly adopted Resolutions after last
revision.
Recommendation
The Republic of Korea recommends that the CEP approves the
attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 171, Narębski
Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island (Attachment A).
