Update on High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in Antarctica
Update on High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by SCAR, COMNAP, IAATO and CCAMLR
Summary
This paper provides an update on the current status, known impacts
and community actions in response to High Pathogenicity Avian
Influenza (HPAI H5N1), also known as ‘bird flu’, in Antarctica. The
first confirmed cases in the Antarctic Treaty Area were jointly
reported by the national Antarctic programmes of Argentina and
Spain on 24 February 2024. There are clear indications that the
virus was brought to the Antarctic through natural migration and
not through direct human activity or interactions with wildlife.
Heightened vigilance of operators, encompassing national Antarctic
programmes and tourism operators, looking for signs of the
presence of HPAI in wildlife facilitated the reporting of suspected
cases during the 2023/24 Antarctic summer season. At the time of
writing (April 2024), confirmed cases have been recorded at seven
sites, and suspected cases recorded at a further seven sites in the
Antarctic Treaty Area. With HPAI confirmed in the northern
Antarctic Peninsula region, the risk remains high for intra-regional
spread, infection to multiple species, and continuing impact to
Antarctic wildlife. SCAR, COMNAP and IAATO recommend that the
Parties: 
Ensure that biosecurity guidelines and procedures are robustly
implemented, to eliminate or mitigate the risk to humans, as well as
the risk of spreading the disease within Antarctica through human
activities;
Encourage continued vigilance and monitoring, as well as sample
collection and testing where necessary expertise is available and
permitted;
Continue to report and share information on suspected and
confirmed cases (including through the SCAR Antarctic Wildlife
Health Network (AWHN) HPAI Monitoring Project), to support
collaboration, inform decision-making, and to improve scientific
understanding of the spread and impact of the disease.
Background
In 2022, ahead of the 2022/23 Antarctic season, the SCAR AWHN
confirmed that HPAI was likely to arrive in the Antarctic region by
way of migrating species and could have a significant impact on
local wildlife. In response to the heightened risk, COMNAP and
IAATO developed guidance for the 2022/23 season (ATCM XLV,
IP101). While no cases of HPAI were suspected or confirmed during
that season, SCAR, IAATO and COMNAP informed the CEP in 2023
that the risk of the virus arriving for the first time in the Antarctic
Treaty Area remained high for the 2023/24 season (ATCM XLV,
IP101).
SCAR was requested to provide updates to the CEP and the ATCM
on the potential impacts of HPAI to native birds and mammals in
Antarctica. Parties were encouraged to share information on
suspected and confirmed cases of HPAI in Antarctica, and welcomed
ongoing advice from SCAR, COMNAP and IAATO on preventing the
introduction and spread of the disease (ATCM XLV Report,
paragraphs 96 and 97).
HPAI H5N1 has caused high levels of mortality in wild bird and
mammal populations worldwide, particularly affecting seabirds in
the northern hemisphere, around the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans
and southern Africa since 2022. Many seabird colonies have
experienced significant losses with up to 50–60% mortality rates
(e.g. great skua and gannets). In 2023, cases were detected in South
America, including in penguins, sea lions and elephant seals.
Oceania (Australia and New Zealand) and Antarctica were the only
continents free of the disease. In October 2023, the first case was
confirmed in the Subantarctic (Bird Island). 
Summary of Community Actions to Date
The response to the heightened risk was a community effort with
actions taken by SCAR (see SCAR ATCM XLVI IP165 SCAR response
to risk of High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in Antarctica),
COMNAP (see COMNAP ATCM XLVI IP004 Actions in Response to
Heightened Risk of High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza (HPAI) in
Antarctica), IAATO (see ATCM XLVI IP150 IAATO Operator High
Pathogenicity Avian Influenza Response) and CCAMLR to inform
their memberships. The best available science was used to jointly
develop and implement protocols to ensure biosecurity procedures
were sufficiently robust to minimise the inadvertent spread of the
disease by human activity and to protect human life. This
partnership continues to inform the development of practical
guidance for the 2024/25 Antarctic season.
An Expert Workshop was convened by the SCAR AWHN at the
SCAR Biology Symposium 2023 (31 July–4 August, Christchurch,
New Zealand), and attended by many members of the community
including representatives from SCAR, COMNAP and IAATO. The
workshop was an important opportunity to share information with
the community on the risk assessment conducted by SCAR AWHN
and to discuss recommendations for the upcoming season.
In anticipation of the 2023/24 Antarctic summer season, COMNAP
and IAATO each prepared guidance for their memberships, and an
HPAI Monitoring Project was established through the SCAR AWHN
to collate detailed scientific information on suspected and
confirmed cases.
To facilitate rapid communication, WhatsApp chat groups were
administered by IAATO, including one for the Antarctic Peninsula
region, as a means to share information on suspected cases with
anyone that wished to join the group. A high-level HPAI Forum
group was also established where representatives from CCAMLR,
COMNAP, IAATO, SCAR and from the Joint (COMNAP/SCAR)
Expert Group on Human Biology & Medicine (JEGHBM) could meet
(virtually) regularly and as required under urgency as the situation
began to develop and as new information was received. This
allowed for real-time review of procedures and protocols and
enabled drafting of joint communiques for the community, media
and public.
The JEGHBM undertook an infectious disease review and presented
its findings to the COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) 35
(July 2023). It provided key recommendations in support of
preventative steps to stop human infection including that “all
stakeholders are recommended to develop a medical response plan
and model which is appropriate to the environment in which
contact with HPAI could be reasonably expected to occur.”
Impact on Antarctic wildlife
The first cases of HPAI were confirmed by PCR (polymerase chain
reaction) test in the Subantarctic on 23 October 2023 (brown skua
and southern fulmar). The first suspected cases in Antarctica were
recorded at Orcadas Station (Laurie Island) in December 2023, with
the first case confirmed by PCR at Primavera Station on 24
February 2024.
At the time of writing (April 2024), confirmed cases have been
recorded at seven sites, and suspected cases recorded at a further
seven sites in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The reports are likely to be
an under-representation of actual cases since the database relies on
reports from those operating in the Antarctic, and these operators
do not visit all areas with wildlife. There is also no information on
the mortality of seabirds and mammals at sea.
Skuas appear to be the most affected species in Antarctica, however
individuals of other species including kelp gulls, gentoo and Adélie
penguins and Antarctic fur seals have also been observed showing
likely signs of the disease. Signs observed in seabirds include lack of
balance
and coordination, and seizures. In marine mammals, symptoms
include seizures, excessive mucus production and respiratory
distress.
The full impact on Antarctic wildlife is not yet understood. Little is
currently known about the way the virus affects Antarctic species,
and the mechanisms of transmission between species and locations.
Data are currently limited because of the recent arrival of the
disease, the practical constraints of monitoring across large areas
and where there is no human presence, and the limited ability to
undertake sampling and testing. Genetic assessment of the virus
obtained from the Subantarctic cases indicated spread from South
America, likely through movement of migratory birds (Bennison et
al., 2023). There are clear indications that the virus was brought to
Antarctica through natural migration and not through direct human
activity or interactions with wildlife.
Implications for human activities in Antarctica
Visual monitoring is continuing in the Antarctic regions where and
when national Antarctic programs and tourism operators are active.
To date, sample collection and testing outside of the Antarctic
Peninsula region has not indicated that HPAI is present elsewhere
in the Antarctic Treaty Area. Globally, there are no sustained cases
of human-to-human transmission and the current risk to humans in
Antarctica remains low, especially with current biosecurity
protocols in place (JEGHBM, 2023).
The SCAR AWHN has developed a practical guide for those
interacting with Antarctic wildlife, containing background
information and advice on identifying suspected cases, and on
reducing additional risk from direct transfer of the virus from
human activity in the Antarctic region, for example through further
enhancing biosecurity procedures (Dewar et al., 2022).
COMNAP Guidance https://www.comnap.aq/heightened-risk-of-
hpai-in-antarctica is available and is regularly reviewed based on
circumstances. National Antarctic programs have developed their
own protocols based on SCAR and COMNAP guidance, and
deployment points to the Antarctic Treaty Area are urged to ensure
biosecurity procedures are reviewed and updated in response to the
heightened risk HPAI presents. 
CCAMLR developed advice https://www.ccamlr.org/en/document/
science/hpai-guidelines-vessels for vessel crew and observers for the
handling and disposal of live or dead birds landed or discovered on
a vessel and encouraged reporting of any suspected cases to
national authorities.
In addition to IAATO’s robust biosecurity procedures already in
place to protect Antarctica from pathogens and non-native species,
IAATO continued working with SCAR and COMNAP to enhance its
HPAI protocols https://iaato.org/iaato-2022-23-biosecurity-
protocols-regarding-avian-influenza/ during the 2023/24 season.
These included mandatory pre-landing assessments, cancelling
landings at sites where wildlife mortality and/or behaviour
indicated avian influenza could be present, and maintaining swift
reporting and communication with the broader Antarctic
community.
Monitoring and reporting
Monitoring and reporting of suspected and confirmed cases is
critical to further understand the impact of HPAI on Antarctic
wildlife, how it spreads, mutates, and where it might present next
(Banyard et al., 2024).
As part of its HPAI Monitoring Project, the SCAR AWHN established
a HPAI database to record information submitted to the AWHN on
the spread of HPAI outbreaks in the sub-
Antarctic and Antarctica. This is a central reporting database to
collate detailed information on all suspected and confirmed
outbreaks throughout the Subantarctic and Antarctica and relies on
the community to submit reports. Reports are displayed on a GIS-
based map available via the SCAR website https://scar.org/library-
data/avian-flu . This project will continue to be supported for
reporting in the 2024/25 Antarctic season. The SCAR AWHN has
also provided updates on current cases and recommendations via its
website and regular bulletins.
Outlook and Recommendations
In areas where confirmed cases have been recorded, there is a high
likelihood that HPAI will remain present in that region of the
Antarctic Treaty Area over the coming winter. Now that HPAI has
arrived in the Antarctic region the risk of high mortality in
Antarctic species is expected as species begin to return to the
Peninsula to breed at the start of the 2024/25 austral summer.
SCAR, COMNAP and IAATO recommend that the Parties:
Ensure that biosecurity guidelines and procedures are robustly
implemented, to eliminate or mitigate the risk to humans, as well as
the risk of spreading the disease within Antarctica through human
activities;
Encourage continued vigilance and monitoring, as well as sample
collection and testing where necessary expertise is available and
permitted;
Continue to report and share information on suspected and
confirmed cases (including through the SCAR AWHN HPAI
Monitoring Project), to support collaboration, inform decision-
making, and to improve scientific understanding of the spread and
impact of the disease.
Further information 
Follow the latest information from the SCAR Antarctic Wildlife
Health Working Group at: https://scar.org/library-data/avian-flu.
Follow the latest information from COMNAP at: https://
www.comnap.aq/heightened-risk-of-hpai-in-antarctica.
Follow the latest information from IAATO at: https://iaato.org/
iaato-2022-23-biosecurity-protocols-regarding-avian-influenza/
Follow the latest global information at: https://www.woah.org/en/
disease/avian-influenza/.
References
Banyard, A. et al. 2023. Continued expansion of high pathogenicity
avian influenza H5 in wildlife in South America and incursion into
the Antarctic region. OFFLU (WOAH/FAO Network of Expertise on
Animal Influenza). https://www.offlu.org/wp-content/
uploads/2023/12/OFFLU-wildlife-statement-no.-II.pdf
Bennison, A., Byrne, A.M.P., Reid, S.M., Lynton-Jenkins, J.G.,
Mollett, B., De Sliva, D, Peers-Dent, J. Finlayson, K., Hall, R.,
Blockley, F., Blyth, M., Falchieri, M., Fowler, Z., Fitzcharles, E.M.,
Brown, I.H., James, J., Banyard, A.C. 2023. Detection and spread of
high pathogenicity
avian influenza virus H5N1 in the Antarctic Region. bioRxiv
2023.11.23.568045; doi: https://
doi.org/10.1101/2023.11.23.568045  
Dewar, M., Wille, M., Gamble, A., Vanstreels, R., Boulinier, T.,
Smith, A., Varsani, A., Ratcliffe, N., Black, J., Lynnes A.The Risk of
Avian Influenza in the Southern Ocean: A practical guide for
operators interacting with wildlife. Preprint. https://
doi.org/10.32942/osf.io/8jrbu.
JEGHBM, 2023. Joint COMNAP/SCAR Expert Group on Human
Biology and Medicine, Avian Influenza: A summary of “The Risk of
Avian Influenza in the Southern Ocean: A practical guide for
operators interacting with wildlife. With additional supporting
information and guidance regarding impact of Avian Influenza in
Humans”, June 2023, https://www.comnap.aq/s/Post-JEG-review-
Avian-Influenza-A-summary-of-The-Risk-of-Avian-Influenza-in-the-
Southern-Ocean-A-pra.pdf.
