Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm
Bay
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm
Bay
Working Paper submitted by Japan
Summary
Japan has conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA
No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay, in
accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the ‘Guide to the
presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or
Historic Sites and Monuments’ appended to Resolution 3 (2018).
ASPA No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay
(69º14'30''S, 39º46'00''E) was originally designated in
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987, SSSI No.22) after a proposal by
Japan. A management plan for the Area was adopted under
Recommendation XVI-7 (1991) and revised under Measure 1 (2000)
and Measure 7 (2014), Measure 3 (2019).
A revised Management Plan for ASPA NO. 141 is provided at
Attachment A. There are no major changes to the Management
Plan. Minor amendments are summarised as follows:
The section Supporting documentation has been updated.
The following text has been added under section 7(x) Measures that
may be necessary to continue to meet the aims of the Management
Plan : ‘Scientific activities shall be performed in accordance with
the SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific
Field Research in Antarctica (Resolution 5 (2018)). Geological
research shall be undertaken in accordance with the SCAR
Environmental Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field Research
Activities in Antarctica (Resolution 1 (2021))’.
Recommendation
Japan recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
Management Plan for ASPA No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde,
Lützow-Holm Bay (Attachment A).
ASPA No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay
Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 141
First designation:
Rec. XIV-5 (1987, SSSI No. 22)
First adoption of management plan:
Rec. XVI-7 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Current management plan:
Measure 3 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No.
Renaming and renumbering as Decision 1(2002)
ASPA No. 141
If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan,
please indicate the types of amendment:
Major or minor?
Minor.
any changes to the boundaries or coordinates?
No.
any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
No.
any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this
area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with,
incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
Other – brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
The section Supporting documentation has been updated.
The following text has been added under section 7(x) Measures that
may be necessary to continue to meet the aims of the Management
Plan : ‘Scientific activities shall be performed in accordance with
the SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific
Field Research in Antarctica (Resolution 5 (2018)). Geological
research shall be undertaken in accordance with the SCAR
Environmental Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field Research
Activities in Antarctica (Resolution 1 (2021)) ’.
If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area? Yes/No
N/A
If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)? Yes/No
N/A
If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? Yes/No (If
yes, the
reference to the relevant paragraph of the relevant CCAMLR Final
Report should be given).
N/A
If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
B - representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008)? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here.)
D - East Antarctic coastal geologic (e.g. Vestfold, Bunger, Wilson
hills)
If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012)? Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic
Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here.)
ACBR 5 Enderby Land
If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
(Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to
ATCM XXXVIII – IP 27 and the full report available at: http://
www.erg.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important Bird
Area(s) should be noted here.)
N/A
