Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on an
international environmental monitoring framework
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on an
international environmental monitoring framework
Background
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have discussed aspects of
environmental monitoring during the last 50 years. General
recognition of the need to monitor to identify and assess the
environmental impacts of human activities occurring within the
Antarctic Treaty area was reached in the early 1970s. The topic has
since been on the agenda of most ATCMs and, since its inception,
all meetings of the CEP, although the scope and focus of the debate
has varied with time (e.g., IP07 at ATCM XXXI).
Article 12 (1) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty states that CEP shall provide advice on “the state
of the Antarctic environment” (Article 12(1)j). A number of
attempts have been made to identify core/key environmental
parameters or indicators to monitor, without agreement on a
definitive list.
Most remarkably an agreed approach to “the state of the Antarctic
environment” monitoring, “a broader approach with the purpose to
identify and report on regional or continent-wide environmental
changes, irrespective of the cause, as intended by the SAER system”
(WP16 at ATCM XXIX,) is still lacking. The CEP currently identifies
monitoring and state of the environment reporting as a Priority 2
issue in its 5-Year Work Plan.
Introduction
In May 2023, at ATCM XLV - CEP XXV in Helsinki, the Netherlands,
France and Belgium submitted WP17 proposing to establish an ICG
tasked to develop a proposal for such a broader approach: an
overall framework for environmental impact monitoring. At ATCM
XLV - CEP XXV, the CEP agreed to establish an ICG to discuss this
matter, with the following Terms of Reference (ToR):
agree on work methods
identify and analyze existing monitoring activities and the data
available
discuss objectives for environmental monitoring needed to fulfill the
requirement of the Environmental Protocol and develop an initial
framework of parameters that based on environmental values and
cumulative impact, would require monitoring to meet those
objectives
report on an initial gap analysis between the existing monitoring
portfolio and what is required
the ICG would work intersessionally and report to CEP 26.
In WP21 of ATCM XXVI, an intersessional discussion group
concluded that the indicators of change can be divided into two
categories: pressure and condition:
“[P]ressure indicators (i.e. measurements of activity levels or
outputs which may affect environmental condition) relate to many
of the requirements under the Protocol (e.g. waste management),
and may have immediate management implications for Treaty
Parties.
Condition indicators (i.e. measurements of the physical or biotic
environment, such as air temperatures or sea ice extent) reflect
significant aspects of the Antarctic environment but may have less
immediate management implications. In the long term, however,
information on trends in both known pressures and environmental
condition are required for a comprehensive picture of the state of
the environment which can inform management decisions.” (WP21
at ATCM XXVI).
Consequently, many Parties currently apply the Condition-Pressure-
Response (CPR) or Pressure-State-Response (PSR) frameworks for
environmental reporting (IP07 at ATCM XXXI). Environmental
monitoring is an obligation under the Environment Protocol and
most Parties undertake environmental monitoring to some extent.
However, these initiatives differ in terms of the variables and
geographic extent of what is being monitored. An international
framework for environmental monitoring should provide guidance
on what to monitor, where, and how. Yet, the first step towards
establishing a coordinated effort to monitor the Antarctic ecosystem
is to agree on the purpose of such an effort.
WP21 of ATCM XXVI also noted that the primary basis for
environmental reporting comes from the Protocol Article 12, 1(j)
requirement that the CEP provide advice on “the state of the
Antarctic environment.” The WP indicates that an Antarctic
environment reporting system would underpin the environmental
principles of the Protocol outlined in Article 3 and would also
provide a useful mechanism for the Committee to fulfil its wider
functions under Articles 12 1(a), (b), I, (f), (i) and (k). A mechanism
for reporting the state of the environment would provide
information to support the planning of activities, alert on emerging
environmental problems, and provide a means of evaluating the
effectiveness of actions aimed at implementing the Protocol and
responding to environmental changes. An international monitoring
framework is needed as the foundation for such a mechanism.
An international monitoring framework would also contribute to
achieving the objectives of Art. 3.2.c of the Environmental Protocol
regarding the consideration of cumulative impacts in the planning
and conduct of Antarctic activities. Once an international guiding
framework is established, ideally the national programs would
respond, and contribute to it (WP17 at ATCM XLV), although
international coordination would be required.
Finally, WP21 at ATCM XXVI concluded that “In the long term …,
information on trends in both known pressures and environmental
condition are required for a comprehensive picture of the state of
the environment which can inform management decisions” and
endorsed the use of environmental indicators as an effective means
of conveying environmental information. The concept of developing
a framework for the selection of environmental indicators was
discussed, and the WP remarked the need to incorporate in such a
framework, indicators of both pressure and condition.
The use of pressures and condition indicators closely resembles the
Pressure-State-Response (PSR) framework developed by the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
The PSR framework proposes to evaluate the pressures of human
activities on environmental states and to provide policy/
management responses in order to achieve or return to a “desirable
state”. Since the 1990s several frameworks derived from PSR have
been developed, including the Driver-Pressure-State-Impact-
Response (DPSIR) framework developed by the European
Environment Agency (EEA), and most recently DAPSIR, which
explicitly identifies the human activities that generate pressures on
the system (Elliot et al., 2017)Elliott M., Burdon D., Atkins J.P.,
Borja A., Cormier R., de Jonge V.N., Turner R.K. 2017. And DPSIR
begat DAPSI(W)R(M)!” - A unifying framework for marine
environmental management. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 118 (1-2),
pp. 27 – 40. DOI: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.03.049
Report on the ICG
During the 2023/2024 intersessional period the ICG advanced in
two rounds of discussion. The first round aimed at agreeing
methods, and the second round discussed on the other components
of the ToR. Specifically, during the second round CEP members
were asked the following questions:
Question 1: What should be the components to include in an
environmental monitoring framework for Antarctica?
Question 2: What are the requirements of the Environmental
Protocol to be fulfilled through environmental monitoring?
Question 3: What needs to be monitored and what are possible
parameters to consider?
Question 4: What is currently being monitored at a continental scale
(i.e., What monitoring schemes are already underway)? What
parameters are being measured?
After the first round of consultation several Parties expressed some
concerns about the viability of advancing as much as expected in
just one year. Some of the answers identified issues not considered
in the ToR of this ICG, but that are key to enable moving forward in
the fulfillment of the objectives of this ICG (e.g., the need of
establishing a common understanding of the purpose and scope of
the monitoring framework). Based on the response to the questions
of the second round, the convener decided to extend the second
round of consultation to explore the degree of agreement to the
different positions stated by the CEP members on the topics being
discussed.
Answers to the second round of consultation were summarized in
43 statements and overall agreement to these was evaluated
through an online questionnaire. Most of the 12 members of the
CEP that filled the questionnaire agree on 17 statements listed in
the attached document, and none disagree with these. Uruguay
understands these statements provide an initial description of what
is the purpose of the framework, what should be monitored, and the
characteristics the framework should have.
Still, many members emphasized the importance of establishing a
common understanding of the purpose and scope of the monitoring
framework, as well as the need of considering the SCAR/COMNAP
Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental
Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica (2005) when designing the
framework. Other members indicated the need of discussing
relatively early in the ICG process the financial needs for sustaining
a monitoring framework, as well as the need of considering the
links to ongoing monitoring negotiations in other groups (e.g.,
tourism).
Overall, Uruguay understands that the first year of work of this ICG
contributed to identify some of the conditions needed to advance in
the establishment of an international environmental monitoring
framework for Antarctica. As such it has allowed the Parties to
advance towards the fulfillment of a task that has been outstanding
for a number of years.
Recommendations
Based on the various ideas expressed by the Parties, Uruguay, as
convener of the ICG, recommends the CEP to:
1. Extend the work of this ICG for two years; the ICG will work
intersessionally and report to CEP 27 and CEP 28.
2. Ask the ICG to produce a report for CEP 27 providing agreed
definitions of 1) what is an international environmental monitoring
framework in the context of the Protocol, 2) its purpose
(i.e., a brief explanation of its goals), and 3) its scope (i.e., a brief
description of what is to be monitored by the framework).
3. Agree that:
I. An international framework for environmental monitoring should:
• provide ‘situational awareness’ of the Antarctic region; that is,
indicating what is changing, where and why;
• focus on identifying, detecting and measuring changes in the
state/condition of the Antarctic environment and monitoring
pressures arising from both activities within and outside the
Antarctic Treaty area;
• enable: 1) assessing the environmental status, 2) detecting change,
3) evaluating compliance, 4) informing decision making;
II. Art. 3, 12 and 14 and Annex I Art. 5, Annex II Art. 6 and Art. 8,
Annex III Art. 8 and 9, Annex IV Art. 13, Annex V Art. 3 and 10 of
the Protocol specify monitoring requirements to consider in the
design of the framework, and constitute a minimum basis for the
framework to address; yet, in addition to requirements specified in
the Protocol, other monitoring needs may be required to detect
changes in the state of the environment.
III. Operationally, the monitoring framework should:
• use a relatively simple approach to describe the state of the
Antarctic environment, at least initially;
• have user-friendly interoperable databases, linked to and available
through a centralized portal, with comparable and open access data
of consistent quality, relying to a large degree on data that is
already being collected;
• use the Pressure-State-Response model as a starting point to define
what to monitor;
• provide means to consider cumulative impacts;
• maintain the collection of scientific data at appropriate and
relevant time and spatial scales to have long-term series that serve
as benchmarks to evaluate impacts;
• differentiate between “State of the environment monitoring” and
“Operational monitoring” as described in WP16 at ATCM XXIX.
4. Ask the ICG to elaborate ToR for an in-person workshop to be
held before the ATCM 48 (2026) to establish explicit objectives for
an international environmental monitoring framework, define
criteria for its design, and agree on a roadmap for its
implementation; the ToR will be presented to CEP 27 and the
results of the workshop will be reported to CEP 28.
5. Ask COMNAP to produce a catalogue of ongoing environmental
monitoring programs undertaken by National Antarctic Programs,
to be presented to CEP 27. Ideally the catalogue should differentiate
between “State of the environment monitoring” and “Operational
monitoring” (as described in WP16 at ATCM XXIX) when describing
the programs. Also, the catalogue should ideally indicate how the
monitoring schemes relate to the requirements stemming from the
Madrid Protocol, as described under II (above).
6. Ask SCAR to produce a report for CEP 27 summarizing ongoing
continent or regional-wide monitoring schemes in Antarctica and
the Southern Ocean conducted by other relevant bodies such as SC-
CAMLR and ACAP, which have designed and implemented
integrated approaches to monitoring key attributes of conservation
significance to Antarctica. If feasible it should also consider
equivalent experiences in the Arctic. Ideally the report should 1)
indicate how the monitoring schemes relate to the requirements
stemming from the Protocol, as described under II (above), and
what parameters are monitored, and 2) provide an overall
description of the monitoring scheme architecture/components and
how the data are collected, processed, integrated, made available
for decision-makers, and stored.
