Proposal for modifications to the coordinates, description and
conservation status for HSM No. 24 Amundsen’s Cairn
COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON A HISTORIC SITE OR
MONUMENT
The following information is provided in accordance with the
"Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals
for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed
Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments," attached to Resolution 3
(2018):
1. Has this site or monument been designated by a previous ATCM
as a Historic Site or Monument?
(If yes, please list the relevant Recommendations and Measures.)
Yes
Designation RE VII-9
Current plan M 23 (2021)
2. If the proposal is for a new Historic Site or Monument, please
include the following information, worded for
inclusion in the Measure:
NA
3. If the proposal is to revise an existing designation of an HSM,
please list the relevant past
Recommendations and Measures.
Designation RE VII-9
Current plan M 23 (2021)
Proposal for modifications to the coordinates, description and
conservation status for HSM No. 24 Amundsen’s Cairn
Summary
In the austral summer 2017-2018 a private South Pole skiing
expedition searched for and visited the cairn left behind by Roald
Amundsen’s 1911 South Pole Expedition at a small peak they
named Bettytoppen. The 2017-18 expedition found that the cairn,
listed as HSM No. 24, is located at different coordinates than those
which are given in the formal HSM listing. They also found that a
plaque that had been placed on the Amundsen cairn in the 1986-87
season to commemorate the Amundsen expedition, had been placed
on a wrong cairn, but at the correct location according to the HSM
list. Here we present a proposal to modify the coordinates and
description of HSM No. 24 Amundsen’s Cairn, as well as to make
slight adjustments to the conservation status description.
Background
Amundsen’s Cairn was designated as HSM No. 24 through
Recommendation VII-9. Norway was the proposing party and is
undertaking the management. The cairn, which was erected by
Roald Amundsen on 6 January 1912 on his way back to Framheim
from the South Pole during his successful attempt to first reach the
South Pole, was erected on a small peak he named Bettytoppen
(translates to Mount Betty), in the Queen Maud Range. Amundsen
placed a paraffin tank, two match boxes and a small tin-can
containing two notes inside the cairn. The tin-can and its content
has since been removed (1929) and were given to the Norwegian
Geographical Society in 1949. In the formal list of Historic Sites and
Monuments (HSM), last updated through Measure 18 (2022)
(available through www.ats.aq), it is noted that the cairn is intact,
that there is a paraffin tank inside it and that there is a plaque on
the cairn commemorating it. The plaque had been placed there
during a Norwegian expedition in 1987.
In December 2017 the Norwegian expeditioner Astrid Furholt,
during a skiing expedition to the South Pole, had been tasked by the
Norwegian Polar Club (http://polarklubben.org/) to search for and
confirm the correct coordinates for the cairn. She located the cairn
on a small peak, and found that the paraffin tank was still intact
(but no match-boxes). She did GPS-positioning and found a
mismatch between the actual position and the HSM-listing. The
correct position of the cairn is 85°10'23,8"S 163°36'5,9"W, while the
location of the cairn is listed as 85°10′60″ S, 163°45′0″ W in the
HSM list. According to SCAR Gazetteer, this small peak that
Amundsen named Bettytoppen to commemorate his favourite
nanny, currently has no officially listed name. See Figure 1 for
location description.
Furthermore, Astrid Furholt looked for the plaque mentioned in the
HSM description and found that it had been wrongly placed on a
now collapsed cairn located at 85°10′60″ S, 163°45′0″ W, which
indeed are the coordinates listed for HSM 24, and which in fact is a
peak named Mount Betty according to SCAR Gazetteer. Furholt
moved the plaque and placed it at the base of the actual Amundsen
cairn at 85°10'23,8"S 163°36'5,9"W.
Figure 1: Mount Betty in the background, which today is listed as
location of HSM 24, and the peak that Roald Amundsen named
Bettytoppen in the foreground, which is the actual location of HSM
24. (Source: Astrid Furholt)
On basis of this information, it seems timely to update the
information about HSM No. 24 in the HSM list.
Norway will also submit the pictures (Figure 2-4) included in this
Working Paper to the Secretariat to be included in the description
of HSM No. 24 in the HSM database (https://www.ats.aq/devph/
#).
Norway will consider the need or desire for further actions
regarding official naming of the peak in due course.
Recommendation
Norway recommends that the CEP
Approves the updated coordinates and description for HSM No. 24
through a Measure (cf. Decision 1 (2021)).
The new coordinates should be listed as 85°10'23,8"S 163°36'5,9"W
The new description should be: Rock cairn, known as ‘Amundsen’s
cairn’, in, Queen Maud Range erected by Roald Amundsen on 6
January 1912 on a peak Amundsen named Bettytoppen, on his way
back to Framheim from the South Pole.
Update the Conservation Status on the HSM No. 24 listing on the
Antarctic Protected Area database replacing current text with the
following: The cairn remains intact. There is a paraffin tank inside
the cairn, which is in good condition. A tin box containing two
notes which was originally placed in the cairn by Amundsen, has
long since been removed. A plaque commemorating Amundsen’s
expedition is placed at the base of the cairn. This update should be
recorded through report language, cf. Decision 1 (2021).
Figure 2: Amundsen’s Cairn (Source: Astrid Furholt)
Figure 3: The petrol tank left behind by Roald Amundsen at the
cairn (Source: Astrid Furholt)
Figure 4: The plaque commemorating Roald Amundsen’s
expedition, now placed at the base of the Amundsen Cairn (Source:
Astrid Furholt)
