Matters for consideration in the development of a comprehensive
and consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and non-
governmental activities
Matters for consideration in the development of a comprehensive
and consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and non-
governmental activities
Summary
Australia strongly supports the development of a comprehensive
and consistent framework for the regulation of tourism and non-
governmental activities in Antarctica. Noting that Decision 6 (2023)
invited Parties to develop proposals in support of discussions,
Australia presents some matters that warrant consideration by
Parties at ATCM 46 and beyond. These include suggestions on scope
and process, ensuring decisions on the nature and form of the
framework are informed by the objectives and management
priorities agreed by Parties, and matters where additional
management and regulation should be considered.
Introduction
Consistent with ATCM Decision 6 (2023), Australia strongly
supports the development of a comprehensive and consistent
framework for the regulation of tourism and other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica. Embarking on these dedicated
discussions is timely, given the observed growth in tourism activity,
and the indications of potential further expansion. There is an
opportunity to ensure current and future tourism and non-
governmental activities are managed in a coherent, considered and
precautionary way, across the whole suite of issues and challenges.
Australia has a strong interest in the sound management of
Antarctic tourism. Like all Antarctic Treaty Parties, we are
committed to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic
environment, to ensuring the safety of all visitors to Antarctica, and
to ensuring the effective support and conduct of national Antarctic
science programs. Australian citizens visit Antarctica as tourists,
and a number of Australian companies operate tourism activities
there.
Australia regards tourism as an appropriate use of Antarctica,
provided it is conducted safely and in an environmentally
responsible manner. We support modes of tourism that allow people
to have Antarctic experiences that are consistent with Antarctica’s
unique values, without requiring higher-impact activities such as
permanent infrastructure. Most activity is ship-based, with brief and
well managed landings, and is relatively low impact. These
activities, and the small proportion of activities occurring on land,
benefit from a well-organised industry that adheres to ATCM-agreed
requirements as well as effective self-regulation through the
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO).
Matters for consideration
Noting that Decision 6 (2023) invited Parties to develop proposals
prior to the convening of discussions of the development of a
framework, Australia presents some matters below that warrant
consideration by Parties at ATCM 46 and beyond.
Scope and process
A comprehensive and consistent framework for the regulation of
tourism and non-governmental activities should aim to ensure such
activities are conducted safely, in a manner that is consistent with
the objective and principles of the Environmental Protocol, and
without interfering with national Antarctic programs.
Consideration should be given to whether commercial tourism and
private non-governmental activities may require some distinct
management provisions, and a different
level of attention in Parties’ discussions, given their different
characteristics and associated challenges.
Antarctic tourism activity takes different forms, which may require
differing management tools or approaches. Categories of activities
that may require specific consideration could include: ship-based
activities, yacht activities, land-based activities, and aviation
activities.
There may be a need for differing management tools or approaches
for different geographic regions of Antarctica, in recognition of
different environmental characteristics, operational challenges, and
levels of activity. The Antarctic Peninsula, for example, is likely to
have differing management needs than the Ross Sea region or East
Antarctica.
It is likely to take some time to develop a framework. Continuing
discussions in the format of a dedicated ATCM Working Group
would ensure Parties can plan for and engage in formal discussions
in a meaningful and structured way.
In order to progress the work in a timely manner, and to provide
sufficient time for consideration of complex issues, supporting
intersessional work will likely be needed. This might involve Parties
working individually or in groups to advance key elements.
Agreeing objectives and content before deciding on instruments
A range of options may be available to establish a framework and
give effect to agreed management objectives, such as (and without
prejudice to a particular form) additional ATCM Measures,
modifications to existing Measures or Resolutions, an additional
Annex or Annexes to the Environmental Protocol, further non-
binding arrangements, or a new instrument at Treaty level.
However, decisions on the nature and form of any new
instrument(s), or modifications to existing instruments, should be
informed by the scope, objectives and management priorities agreed
by Parties. The same holds for related institutional support
arrangements and mechanisms that might be required.
As a starting position, Australia notes that existing legally binding
requirements will continue to apply, in addition to requirements
that may be agreed upon through the development of the
framework. Decisions on how these existing requirements are
referenced in the framework could come at a later stage in the
development process.
As with other ATS agreements, and consistent with established
practice, we regard it as important to maintain the principle of
Parties implementing internationally-agreed rules by administering
and regulating the activities of their own nationals (state-based
implementation). As such, continued effort will be required to
ensure consistency between national competent authorities in how
requirements are implemented.
Additional management and regulation
It is important to recognise that Antarctic tourism and non-
governmental activities are not unregulated or unmanaged. The
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
applies to all such activities. A number of dedicated binding and
non-binding measures have also been agreed by the ATCM. In
Australia’s view it remains a priority to ensure the entry into force
of Measure 4 (2004) and Measure 15 (2009) at the earliest
opportunity.
Noting that future trends and other developments are difficult to
predict, a framework should take a precautionary approach, and be
flexible.
A framework could incorporate best practice management
approaches already in use by IAATO or recommended by industry,
which are not currently reflected in ATCM-agreed instruments.
Unconstrained growth in tourism and non-governmental activities
would at some point result in unacceptable outcomes. These might
include cumulative or site-specific environmental impacts, site
scheduling and usage conflicts, disruption to national Antarctic
program activities, and negative impacts on the visitor experience.
A framework should include means of avoiding such outcomes,
through provisions to manage and constrain
growth - overall, spatially, temporally, regionally, or by category. In
considering constraints on growth, challenging issues such as
allocation within an international system, overflow of activities in
time or space, equity considerations, or potential unintended
consequences may need to be addressed.
Improperly managed tourism and non-governmental activities have
the potential to impact on the recognised values of Antarctica,
including wilderness values. A framework should ensure
commercial tourism activities are managed in a way that results in
high quality experiences for all visitors, includes meaningful
education on Antarctica and its importance, and is consistent with
the values for which Antarctica is protected.
The implementation of new or additional tourism management
measures may in some cases require additional action by the
Parties, for example to identify inviolate sites, or develop
monitoring programs.
Existing models of Antarctic tourism, and the operational practices
employed by tourism operators allow people to visit Antarctica in
ways that limit environmental impacts and safety risks, in
comparison with potential alternatives such as large-scale air-
supported, land-based tourism with associated infrastructure.
Consideration should be given to how to draw on and support the
benefits of the current models, and deter the development of other,
more impactful, models.
Landings of passengers are presently concentrated on a limited
number of sites. A framework should focus on site management as a
priority, and may include work to better understand currently used
sites, formalised and potentially binding arrangements for using
sites, possible regional arrangements, protection of inviolate areas,
and mechanisms to manage potential use of new sites.
Improvements to information management may be warranted,
including the type and timing of information provided by operators
and exchanged between Parties. This might require additional roles
for the Secretariat, Parties, and industry.
