Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica
Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica
Summary
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has considered
the issue of cumulative impacts in some form at most meetings and
noted that this topic requires more attention. The UK has
commissioned a consultant to further explore cumulative impacts
and the resulting report Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: A
Discussion Document is attached to this WP. The report aims to
assist with CEP’s discussions on this topic by summarising some of
the key aspects of addressing cumulative impacts and by describing
some practical examples. Recommendations are made for the
Committee and Parties to consider.
Background
The CEP has considered the issue of cumulative impacts in some
form at most meetings and noted that this topic requires more
attention.
At CEP XXIV (2022) the Committee agreed to review and progress,
through informal intersessional discussions, a series of
recommendations that had been made in WP 33 (submitted by the
UK and the Netherlands) to improve the effectiveness of Antarctic
environmental impact assessment (EIA) procedures. This included a
review of cumulative impact assessment approaches (CEP XXIV
Report, paras 66 to 73).
At CEP XXV (2023) the Committee again stressed the importance of
addressing cumulative impacts1(CEP XXV Report, paras 71 to 73).
The UK therefore commissioned Dr Neil Gilbert, former CEP chair
and now independent consultant, to further explore cumulative
impacts and provide a report that discusses some of the key aspects
of addressing cumulative impacts and by describing some practical
examples with the intention of assisting the CEP in its discussions.
The report Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: A Discussion
Document is attached to this WP.
The Report
The report describes the legal requirements for the assessment of
cumulative impacts in Antarctic EIAs and provides a brief overview
of discussions on this topic within CEP meetings to date.
It describes cumulative impacts, referencing the definition provided
in the CEP’s Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctic (Resolution 1 (2016)) and in other global Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) regimes, noting the general consistency in
definitions.
A description of why cumulative impacts matter is provided, noting
that they represent some of the most complex and urgent
environmental, social and governance issues of today, and there is
increasing awareness of the critical need to recognise, manage and
mitigate cumulative impacts.
It cites a reference that the environmental consequences of multiple
activities occurring over multiple spatial and temporal scales are
often hidden or delayed until a particular threshold is reached and
that there is increasing evidence that the most destructive
environmental effects may result not from the direct and indirect
effects of a given action, but instead from the
combination of individually minor but collectively significant
effects of numerous actions over time.
Elements to be considered in assessing cumulative impacts are
discussed, noting that cumulative impact assessment is not without
a degree of complexity and that most legislated EIA processes refer
to the need to consider cumulative effects of proposed activities, but
in practice they are often not addressed or are handled
inadequately.
It provides a conceptual model of cumulative impacts, noting they
can occur as a result of different aspects arising from within an
activity (i.e. different aspects of an activity acting upon a particular
value or location) as well as from different aspects arising from
multiple past, present or reasonably foreseeable activities (i.e.
different aspects from several activities acting upon a particular
value or location). Consequently, there are several elements that
need to be considered in the context of cumulative impacts:
Small actions whose impacts seem insignificant when viewed alone,
can contribute to significant cumulative impacts when viewed along
with other past, present or foreseeable future actions.
Larger-scale activities can produce a “stream” of impacts, and the
totality of impact from actions includes indirect and secondary
impacts and any activities or impacts which may be induced by the
original activity.
The interaction of impacts can be additive or interactive (e.g.,
synergistic, antagonistic, biomagnified).
Impacts may vary over time or space and the spatial and temporal
scope of any impact assessment needs careful consideration.
Activities by more than one operator may be involved.
A review of guidance documents has been included and the report
notes that guidance material identifies four key elements that need
to be considered:
A scoping process to identify the cumulative impacts of an activity
on environmental values;
A ‘retrospective’ analysis phase to establish the current baseline,
assess the historical condition of the environmental values and
characterise trends and changes in conditions over time;
A ‘prospective’ analysis phase to connect the activity and other
activities in the region to the environmental values and predict how
those values may respond to additional stress or disturbance in the
future; and
A determination of the significance of the cumulative impacts of the
activity on the environmental values when considering the total
retrospective and prospective impacts. Importantly, the impact of
the project must not be compared to the impact of other projects,
but rather considered ‘in addition to’ the impacts of other projects.
This determination should, ideally, also consider how much more
change in the condition of an environmental value is tolerable. It
requires evaluation of the cumulative impact in light of ecological
thresholds, boundaries, and/or management targets, if available.
The report provides eight practical examples of cumulative impacts
that have been reported in Antarctica from which the report draws
further points as follows:
That prior assessment of environmental impacts remains crucially
important. Ongoing efforts are needed to ensure that EIAs are
consistently implemented to a high standard, including by ensuring
a detailed understanding of the current state of the environment, a
thorough consideration of actual or potential impacts, effective
identification and implementation of mitigation measures, and
meaningful monitoring.
Cumulative impacts can occur at a variety of temporal and spatial
scales, therefore determining the scope for an EIA requires careful
consideration. Given that the majority of EIAs have been activity
focussed, it is often easy to constrain the spatial scale of the EIA to
the primary footprint of the activity and the temporal scale of the
EIA to the project period. Constraining the scope risks missing or
avoiding consideration of some cumulative impacts that may occur
on regional or even continental scales and over longer time periods
than any one project in isolation.
Cumulative impacts may arise from multiple operators conducting
independent activities over various spatial and temporal scales, yet
the majority of EIAs have been undertaken by single operators for
short-term and spatially constrained activities.
That EIAs are currently undertaken to assess the consequences of
activities, whereas greater consideration could also be given to
assessing the cumulative pressures on key values in Antarctica.
That assessing the significance of cumulative impacts remains a
challenge. Any cumulative impact assessment should consider the
significance of the identified cumulative impacts which in turn will
inform the nature and extent of response strategies. This
significance is hard to assess given the absence of any regional or
continent-wide thresholds.
Recommendations
The United Kingdom invites the CEP to consider:
Collating an evaluation of best practice methods and approaches
used to assess cumulative impacts away from Antarctica including
how such approaches could be applied in an Antarctic context.
Developing, based on the findings of the above, enhanced
guidelines on undertaking cumulative impact assessments in
Antarctica, which could be standalone or accommodated within the
CEP’s EIA guidelines (Resolution 1 (2016)).
Reaffirming the importance of conducting high quality
environmental impact assessments as well as the need to continue
to develop Antarctic environmental impact assessment processes in
accordance with best practice.
Seeking scientific advice on the development of thresholds for a
selection of ecological and environmental values in Antarctica.
And Parties to consider:
Undertaking EIAs or cumulative impact assessments that are
independent of any one particular activity but instead focussed on
key values over broader temporal and spatial scales.
Sharing any experience of undertaking strategic environmental
assessments or joint environmental impact assessments with a view
to informing the potential development of new or enhancement of
existing guidelines.
Undertaking cumulative impact assessments jointly among multiple
operators with an interest in particular regions of Antarctica.
Undertaking assessments that are focussed on understanding the
cumulative impacts of multiple activities on key Antarctic values.
