Outcomes and Proposals from the ICG on CEP strategic priorities
and the 5-year work plan
Outcomes and Proposals from the ICG on CEP strategic priorities
and the 5-year work plan
Summary
Since CEP XXIV in Berlin (2022), the CEP has considered the CEP
strategic priorities and its 5-year work plan through informal
intersessional discussions, an informal workshop, discussions at CEP
XXV in Helsinki (2023) and now finally through a dedicated
Intersessional Contact Group established at CEP XXV. This paper
presents final outcomes and considerations from this process,
including a proposed revised and updated 5 year-work plan for the
CEP’s consideration, for further adjustment and adoption. It is
proposed that the CEP:
Consider, adjust as appropriate and adopt the attached draft revised
5YWP (Appendix 1), using it to frame the future work of the CEP.
Task the Secretariat to make the 5YWP available on the CEP
website in its most updated form at all times.
Consider and discuss the use of icons in the 5YWP and agree to a
process of incorporating as appropriate.
Consider and agree to a format for a summary matrix (draft
presented in Appendix 2) to be attached as a front cover to the
5YWP.
Consider and agree to a list of modalities for actioning priority
actions (Appendix 3) and task the Secretariat to make this list
available as a “toolbox” on the CEP website.
Background
At CEP XXIV the Committee agreed that it would revisit its
priorities, the functioning of the Committee, and its Five-year Work
Plan at CEP XXV.
The Committee agreed that this should be taken forward in the
following manner:
The Chair/CEP Bureau would be tasked with facilitating
intersessional discussions to prepare for a workshop in Helsinki
prior to CEP XXV, in collaboration with the host country, Finland.
Discussions before and during the workshop would be open and
inclusive of all Members and Observers.
Members and Observers would be encouraged to facilitate
participation in the intersessional discussions and workshop by
early career researchers and policy makers/managers, as
appropriate, and ensure diversity and inclusivity; and
At CEP XXV in Helsinki, the Committee would consider the
outcomes of the workshop and earlier intersessional discussions.
At CEP XXV in Helsinki the Committee considered the outcomes of
the intersessional process and the workshop, and agreed to establish
an Intersessional Contact Group with the following Terms of
Reference:
Develop a draft revised five-year prioritised work plan for
consideration at CEP 26;
Prepare advice on practical measures that the CEP might consider
in initiating, pursuing and monitoring progress on work plan
actions; and
Report back to CEP 26.
The ICG discussions have been convened and coordinated by
Norway.
Through two rounds of discussions on the CEP Discussion Forum
Members and Observers provided input on issues that have
contributed to the material presented through this working paper.
Fourteen Members (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Canada, China,
France, Germany, Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru, Portugal,
Türkiye, United Kingdom, United States) and two Observers (ASOC,
IAATO) contributed to the ICG discussions.
Outcomes
The 5-year work plan
Through the two rounds of discussions the ICG has – on basis of the
discussions having taken place in advance of and at CEP XXV -
discussed and refined a draft revised 5-year work plan (5YWP)
which is put forward for the CEP’s consideration and adoption
(Appendix 1). The plan builds around a set of twelve suggested
priority topics in three different categories (Table 1) and include for
each of these:
Description of context: Framing/contextualizing the priority topics
to provide a clear understanding of why the area is of importance –
assisting CEP Members (particularly new delegates) in pursuing the
objectives associated with each Priority Topics.
Interlinkages with other priority topics: There is complexity in the
interlinkages between most of the priority topics and it has been
considered useful to visualize these interlinkages in the 5-year work
plan.
Objective: Clear objectives against which planned CEP actions
respond directly to and can be measured against.
Priority actions for the next 5-year period: Actions that are relevant
to the objectives for that Priority Topic and to the CEP’s roles;
makes it clear what the CEP should do; are achievable with the
resources and time available; and measurable with regard to
progress.
Regular actions: The Committee’s must-do tasks (e.g. arising from
the Protocol, CEP procedures or ATCM Decisions / Resolutions).
There was general agreement to remove the current priority
categories (1, 2 and 3). There was some desire to indicate level of
priority through the ordering of priority topics, but no clear
agreement as to which order. Thus, in the draft revised 5YWP the
priority topics are not prioritized against each other, and neither
should the order they appear in be read as a priority ranking.
Rather, each Member of the Committee are encouraged to target
priorities and submit papers according to their interest, expertise,
capability and capacity.
The ICG participants considered and made some initial exchanges
as to how to move the specific actions in the proposed 5YWP
forward. This discussion was in no manner completed. However,
the inputs that were provided in this discussion may be useful to
refer to for inspiration as the CEP or Members initiates work on the
various priority actions in the proposed 5YWP and are therefore
maintained as a summary available on the CEP Discussion Forum
under the thread “Five-year Work Plan: Revision and Modalities”
(intersessional activities 2023/24).
Format issues
Icons
The ICG discussed and agreed that it could be beneficial to illustrate
each priority topic with an icon (with an icon key at the start of the
document). These icons could then replace text in the 5YWP where
interlinkages are listed – see example in Figure 1. This would also
make the plan less “word heavy” and break up the text flow a bit.
Time did not allow for finalizing the discussion on choice of icons,
but Table 2 provides a suggested starting point for further
consideration and discussion.
Summary matrix for overview and progress tracking
The 5YWP is a complex and extensive document. The ICG agreed
that it would be useful to find a way to simplify and provide an
overview, and at the same time keep track of implementation. In
Appendix 2 the ICG provides a suggested approach to such an
overview table (only indicating structure – not all actions included
yet). This draft also provides a mechanism and mean to track
progress and would need to be updated on an annual basis after the
end of the meetings. It is suggested that the CEP consider this
proposed summary overview, with the aim to agree to a format that
thereafter should be finalized to reflect the content of the 5YWP as
it is adopted. The overview should thereafter be added as a cover
page to the 5YWP.
Table 1: Priority Topics
Environmental Pressure Priorities
1a. Introduction of non-native species & wildlife disease
1b. Impacts of Tourism and NGO activities and implications of
growth and diversification
1c. Climate Change Implications for the Environment
1d. Long-range and local Pollution
Management Response Priorities
2a. Facilitating monitoring and state of the environment reporting
2b. Contributing to marine spatial protection and management
2c. Systematic approach to the protected areas system
2d. Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
2e. Increasing the understanding of and protecting Antarctic
biodiversity
2f. Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
2g. Designating and managing Historic Sites and Monuments
Operational Priorities
3a. Effective Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
Toolbox: Modalities for actioning the 5YWP actions
The CEP has an agreed procedure for keeping its 5-year work plan
updated with new actions, through ensuring that actions that are
identified and agreed to during the discussions of the Committee at
its meeting are recorded in the plan. The CEP does not, however,
have many procedures or mechanisms that ensure that actions are
set in motion. Most actions are set in motion by Members (one or a
group) who have specific interest or feel a specific responsibility to
move a specific action forward. This approach makes progress
unpredictable, both as to whether the action is being taken forward
at all and by who and as to the timeline of progress. However, the
CEP does have a few mechanisms at its disposal that provide a
clearer path for progressing actions, such as the establishment of
intersessional contact groups to pursue an action or the holding of a
workshop on specific issues.
A full session at the informal CEP workshop in Helsinki was
dedicated to pursuing these discussions. CEP XXV and subsequently
the ICG reviewed and further considered the outcomes of the
workshop discussions. The resulting list of modalities (Appendix 3)
is put forward to the CEP as a suggested toolbox that the CEP and
CEP Members should refer to and consider when suggesting and
initiating new actions within the framework of the 5YWP, and
actively use relevant tools for this purpose. The ICG suggests that
the CEP – when agreeing to add new priority actions in the 5YWP
in the years to come - discusses and indicates which tools may be
appropriate to use in moving the action forward. The ICG
furthermore suggests that the Secretariat should make this list of
modalities available on the CEP website.
Table 2: Draft Priority Topic Icons
Introduction of non-native species & wildlife disease
Systematic approach to the protected areas system
Impacts of Tourism and NGO activities and implication of growth
and diversification
Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Climate Change Implications for the Environment
Increasing the understanding of and protecting Antarctic
biodiversity
Long-range and local Pollution
Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
Facilitating monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Designating and managing Historic Sites and Monuments
Contributing to marine spatial protection and management
Effective Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
Icon images: flaticon.com
Figure 1: Illustration of 5YWP using icons
Recommendation
It is recommended that the CEP:
Adopt the attached revised 5YWP (Appendix 1) and use this for
framing of its work in the years to come. Also,
The 5YWP should be updated on an annual basis according to
practice and reviewed strategically on a regular (5-year) basis.
The Secretariat should ensure that the 5YWP is available on the CEP
website in its most updated form at all times.
Consider the use of icons in the 5YWP and agree to a process of
incorporating as appropriate.
Consider and agree to a format for a summary matrix (Appendix 2)
to be attached as a front cover to the 5YWP.
Agree that the list of modalities for actioning priority actions
(Appendix 3) provides a useful toolbox for the CEP and its Members
to refer to when initiating and moving actions forward. The
Secretariat is requested to make this list available on the CEP
website.
APPENDIX 1
CEP 5-YEAR WORK PLAN
1. Environmental Pressure Priorities
1a. Introduction of non-native species & wildlife disease
Context: Antarctica’s biodiversity and its intrinsic values are
potentially at risk from the introduction of non-native species,
derived from a range of sources including human activities. Whilst
guidance has been developed to minimise the risk of
unintentionally introducing plants and invertebrates to the
terrestrial environment, less attention has been given to marine
non-native species risks and microorganisms. Because of steadily
growing human activities in the Antarctic Treaty area and
progressing climate change, the risk of non-native organisms
arriving and establishing is likely to increase. Further, the highly
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) is a new threat to the area which
deserves special attention and response measures. Regionality: This
issue is of continent-wide importance, but particularly where
human activities move between local and biogeographic regions
such as in the Antarctic Peninsula region where human activity is
increasing and climate is changing rapidly.
Interlinks with:
Climate Change Implications for the Environment; Tourism and
NGO activities; Monitoring and state of the environment reporting;
Biodiversity knowledge; Implementing and improving the EIA
provisions of Annex I; Implementing a systematic approach to the
protected areas system
Objective: Promote prevention measures. Facilitate monitoring of
and surveillance for NNS and wildlife disease, particularly in high-
risk areas, and ensure that – also through CEP actions – operators
have enough information and tools to prevent, and respond to NNS
and wildlife disease.
Priority Actions
Develop a rapid response mechanisms and strategy for use in the
instance of NNS and wildlife disease outbreaks.
Identify areas at high risk of wildlife disease and develop a
monitoring program for such areas.
Identify biosecurity measures to prevent intra-continental species
introductions.
Regular Actions:
Review the progress and contents of the CEP Non-native Species
Manual (5 year).
Review reports on implementation and effectiveness of biosecurity
measures and the NNS manual (as appropriate).
Review updates on status of known and new established non-native
species (as appropriate).
Consider the current threat caused by the highly pathogenic avian
influenza (HPAI) (annually).
1b. Impacts of tourism and NGO activities and implications of
growth and diversification
Context: Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic
have grown steadily since they began in the 1950s. The numbers of
tourists and tour operators have increased as has the number and
geographic spread of sites being visited. The range of activities
being undertaken has also diversified. It is recognised that tourism
has the potential to result in impacts on the environmental,
intrinsic, wilderness, aesthetic, and scientific values of Antarctica.
Unforeseen cumulative impacts may also arise. Future development
of Antarctic tourism and potential management responses need to
be considered in light of the associated environmental implications,
also in the context of other pressures being faced in the region, such
as climate change. Regionality: This issue is particularly important
in the Antarctic Peninsula region, ie. that area of Antarctica where
human activity, including tourism is most intense and growing/
expanding and where the climate is changing rapidly. It is also
important to maintain awareness of development in land-based
tourism.
Interlinks with:
Introduction of non-native species & wildlife disease; Climate
Change Implications for the Environment; Repair and Remediation
of Environmental Damage; Pollution; Monitoring and state of the
environment reporting; EIA provisions; Biodiversity knowledge;
Implementing a systematic approach to the protected areas system
Objective: Facilitate research and monitoring to understand the
impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities, seen also in
light of other environmental impacts and activities. Through CEP
actions provide tools and guidance to avoid or minimize
environmental impacts.
Priority Actions:
Develop mechanism enabling rapid considerations of and changes
to existing Visitor Site Guidelines when immediate action is
required for site management due to particular and urgent
environmental concerns.
Develop tools and guidance – in addition to Visitor Site Guidelines –
to avoid or minimize environmental impacts of tourism and NGO
activities.
Discuss and prepare a framework for an environmental monitoring
programme to assess the impacts of tourism and NGO activities that
will also consider the potential for using sensitivity and carrying
capacity to reduce impacts (relevant to action 2a-1).
Develop a framework for pre-assessment of new, novel or
particularly concerning activities (also listed as action 2d-4).
Advance recommendations from ship-borne tourism ATME (2010)
and the CEP tourism study (2012).
Regular Actions:
Regular review of all existing Visitor Site Guidelines to ensure that
they are accurate and up to date, including precautionary updates
where appropriate (5 years).
Regular review of the General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic in collaboration with COMNAP, IAATO and other relevant
expert organisations.
Proactively monitor tourism trends (in collaboration with IAATO
and the Secretariat) in order to identify and advice the ATCM on
the need for additional management measures.
1c. Climate Change Implications for the Environment
Context: Observations, modelling and global assessments describe
significant changes in Antarctic physical and living systems, both
marine and terrestrial. Changes in the Antarctic environments and
dependent and associated ecosystems are linked to and influence
climate change drivers globally. While climate change has global
impacts and will contribute to ecosystem disruption and loss of
biodiversity beyond the Antarctic region, the impacts on the
Antarctic environment itself are also of substantial concern. Climate
change may benefit some Antarctic species in the short-term, for
example, by expanding the size of ice-free areas available for
colonisation, or with warmer waters increasing biological
productivity in the ocean. However, the loss of habitat for some
species, the threat of non-native species establishing and
outcompeting native species, the increasing exposure to re-released
contaminants due to melting ice and the loss of natural values are
some of the potential negative implications of climate change.
Regionality: This issue is of continent-wide importance, although
there are substantial variations in the degree of change and
associated consequences.
Interlinks with:
Introduction of non-native species & wildlife disease; Monitoring
and state of the environment reporting; Biodiversity knowledge;
Repair or remediation of environmental damage; Implementing a
systematic approach to the protected areas system; Implementing
and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I; Long-range and local
pollution
Objective: To support efforts to monitor, mitigate, prepare for,
adapt and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a
changing climate and the associated implications for the
governance and management of Antarctica through the
implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme
(CCRWP).
Priority Actions:
Implement the Climate Change Response Work Programme, keep it
updated and review and revise in light of relevant input and
discussions.
Regular Actions:
Consider subsidiary group report, including CCRWP updates
(annually).
1e. Long-range and local pollution
Context: Antarctica is one of the cleanest, least polluted places on
Earth. However, there is growing evidence that Antarctica is
increasingly exposed to chemical stressors, both long-range
transport of chemical contaminants and pollutants and local
discharges. Some of these chemicals have been detected in the
Antarctic environment and can accumulate in the Antarctic biota.
Microplastic pollution has also been found in Antarctica, but the
presence and effects of microplastics within food webs are still little
understood. Similarly, the extent and effects of globally transported
pollutants in Antarctica is poorly understood. Regionality: This
issue is of continent-wide importance.
Interlinks with:
Climate Change Implications for the Environment; Repair or
remediation of environmental damage; Facilitating monitoring and
state of the environment reporting
Objective: Facilitate initiatives to systematically monitor and track
long-range and local pollution and enable Parties to respond
appropriately, including communication to/with relevant local and
global organizations. Furthermore, provide guidance and tools to
monitor, exchange data, reduce and respond to local and global
pollution (primarily chemical and plastic pollution).
Priority Actions:
Develop a framework for systematic, standardised and comparable
sampling and data collection of pollution in the Antarctic as per
Resolution 5 (2019).
Identify appropriate mechanisms for updates on status and trends of
pollutants in Antarctica, including a database to share and store
information.
Assess the need for guidance /regional plan on avoiding pollution.
Regular Actions:
Review of the Clean Up Manual to consider and include local
pollution information (as appropriate).
2. Management Response Priorities
2a. Facilitating monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Context: In order to meet the overarching objectives of the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the
Environmental Protocol) to protect the Antarctic environment it is
helpful and necessary to develop relevant management actions.
These may include actions to understand and report on if and how
the Antarctic environment, on a continental, regional and local
scale is changing, including understanding how human activities
contribute to those changes. Environmental monitoring is
fundamental to assessing and understanding change on all scales.
Regionality: This issue is of continent-wide importance.
Interlinks with:
Climate change implications; Biodiversity knowledge; Tourism and
NGO activities; Repair or remediation of environmental damage;
Long-range and local pollution; Implementing a systematic
approach to the protected areas system
Objective: Encourage and facilitate coordinated and systematic
monitoring efforts to understand the pressure on and state of the
Antarctic environment. Enable reporting on state and trends for key
environmental values in Antarctica.
Priority Actions
Consider objectives for environmental monitoring needed to fulfil
the requirement of the Environmental Protocol and develop an
initial framework of parameters that based on environmental values
and cumulative impact, would require monitoring to meet those
objectives.
Identify existing monitoring activities and data available to
undertake and report on an initial gap analysis between the existing
monitoring portfolio and what is required.
Consider and facilitate the development of possible mechanisms to
facilitate access to monitoring data in collaboration with SCAR,
COMNAP, CCAMLR (CEMP) and other relevant expert
organisations.
Develop a dashboard system or other appropriate mechanism
enabling future periodic summary of monitoring activities in order
to derive effective measures.
2b. Contributing to marine spatial protection and management
Context: The biological and physical processes of the marine and
terrestrial environments in the Antarctic Treaty Area are closely
connected. Protection and management activities should therefore
consider ocean-land connectivity to ensure effectiveness. The
Environmental Protocol aims to protect the Antarctic environment
and associated and dependent ecosystems, which clearly links the
continent and the surrounding ocean. While CCAMLR is the key
engine for marine spatial protection and management in Antarctica,
the ATCM can take decisions within its competence to support
robust marine spatial protection and management. Regionality: This
issue is of continent-wide importance.
Interlinks with:
Implementing a systematic approach to the protected areas system;
Climate Change Implications for the Environment; Biodiversity
knowledge; Monitoring and state of the environment reporting;
Long-range and local pollution; Implementing and improving the
EIA provisions of Annex I; Non-Native Species and Diseases
Objective: Facilitate monitoring, protection and management of
marine environmental values in ia. marine ecosystems, species,
processes and areas within the framework of the provisions of the
Environmental Protocol.
Priority Actions:
Identify needs for additional measures for spatial marine protection
and management measures.
In light of relevant connectivity between land and ocean consider
any appropriate actions within the ATCM’s competence to
contribute to the achievement of CCAMLR MPAs, incl. providing
advice relating to Resolution 5 (2017).
Consider approaches to managing threats to the marine
environment (e.g. pollution, , wastewater discharge, etc.).
Consider how the network of ASPAs and ASMAs could be enhanced
to support the protection of terrestrial and marine environments
from activities not covered by CCAMLR, including contributing to
climate change resilience, addressing land-based sources of
pollution and considering areas exposed to glacial retreat.
Regular Actions:
Maintain dialogue (or sharing of information) with SC-CAMLR on
complementary actions within the competence of the ATCM
(Resolution 5 (2017)) (continuously).
Hold joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshops to progress spatial protection
and management (c. 5 years).
2c. Implementing a systematic approach to the protected areas
system
Context: Annex V to the Environmental Protocol establishes a
framework for designating Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
(ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). These
areas are intended to support the objective of protecting
comprehensively the Antarctic environment. Important work has
been done to underpin the development of a representative series of
ASPAs, including spatial analyses to identify distinct ‘Environmental
Domains’ and ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’. The
Antarctic Treaty Parties have agreed that these spatial frameworks
are useful references to guide the designation of ASPAs within a
systematic environmental-geographic framework, and the
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has recognised the
need for a more systematic approach to the development of the
protected area system. Regionality: This issue is of continent-wide
importance.
Interlinks with: Climate change implications, Tourism and NGO
activities, Biodiversity knowledge State of the environment and
marine spatial protection; Implementing and improving the EIA
provisions of Annex I
Objective: Assess the effectiveness of the current series of ASPAs
with regard to the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V and provide
a framework for a systematic further development of the protected
area system.
Priority Actions:
Undertake work to advance actions agreed by the Committee from
discussions on the protected areas workshop (2019) as presented in
the final report of CEP XXII (para 182).
Develop criteria for assessing the suitability of bird colonies for
ASPA designation, including to identify what constitutes ‘major
colonies of breeding birds’ as set out in Article 3.2(c) of Annex V to
the Environmental Protocol, and identify IBAs that meet those
criteria. (2017 para 157).
Assess the extent to which type locality of species are or should be
represented within the series of ASPAs (2022 para 160).
Consider criteria for prioritising areas requiring protection based on
risk.
Consider further mechanisms for protection of outstanding
geological values and wilderness.
Develop a robust, interconnected and coherent set of protected
areas to limit risks of dispersion of non-native species and disease
(also listed as action 1a-5).
Regular Actions:
Review of ASPA/ASMA management plans, on the basis of the input
from the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans, and proposed
new locations (annually).
Consider the report of the SGMP (annually).
Maintain and update Protected Area guidance material
(continuously).
2d. Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Context: The Environmental Protocol requires an EIA to be
undertaken prior to an activity occurring in the Antarctic Treaty
Area, and applies to almost all scientific, logistical and non-
governmental activities that occur in the region. The EIA process is
a key tool in helping to meet the Parties’ commitment to
comprehensively protect the Antarctic environment. The real
benefit is the contribution it can make to planning an activity.
Building EIA concepts into the processes and procedures for
organising an activity from the very beginning, increases the rigour
of the planning process and greatly improves the identification of
alternative, more environmentally friendly options. Increasing
pressures on the Antarctic environment (through for example
climate change and expanding human activity) means that the
management benefits of the EIA tool will be increasingly important.
It is therefore important to continue to review and, where
appropriate, improve the effectiveness of the Antarctic EIA system.
Interlinks with:
Climate Change Implications for the Environment; Tourism and
NGO activities; Biodiversity knowledge; Facilitating monitoring and
state of the environment reporting
Objective: Ensure clear guidance to all those responsible for
activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area on conducting appropriate
assessments of the activities. Assist through guidance material
Parties in assessing, authorizing and permitting activities on basis of
EIAs. Allow for a continuous improvement of the EIA process,
where appropriate, including EIA follow-up and associated
monitoring activities to assess the effectiveness of mitigation and
management measures.
Priority Actions:
Develop guidelines for assessing cumulative impacts.
Develop guidance on how to undertake an environmental baseline
condition survey.
Progress recommendations from the EIA assessment of effectiveness
report (CEP XXIV, para 73).
Develop a framework for pre-assessment relating to new, novel or
particularly concerning activities (also listed as action 1b-3).
Regular Actions:
Review draft CEEs (as required).
Review EIA guidelines and consider wider policy advising ATCM on
updating, strengthening or otherwise improving existing rules and
measures (5 years).
2e. Increasing the understanding of and protecting Antarctic
biodiversity
Context: Antarctica’s biodiversity faces multiple threats.
Fundamental knowledge about the environment is required in order
to understand changes, impacts, risks, which species are found
where, what are their dynamics, etc. While significant advances
have been made in recent years, Antarctica’s biological and
ecological domains remain, to a large extent, unexplored. This
hampers the development and implementation of effective
management actions to protect biodiversity. At the same time,
existing knowledge, in keeping with a precautionary approach, can
already provide a basis for management actions. Regionality: This
issue is of continent-wide importance.
Interlinks with:
Climate change implications; Monitoring and state of the
environment reporting, Implementing a systematic approach to the
protected areas system; EIA provisions; Introduction of non-native
species & wildlife disease; Tourism & NGO activities; marine spatial
protection and management
Objective: Keep up to date on status and trends in biodiversity as
well as the threats it is faced with and implement and inform
relevant management actions.
Priority Actions:
Consider status and threats to Antarctic biodiversity to inform
management/protection of Antarctic biodiversity.
CEP to review further scientific advice on anthropogenic impacts on
wildlife, including disturbance, and on basis of this consider any
need for further management actions or measures.
Consider the risks for disease when developing biodiversity
protocols or tools.
Regular Actions:
Consider the conservation status of Antarctic species threatened by
climate change (in line with CCRWP action).
2d. Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
Context: Environmental damage in Antarctica might occur as the
result of chemical, physical or biological processes resulting from
human activities in the region. Furthermore, it might occur as a
result of one-off or irregular activities, emergency situations as well
as situations in which the environment has been impacted or
degraded over longer periods of time. For example, chemical
impacts might arise from pollution events, such as the critical
failure of a fuel tank; a coastal shipping disaster, or the slow
degradation of abandoned bases; leaking fuel tanks, or presence of
waste dumps. Physical impacts might arise from regular foot and
vehicle traffic causing tracking, or damage to vegetation, as well as
from the establishment and ongoing operation of Antarctic stations
and bases. Biological impacts might arise through the introduction
and establishment of non-native species (cf. 1a.). The
environmental and geographic characteristics of Antarctica means
that response actions and approaches used elsewhere may need to
be adapted, while taking into account the high standards of
environmental protection in Antarctica relative to many other parts
of the world. Regionality: This issue is of continent-wide
importance, wherever there has been or is human activities ongoing
in both marine and terrestrial environments.
Interlinks with: Long-range and local pollution; Climate Change
Implications for the Environment; Facilitating monitoring and state
of the environment reporting; Introduction of non-native species &
wildlife disease
Objective: Facilitate actions to identify, respond to, Repair and
remediation of environmental damage in Antarctica. Furthermore,
assess whether all actions that should have been taken with respect
to repair and remediation have been taken and promote actions
where it still may be required.
Priority Actions:
Develop an inventory of past sites of activities.
Develop an action plan with guidance and priority ranking to
implement remediation where needed.
Develop a rapid response mechanism to respond to new or
emerging issues.
Regular Actions:
Review of the Clean-Up Manual and include new tools as
appropriate. Members to work on the development of new
techniques or guidelines (5 years)
Exchange of information on experience with repair and remediation
(as appropriate)
2f. Designating and managing Historic Sites and Monuments
Context: Humans’ presence in Antarctica is, seen in the global
context, extremely short. Since the first sighting of the continent in
1820, the extent to which humans have left their mark here is
relatively limited. In such a context, the limited historical evidence
of a connection between man and land becomes extremely visible
and special. Parties therefore have given full recognition to the
historic sites, structures and objects as part of humankind’s cultural
heritage. The Environmental Protocol makes the Historic Sites and
Monuments (HSM) list the key mechanism for the protection of
historic values in Antarctica.
Interlinks with:
Tourism and NGO activities; Climate Change Implications for the
Environment; Implementing a systematic approach to the protected
areas system; Monitoring and state of the environment
Objective: Provide Parties with guidance and support in assessing
and managing heritage.
Priority Actions:
Develop criteria for maintenance and management of HSMs,
especially in the context of climate change and the impact on the
environment, structure and/or objects.
Implement a regular review process of HSMs for effectiveness of
management/conservation plans (if relevant) with regards to
climate change and it's impacts on the special values and potential
clean up.
Further develop criteria for Conservation Management Plans for
historic sites, structure and/or objects.
3. Operational Priorities
3a. Effective Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
Context: The CEP was established under the Environmental Protocol
to advise the ATCM on matters relating to the protection of the
Antarctic environment. After more than 25 years of work, the
Committee has consolidated itself as a highly relevant and
important component of the Antarctic Treaty system. The CEP
agenda is normally full and broad and the Committee is in many
ways “the workhorse of the ATCM”. Focus on strategic planning
provides for CEP activities focused on the environmental issues
requiring the greatest attention.
Interlinks with:
Objective: Ensure that the CEP systematically works to provide
advice in implementing the objectives of the Environmental
Protocol to the ATCM in a prioritized, strategic and efficient
manner, facilitating broader participation by Members in the work
of the Committee.
Priority Actions:
Use the 5YWP actively to frame the CEP meetings.
Consider opportunities for enhancing the working relationship
between the CEP and the ATCM.
Consider opportunities for enhancing broader participation by
Members in the work of the Committee.
Implement a regular review of priorities based on ATCM
requirements and changing circumstances.
Consider and discuss fundamental issues relating to the overall
functioning of the CEP in light of the aims of the Environmental
Protocol and the tasks of the CEP described in Art. 12 of the
Protocol,.
Regular Actions:
Keep the five-year work plan updated (annually).
APPENDIX 2
Draft: Summary of 5-year work plan for overview and progress
tracking
Action initiated
Action well advance
Action completed
CEP desires action completed
Environmental Pressure Priorities
1a.
Introduction of non-native species & wildlife disease
1a-1
Rapid response mechanisms and strategy
2024
2026
2028
2028
1a-2
Monitoring program for areas at high risk of wildlife disease
2027
1a-3
Biosecurity measures to prevent intra-continental species
introductions
1b.
Impacts of Tourism and NGO activities and implications of growth
and diversification
1b-1
1b-2
1c.
Climate Change Implications for the Environment
1d.
Long-range and local Pollution
Management Response Priorities
2a.
Facilitating monitoring and state of the environment reporting
2b.
Contributing to marine spatial protection and management
2c.
Systematic approach to the protected areas system
2d.
Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
2e.
Increasing the understanding of and protecting Antarctic
biodiversity
2f.
Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
2g.
Designating and managing Historic Sites and Monuments
3. Operational Priorities
3a.
Effective Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
Appendix 3:
Toolbox: Modalities for actioning the priority actions in the CEP
5YWP
What practical mechanisms are available to the Committee to
actively address actions?
The following mechanisms are actively being used today:
The meeting itself
Formal ICGs and Informal ICG, noting that it is not always clear
what the difference is between this, and that further clarity could be
needed. 
Workshops. 
Papers presented by one Members, or a group of Members working
in collaboration.
Setting up Subsidiary Groups to deliver longer-term issues. 
Secretariat Summary Papers of previous discussions on individual
topics
Requests to SCAR/COMNAP/etc.
Bringing in external experts to talk about some topics (e.g. SCAR/
CEP Protected Area workshop 2019).
The following mechanisms could be considered for future use:
Virtual workshops
Virtual meetings as part of ICG process and/or stimulate discussions
on other action items.
During CEP meetings: Seminar to discuss particular topic, longer
sessions or creating time on the margins to have short workshops or
meetings. This has not been done in the CEP before but has
happened in the ATCM, e.g. climate day.
Ask for volunteers to lead on topics/issues/actions, but need to
consider how to get broader participation
Mechanisms to create broader participation:
Create a CEP 101 guide (live, video, or other options) – to help new
representatives find decisions and agreements appended to meeting
reports; how things work, what we have, how an ICG functions, etc.
Mentor – encourage a less-active member to join the leader of an
action to improve collaboration and provide learning and
engagement.
Produce a state of knowledge summary when starting work on a
new topic.
Engage experts outside of the CEP to increase communication with
technical experts/scientist to share understanding of needs and
interest – note that this is difficult as the meeting is relatively
closed.
Allow remote access via zoom for community to experience the
meeting to understand how it works
Have champions for priority topics or priority actions. Champion
does not necessarily need to do the work but can contribute to
drawing connections and linking people together to progress a
particular action. Champion could encourage and connect with new
CEP Members.
Consider how we can carve out more time in the meeting – current
approach to pre-meeting management plan reviews provide a useful
example. However, note that it might not be realistic to do this in
between meetings as there is not always enough time for people to
participate.
What types of actions require what type of approach?
Consider for each action, what is the nature of the work required to
take forward an action? A small niche group might be appropriate
for some actions whereas a broader policy stage of an action would
need a more inclusive mechanism, like a
workshop format or an ICG. Actions that are requests may require a
unique approach.
The table below provides an indication of what type of approach
might be appropriate for what type of action, but flexibility must be
maintained to consider on case-by-case basis.
Table of types of action and mechanisms for working.
 
 
Actions
Provision of information
Development of guidelines
Progress in a major topic
Major long-term issue, climate change, protected area
Mechanism
Paper by single Party
X
 
 
 
Paper by Group of Parties
X
X
 
 
Informal ICG
 
X
 
 
Formal ICG
 
X
X
X
In person Workshop
 
X
X
X
Subsidiary Group
 
 
 
X
 
How/when do we make decisions about approach?
Most decisions are made in the meetings themselves, often on the
basis of a Member or group bringing forward a suggested path
forward. 
However, it could be useful to adopt a more strategic approach at
the meeting and consider the full range of mechanisms available
before making a decision, ie.  consider the advantages and
disadvantages of each mechanism available, to help us pick the
most appropriate one. In this context, important to also understand
what else is going on in the CEP. Are there already 3 ICGs going
on?  Do we have the capacity to do a new one? What alternative
approaches do we have? 
Informal/formal and the stage of development: If it is a new topic
then more informal mechanism, if well-developed then formal.
Could be useful to list how an action should be addressed in the
work plan.
Review the workplan during the meeting and/or consider
and decide the approach during a specific agenda session.
Need to maintain flexibility.
How should the Committee:
monitor and ensure progress against the work plan?
Papers are identified by agenda item but don’t address the work
plan item. It is mentioned in the text but this is hard to locate. So
there could be merit in considering if the template of the paper
could be changed to ask authors to identify what work plan item
they address if relevant. 
Review where we are at in the implementation of the work plan.
Consider the burden of doing this administrative work and how it
can be done in an efficient manner. One option would be that the
Chair with the support of the Secretariat could log progress after
each meeting. This could be done in combination with the listing of
actions arising from the meeting, which is normally circulated after
the meeting. Consider opportunities that build on the existing
process to monitor progress. Another option would be that the
Chair, with the support of the Secretariat does this in advance of
meetings.
Regularly – eg. every (three) years -  allocate time to monitor
progress in the work plan and discuss under agenda item 3 on the
CEP agenda. Then identify next steps of an action and put them into
the plan.
To what degree could Members report on where they are in the
plan without this becoming a burden? If a Champion system is
developed, there could be a role for the Champion to provide
regular updates. Another option would be that Vice-chairs supervise
topics and report on progress.
Consider a dashboard system to visualize progress or other ways of
adding information (in a new column) about progress status.
adjust its agenda consistent with the work plan?
Change agenda to have ‘focus topics’ to promote progress. 
Members would be encouraged to provide papers on these
topics. Pollution is an example where a new agenda item is to be
created. However, important that the work plan should not dictate
the agenda as flexibility is required for items of discussion. 
engage the ATCM in its work plan?
May be utility to look at solving mismatch in timing of getting
request for action from ATCM which is then delayed by a year
before the CEP can receive that request and start to respond.
Consider whether there is a way to ensure that the CEP is ‘in the
room’ to respond to requests of the ATCM. CEP may say something
is not possible, or may take X years to deliver, etc.
Consider connect between 5YWP and ATCM multi-year strategic
plan.
Consider whether there would be utility in having the ATCM
consider the CEP 5YWP and provide feedback. In particular maybe
the importance of highlighting changes to the 5YWP when the CEP
report is presented to the ATCM.
How should the work plan be reviewed and updated?
Potential approach: annual revisions to reflect CEP meeting
outcomes, three yearly time allocation to evaluate process and five
(to ten) yearly review. Maintain sight on and reflect on progress
throughout.
Do a review of what has been achieved during the previous period
as a starting point for large-scale reviews.
Five yearly review could take place through workshop or ICG.
Workshop attached to meeting helps with participation, or consider
longer sessions during the annual meeting (e.g. go on later into the
evening).
