Preparation of the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR climate change and
monitoring workshop
Preparation of the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR climate change and
monitoring workshop
Summary
This paper provides an update regarding the organization of the
next Joint Workshop on climate change and monitoring between
the CEP and SC-CAMLR. Its purpose is to finalize the framework for
the Joint Workshop so that the Steering Committee can organize the
event.
France, as co-convenor of the next Joint Workshop, recommends
that the Committee:
Adopts the Terms of Reference as revised by SC-CAMLR at its 42nd
annual meeting;
Appoints Heike Herata (DE) as the new co-convenor for the Joint
Workshop, in replacement of Maude Jolly (FR);
Adopts the revised composition of the Steering Committee and
nominate experts to join; and
Provides guidance regarding the practical arrangements of the
workshop in relation to location, dates, format, outputs, attendance
and support.
Background
The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) was
adopted through Resolution 4 (2015), and last updated in 2016.
The CCRWP contains an action (3e) to maintain a ‘regular dialogue
(or sharing of information)’ with the Scientific Committee for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) on
climate change, in particular on actions being taken.
At CEP XXIV (2022), Argentina, Australia, France and the United
States introduced WP 16 Review of progress in the implementation
of the recommendations identified at the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR
Workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring (2016). It presented
the results of a review undertaken during the 2021-22 intersessional
period on progress in the implementation of the recommendations
identified in the report of the 2016 Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
on Climate Change and Monitoring.
CEP XXIV (2022) emphasized the importance of collaboration and
communication between the CEP and SC-CAMLR and agreed to
develop Terms of Reference for the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR
Workshop.
CEP XXV (2023) adopted Terms of Reference for the next joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop and supported the establishment of a
Steering Committee with participation of both bodies to finalize
practical arrangements. It further agreed to request support from
the Secretariat and that Parties consider funding options for the
workshop.
At its 42nd meeting in October 2023, SC-CAMLR endorsed the
proposal for a joint workshop on climate change with the CEP. SC-
CAMLR reviewed the draft Terms of Reference validated by CEP
XXV (2023) and endorsed a revised version presented below.
As agreed by CEP XXV (2023), informal discussions were held on
the CEP forum during the 2023-24 intersessional period to facilitate
the planning of the Joint Workshop. CEP members received an
update on the discussions arising from the 42nd SC-CAMLR meeting
and had the opportunity to provide feedback and guidance.
Terms of Reference and scope of the workshop
At its 42nd meeting, SC-CAMLR slightly revised the Terms of
Reference previously adopted by CEP XXV (2023) and agreed on
the following terms:
“Building on the 2009 and 2016 joint workshops and the 2023 SC-
CAMLR climate change workshop:
Examine how to progress on matters of mutual interest in the
marine realm in the context of climate change (including the five
joint priority areas identified in the 2009 joint workshop);
Identify common research, monitoring and information needs;
Examine the need to enhance existing monitoring programmes to
assess the impacts of climate change; and
Propose improvements to strengthen cooperation and coordination
between the CEP and SC-CAMLR.”
Over the 2023-24 intersessional period, CEP Members expressed
support for these revised Terms of Reference. They also suggested
that the workshop should provide an opportunity to reinforce the
need for cooperation and data sharing on climate change, promote
further research to advance policy development based on best
available science on climate change, to provide guidance for
monitoring programmes to collect long-term data on climate change
and to assess the impact of climate change (in relation to existing
programs and in cooperation between the two organizations), and
to discuss the management of the impacts of climate change as they
are interlinked with the objectives of monitoring.
Practical arrangements
Workshop facilitation
CEP XXIV (2022) appointed Maude Jolly (FR) as co-convenor of the
Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop. SC-CAMLR endorsed the
nomination of Dr Rachel Cavanagh (UK) to co-convene the
workshop at its 42nd annual meeting. Unfortunately, Maude Jolly
(FR) is unable to continue in this role beyond the CEP 26th meeting
in 2024. France proposes to the Committee that Heike Herata (DE),
convenor of the SGCCR and willing to act as the new co-convenor
of this Joint Workshop, be nominated in replacement of Maude
Jolly (FR).
Steering Committee
CEP XXV (2023) and SC-CAMLR agreed that the Joint Workshop
should be organised with the support of a Steering Committee. Over
the 2023-24 intersessional period, CEP members suggested that a
balance should be respected between CEP and SC-CAMLR members.
It is therefore suggested that the composition of the Steering
Committee be slightly revised in the following way: co-convenors of
the workshop, CEP and SC-CAMLR Chair and Vice-Chair(s), experts,
ATS and CCAMLR Secretariat. Belgium has already expressed its
willingness to join the Steering Committee as an expert. Other
nominations of experts at the 26th meeting of the CEP are welcome.
Location, dates and format
SC-CCAMLR recommended that the workshop be held for 2-3 days
in 2025, ideally in conjunction with the CEP 27th annual meeting.
Over the 2023-24 intersessional period, CEP Members expressed
support for this proposal. The format of the workshop, in-person or
hybrid, remains to be determined as the advantages and
disadvantages of both options have been noted but no clear
preference has emerged from previous discussions at CEP and SC-
CAMLR.
Outputs of the workshop
SC-CAMLR suggested that the output from the Joint Workshop be a
report adopted by the workshop and presented to CEP and to SC-
CAMLR summarizing the outcomes and recommendations of the
workshop. During 2023-24 intersessional period, CEP Members
alternatively suggested that the output be a co-conveners’ report,
with any recommendations arising from the workshop to be agreed
during the workshop by all participants. Consistent with previous
approach, this would aim at maximizing time for discussions during
the workshop.
Attendance of the workshop
It is proposed that the workshop be open to participation by
external experts and observers from CEP and SC-CAMLR, and that it
be an example of equity, diversity and inclusion.
Financial and practical support
In order for the Steering Committee and the future host to start
planning the Joint Workshop effectively, it would be useful for the
26th CEP meeting to clarify the financial support for the workshop
as well as the technical support from the ATS Secretariat as needed.
Recommendation
France, as co-convenor of the next Joint Workshop, recommends
that the Committee:
Adopts the Terms of Reference as revised by SC-CAMLR at its 42nd
annual meeting;
Appoints Heike Herata (DE) as the new co-convenor for the Joint
Workshop, in replacement of Maude Jolly (FR);
Adopts the revised composition of the Steering Committee and
nominate experts to join; and
Provides guidance regarding the practical arrangements of the
workshop in relation to location, dates, format, outputs, attendance
and support.
