Assessing the need for a more developed scoping approach as an
element of the CEE process
Assessing the need for a more developed scoping approach as an
element of the CEE process
Summary
The ATCM Multi-year Strategic Plan has specified that the ATCM
should consider advice of the CEP and discuss the policy
considerations of the review of Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA). The CEP has queried the ATCM as to whether it should
initiate work on potential application for Antarctica of “screening
and scoping” process commonly applied as part of the EIA process
for large projects in other parts of the world. Norway, New Zealand
and UK proposes to request the CEP to start work on assessing the
potential application of a scoping process for CEE level EIAs and
report back to the ATCM in 2027.
Background
Point 5 in the ATCM Multi-year Strategic Plan is as follows: Assess
the progress of the CEP on its ongoing work to review best practices
and to improve existing tools and develop further tools for
environmental protection, including environmental impact
assessment procedures.
As a specific task for the 2024 meeting it states: WG 1 to consider
advice of the CEP and discuss the policy considerations of the
review of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
The review of the EIA process was conducted by the CEP in 2016,
and in its advice to the ATCM that year it requested the extent to
which the CEP should begin work on:
Creating an appropriate and effective method within the Antarctic
Treaty system of preventing and environmentally-damaging project
proceeding.
Potential application for Antarctica of “screening and scoping”
process commonly applied as part of the EIA process for large
projects in other parts of the world.
Process for regular independent review of CEE-level activities
(including the assessment of compliance with any Permit Condition
imposed by the Competent Authority).
This paper suggests that the ATCM tasks the CEP to follow up on
one of these items, namely initiate a preparatory assessment on the
applicability of “screening and scoping” as basis for further
considerations by the ATCM.
Screening and scoping
Screening and scoping are common approaches used in the EIA
processes worldwide, and an early component of any effective EIA
process.
Screening is the process of determining whether a project or policy
requires an EIA and what level of detail is needed. Scoping is the
process of identifying the key issues, impacts, alternatives, and
stakeholders to be considered in the EIA.
The “scoping” is a part of the EIA process that provides an early
opportunity both for the proponent and the competent authority to
define the key environmental impacts and issues of
concern in the EIA procedure, as well as the nature and extent of
information required to make an informed decision about the
project. Scoping defines the EIA report’s content and ensures that
the environmental assessment is focused on the most significant
effects of the project, and that efforts are not spent on unnecessary
examinations. It involves a fully transparent and systematic
examination of the proposed project to determine the key
environmental issues and potential effects that must be considered
in the EIA study. The scoping stage supports to define the scope and
boundaries of the assessment and sets the foundation for a
comprehensive and effective EIA. The process of scoping is
important for focusing the EIA study on the relevant environmental
issues, setting the scope and boundaries, and ensuring the
effectiveness of the assessment. It also reduces the likelihood that
competent authorities will need to request additional information
after the environmental report has been prepared and submitted.
Therefore, generally speaking, scoping can be considered as a “risk
reduction tool” in the EIA process.
Screening and scoping in context of Annex I requirements
In the context of activities undergoing an EIA process in accordance
with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol, screening can be
considered part of the process that supports a Party’s consideration
of the level of assessment (PEE, IEE or CEE) required.
Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol, requires Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for activities, which are likely to
have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment. The information given in the CEE should allow the
assessment of possible alternatives, including the alternative of not
proceeding with it. It should also include the nature, extent,
duration and intensity of the impacts and likely cumulative impacts,
measures which could be taken to minimise or mitigate impacts and
to deal with accidents, monitoring activities and whether there may
be unavoidable impacts. The draft CEE must be made publicly
available and circulated to all the Treaty Parties. The draft CEE
must also be submitted to the CEP for consideration prior to the
annual Antarctic Treaty meeting. The final CEE must address or
include the comments received on the draft version, and must be
circulated to all Parties before the activity starts in Antarctica. The
final decision on whether to proceed with an activity remains with
the relevant national authority.
The aim of any Environmental Impact Assessment is to protect the
environment by ensuring that the decision-making entity has the
full knowledge of the likely significant effects of the activity at hand
and how they will be mitigated, and takes this into account in the
decision making process. The aim is also to ensure that stakeholders
are given early and effective opportunities to participate in the
decision-making procedures.
Although it lays the foundation for a comprehensive assessment
process, the Protocol does not require a scoping process. As per the
provisions, stakeholders (public, other Antarctic Treaty Parties, etc.)
do not have a formal opportunity to comment on a planned activity
until a draft CEE has already been prepared. While it is likely that
Parties to a certain degree have internal processes that may have
elements of the scoping process included, there are no mechanisms
or steps that allow other Treaty Parties to engage in the preparatory
phase as stakeholders.
Allowing Parties to provide input in a scoping process may also
have a number of advantages that are likely to be appreciated by
the proponent Party, including helpful input on baseline conditions,
available technologies, etc. that may contribute to saving time and
money, and could also avoid situations where comments are
received at such a late stage in the process that it in fact is too late
to have any influence on the plans.
Past discussions relating to draft CEEs in the ATCM (based on
advice from the CEP) have often identified areas of concern, both
on principal level and with regard to environmental aspects that
have not been sufficiently taken into account in the assessment
process. Furthermore, the
tendency is that some CEEs are becoming more and more detailed
and comprehensive, although not always clear on whether the level
of detail is in fact relevant for the assessment process.
It could be that including a scoping stage in the CEE process, which
would allow the ATCPs through the ATCM to act as stakeholders
could strengthen the CEE development allowing:
Increased transparency and earlier ability to discuss issues of
principles with regard to the planned activity;
Identifying additional relevant elements to cover in the assessment
process;
Identifying or suggesting potential alternative approaches while it is
still time for them to be considered and adopted if appropriate;
Identifying elements that may not need to be in focus in the
assessment process, thus providing efficiency; and
Lessening the risk of major comments surfacing during the CEP/
ATCM consideration of draft CEE and thus reducing risk to project
timelines.
Proposal
The ATCM request the CEP to start work on assessing the potential
application of a scoping process for CEE level EIAs, considering:
Whether the CEE process could be strengthened, more transparent
and more efficient through the application of such a stage; and
How Parties could/should be engaged as stakeholders in a potential
scoping process.
The ATCM suggests that it may be useful to look to and share
experiences from the use of scoping processes in national non-
Antarctic legislation in this process.
The ATCM request the CEP to report back to the ATCM with its
advice by 2027.
