An example SCAR online application to inform State of the
Antarctic Environment Reporting (SAER)
An example SCAR online application to inform State of the
Antarctic Environment Reporting (SAER)
Summary
This paper describes the outcomes of recent work by SCAR to
develop an example online application to support the provision of
information to inform elements of ‘State of the Antarctic
Environment Reporting’ (SAER). SCAR recommends that the
Committee:
considers the example online application developed by SCAR as a
mechanism for the provision of information relevant to SAER to the
CEP;
invites the views of CEP Members regarding (i) the usefulness of
this online tool and (ii) if considered beneficial, what further topics
would be most usefully examined to support the Committee in their
provision of advice to the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic
environment; and
considers whether and how information relevant to SAER might be
routinely presented to provide context for CEP discussions.
Background
Article 12 (1) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty sets out the functions of the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CEP), i.e.:
‘…to provide advice and formulate recommendations to the Parties
in connection with the implementation of this Protocol, including
the operation of its Annexes, for consideration at Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings, and to perform such other functions as may
be referred to it by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.’
The Protocol goes on to state that amongst other things, the
Committee shall provide advice on ‘the state of the Antarctic
environment’ (Article 12(1)j). The CEP has identified monitoring
and state of the environment reporting as a Priority 2 issue in its 5-
Year Work Plan. Specified actions include:
Identify key environmental indicators and tools;
Establish a process for reporting to the ATCM; and
SCAR to support information to COMNAP and the CEP.
For many decades, SCAR has provided Antarctic policymakers with
information relevant to SAER, but generally on an ad-hoc basis.
Today, SCAR provides independent, relevant and up-to-date
scientific information on Antarctic environments and human
activities in the region through Information Summaries posted on
the SCAR Antarctic Environments Portal (https://environments.aq/)
as well as papers submitted to the CEP. However, there may be an
opportunity to provide policymakers, and other stakeholders
including COMNAP, with further and potentially more-detailed and
area-specific information, with scope to report on environmental
change and trends in Antarctica.
At CEP 25, SCAR introduced ATCM XLV WP18 ATCM XLV WP18.
Contribution of information to inform State of the Antarctic
Environment Reporting (SAER): a potential new SCAR initiative.,
which described the outcomes of a recent SCAR workshop
coordinated by the SCAR Scientific Research Programme (SRP)
‘Integrated science to inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation’ (Ant-ICON) to consider the potential provision of
information to inform elements of State of the Antarctic
Environment
Reporting (SAER). WP18 (2023) proposed that the resulting new
SAER initiative would bring together a variety of relevant existing
knowledge which could be used to make web-based maps, identify
knowledge gaps and perform assessments. SCAR recommended that
the Committee: note the recent SCAR workshops held to consider
how best the scientific community might contribute to SAER;
consider the proposal by SCAR to develop a mechanism for the
provision of information relevant to SAER; and request the view of
CEP Members regarding the usefulness of this proposal and what
information would be most useful for supporting the Committee in
its provision of advice to the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic
environment.
The Committee thanked SCAR for its paper and welcomed SCAR’s
proposal to develop a mechanism for SAER, noting its relevance to
the CEP’s work including with respect to environmental monitoring
and providing advice to the ATCM. Members highlighted the
usefulness of this initiative for the CEP’s entire work agenda,
including to develop a systematic approach to environmental
monitoring and noted that it would be useful to receive an example
report from SCAR to fully assess the practicality and usefulness of
its proposed mechanism for providing information on SAER.
Recent developments
Noting the request from the CEP to provide an example report for
SAER, SCAR has developed an online application visualising an
example dataset on the occurrence of non-native species within the
Antarctic Treaty area. The online application for non-native species
is currently available at: https://saer-non-
nativespecies.data.bas.ac.uk and has the following features:
It is underpinned by the most up-to-date curation of non-native
species records available. This dataset contains over 200 records of
non-native species introduced to Antarctica and includes
information on when each species was first observed in that
location, whether it is still currently present, and how long it
survived/survives there.
The data table is available in the online application and can be
explored by the user, including filtering records by various
categories including ‘kingdom’, ‘occurrence status’, and ‘scientific
name’ (see Figure 1).
The occurrence records can also be explored via the interactive
map, where individual species can be selected to be viewed on the
map. Individual records can be clicked on to find out more detailed
information about the record (see Figure 2).
Figure 1. Screenshot of the online application illustrating the data
table of introduced species records to the Antarctic Treaty area.
Figure 2. Screenshot of the online application that provides an
example of the map visualizing the non-native species data and
associated environmental data.
If considered useful by the CEP, SCAR could consider the delivery
of further environmental datasets that are relevant to SAER, using
the same online application approach with different topics available
in a centrally hosted location. The SCAR Antarctic Environments
Portal provides an existing platform for delivery of policy-relevant
information to decision-makers and could prove an effective and
updatable mechanism for centralized delivery of information
relevant to SAER in the future.
Recommendations
SCAR recommends that the Committee:
considers the example online application developed by SCAR as a
mechanism for the provision of information relevant to SAER to the
CEP;
requests the views of CEP Members regarding (i) the usefulness of
this online tool and (ii) if considered beneficial, what further topics
would be most usefully examined to support the Committee in their
provision of advice to the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic
environment; and
considers whether and how information relevant to SAER might be
routinely presented to provide context for CEP discussions.
