Proposal for the designation of a new Historic Site or Monument
“Commemorative plaque commemorating the first visit to the Lake
Untersee area”
Proposal for the designation of a new Historic Site or Monument
“Commemorative plaque commemorating the first visit to the Lake
Untersee area”
Working paper submitted by the Russian Federation
ACCOMPANYING NOTE TO A WORKING PAPER ON A HISTORIC
SITE OR MONUMENT
1. Has the site or monument been designated as a Historic Site or
Monument by any previous ATCM?
No
2. If this is a proposal to designate a new Historic Site or
Monument, provide the following information with the wording
that is intended to be included in the Measure:
Yes
(i) Name of the proposed HSM:
Commemorative plaque commemorating the first visit to the Lake
Untersee area
(ii) Description:
A brass plaque measuring 220 mm × 120 mm, 4 mm thick, with
the names of five members of the 14th Soviet Antarctic Expedition
who visited the area in 1969, mounted on an aluminum pipe set on
a rocky surface.
(iii) Location:
71° 20' 25.0" S, 13° 27' 00" E
(iv) Definition/amendments
None
(v) Proposer:
Russian Federation
(vi) Party assuming management responsibilities:
Russian Federation
(vii) Type:
building (hut, station, remains of other buildings),
structure,
commemorative item (plaque, bust, cross, etc.) or
other remains (pyramid of stones built by an expedition, tent,
lighthouse, etc.).
Commemorative plaque
(viii) Conservation status:
In good condition
(ix) Give a description of the historical context:
At the beginning of 1969, the first visit to Lake Untersee took place.
Members of the geological and geophysical team of the 14th Soviet
Antarctic Expedition (14 SAE) conducted the first ground survey of
the area, which included glaciological, geomorphological,
ornithological and hydrological observations, depth measurements
and water sampling, collection of materials on moraine deposits and
seabed sediments. The first description of the lake area showed its
uniqueness and promise for further research and also served as the
basis for subsequent expeditions to this area.
(x) Applicable criteria in accordance with Resolution 3 (2009):
a) a specific event of great significance from the point of view of
Antarctic science or Antarctic exploration occurred at this location
(xi) Means and methods for management:
Management activities do not require a formal management plan.
Observation and necessary actions to maintain the HSM in proper
condition will be carried out during scientific expeditions in this
area.
(xii) Photographs:
Figure 1 - Location of the proposed HSM (a red dot marks the
location of the plaque)
Figure 2 - A memorial plaque attached to an aluminum pipe and
installed on the top of a ridge extending north-south, at its
southernmost point, directly above the slope towards the lake
Figure 3 – View in relation to the installed automatic weather
station
Figure 4 – Close-up of the memorial plaque
Figure 5 – Text of the memorial plaque
(xiii) Natural environmental features, cultural context and local
characteristics.
The plaque is mounted on an aluminum pipe installed on a rocky
surface, on the top of a ridge extending north-south, at its
southernmost point, directly above the slope towards the lake.
3. If this is a proposal to revise the existing definition of an HSM,
relevant past Recommendations and Measures should be listed.
None
Proposal for the designation of a new Historic Site or Monument
“Commemorative plaque commemorating the first visit to the Lake
Untersee area”
Working paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Summary
This document proposes including a new site in the list of Historic
Sites or Monuments (HSM) in accordance with Article 8 of Annex V
to the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.
The proposed HSM is a brass plaque measuring 220 mm × 120
mm, 4 mm thick, with the names of five members of the 14th Soviet
Antarctic Expedition who visited the area of Lake Untersee in the
Wohlthat Massif in 1969.
The plaque is mounted on an aluminum pipe fixed to a rocky
surface, on the top of a ridge extending north-south, at its
southernmost point, directly above the slope towards the lake.
The Russian Federation believes that the memorial plaque with the
names of the first explorers of this unique area is subject to
protection in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol.
Historical information
Lake Untersee was discovered from the air by a German expedition
in 1939.
Lake Untersee was first visited in 1969 by members of the
geological and geophysical detachment of the 14th Soviet Antarctic
Expedition (14 SAE), during which physical and geographical
studies were carried out, including glaciological, geomorphological
and hydrological observations, depth measurements and water
sampling, collection of materials on moraine deposits and seabed
sediments. These observations were carried out from January 29 to
February 2, 1969, by a team made up of researchers D.S. Solovyov
(team leader), D.D. Kolobov, V.V. Petrosov, and N.G. Kosenko.
A trip to the lake from Novolazarevskaya station on the all-terrain
vehicle “Kharkovchanka” (driven by B.S. Babutsky) was carried out
along the route planned during an aerial visual inspection of the ice
sheet and selection of the safest route. The movement of the
"Kharkovchanka" was corrected from the air by AN-2 aircraft. The
route ran along a side branch of the Entuziastov outlet glacier,
extending towards the Schirmacher oasis.
During a short period of stay, a set of observations was carried out,
which marked the beginning of the study of this unique
geographical object and its surroundings. Ways to safely enter the
area were explored and the lake basin, constituent rocks, and
terrace levels were characterized. Lake Untersee, the permanent ice
cover and the confluence of lake ice with the Anuchin glacier were
described for the first time. Based on three measurements, the ice
thickness was determined to vary from 230 to 280 cm, with the
depth of the lake increasing to 79 m towards the center. The quality
of water and the temperature at three depths were assessed. Bottom
sediment was collected and examined from a depth of 43 m.
Three-day observations of the glacier on the southern shore of the
lake were carried out, and five avalanches were recorded.
In the area of Lake Untersee, the expedition noted two species of
birds - the snow petrel and the south polar skua, and a large
accumulation of Antarctic mumiyo was discovered on the slopes of
the basin.
Based on the results of the three-day expedition, the first
description of the natural components of the Lake Untersee area
was prepared, on the basis of which it was concluded that
continued physical-geographical research would be needed.
To commemorate the first visit to the area by members of the 14th
SAE, a commemorative brass plaque was erected with the names of
the participants engraved.
Proposal
Due to the growing interest in the Lake Untersee area and frequent
visits by people, and in accordance with Resolution 3 (2009), which
states “a particular event of importance in the history of science or
exploration of Antarctica occurred at the place,” the Russian
Federation considers it advisable to ensure maximum protection of
the memorial plaque by giving it the status of an HSM.
Recommendation
The Russian Federation recommends that the CEP approve the
registration of the “Commemorative plaque of the first visit to the
Lake Untersee area” as a new historical site or monument.
