Procedure for the establishment and operation of intersessional
activities of the ATCM
Procedure for the establishment and operation of intersessional
activities of the ATCM
Summary
This document proposes that the ATCM adopt a formal procedure
for the establishment and operation of the intersessional activities
that take place in the on-line forum of the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat website. The purpose of the proposal is to discuss the
possibility of defining and differentiating these activities, and thus
facilitate the Parties' work.
Background
Originally, the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty concentrated their
work on ATCMs. With the development and increasing use of digital
tools, new opportunities to advance during intersessional periods
have been emerging. These include the establishment of an on-line
forum on the Secretariat website (ATCM Forum).
Intersessional activities as a means of examining specific issues of
concern to the ATCM have been standard practice for over 20 years.
However, although the ATCM has formalised, through the language
of its final reports, the existence of some intersessional activities,
such as intersessional contact groups (ICGs), it has not yet
developed specific provisions in this regard, except for a Template
for the terms of reference of the intersessional contact groups
(paragraph 55 Final Report ATCM XXXVI [2013]). However, this
template is not always easily located by the Parties.
Types of intersessional activities
Intersessional contact groups (ICGs) are only one type of these
activities that usually take place between sessions. In the framework
of the ATCM Forum, so-called «informal discussions» are also held,
as well as other activities that address topics as diverse as, for
example, statements for special occasions, organisational aspects of
future meetings, requests for consultative status for some Parties,
and financial reports, among others.
Current status
Intersessional activities have been consolidated as a well-
established practice to discuss specific issues at the ATCM Forum,
contributing to the Meeting making significant progress. However,
there is no true frame of reference for its establishment and
operation.
This situation may generate doubts among the Parties when
proposing or participating in any of the intersessional activities.
This is confirmed by the Secretariat of the Treaty, after receiving
certain inquiries in this regard.
Proposal
To facilitate the Parties’ work it is proposed that the ATCM discuss
the possibility of agreeing on arrangements for the establishment
and operation of all intersessional activities to discuss specific issues
in the framework of the ATS on-line forum.
To this end, as a first step, it is proposed to request from the ATS an
analysis of the different activities that take place during the periods
between ATCM sessions at source, so that the Parties can have
sufficient elements to discuss them adequately. The ATS will
present these analysis results to the 47th ATCM.
