Management Plan Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX,
Western Bransfield Strait and Eastern Dallmann Bay
Management Plan Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX,
Western Bransfield Strait and Eastern Dallmann Bay
Working Paper submitted by the United States of America
Summary
The United States presents the revised management plan which
merges the management plans for ASPA 152 Western Bransfield
Strait and ASPA 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay into a single
management plan, which maintains the same level of protection
while simplifying the plan and eliminating duplication. The revised
merged plan maintains the original sizes of the two protected
subareas and defines a subsurface vertical boundary at 20 m depth,
which allows freedom of vessel transit over the area. In accordance
with Decision 9 (2005), the revised, merged plan has been reviewed
and approved by CCAMLR.
Background
The United States submitted a revision and merger of the
management plans for ASPA No.152 Western Bransfield Strait and
ASPA No.153 Eastern Dallmann Bay to CEP XXIV (2022) of, which
are co-located in the Antarctic Peninsula region (ATCM XLIV
“Revision and merger of the Management Plans for Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas No. 151 Western Bransfield Strait and No.
153 Eastern Dallmann Bay’. The management plans shared common
purposes, aims, objectives and management policies. Additionally,
the scientific interest and activities within these areas were also
similar. The United States recognized that there would be
considerable benefit to merging the two ASPAs into a single plan
covering both sites. The merger maintains the same level of
protection while simplifying the plan and eliminating much
needless duplication. Given that the United States considered the
changes ‘major’, the merged plan was to be reviewed by the
Standing Group on Management Plans (SGMP) during the
2022-2023 intersessional period.
The two separate marine ASPAs had been previously approved by
CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005). However, given the
nature of the proposed changes, the merged management plan was
submitted to Scientific Meeting of CCAMLR at its 2022 meeting.
After a discussion of the merged plan, the Scientific Committee
meeting failed to reach a consensus on the merged plan (SC-
CAMLR-41, paragraphs 6.31-6.40).
Following the results of the SGMP 2022-2023 intersessional review,
CEP XXV reviewed the revised management plan. Approval was
recommended by the SGMP, noting that the revised plan was of
high quality and addressed the key points raised during the review
process. The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) agreed
with the merger of ASPAs 152 and 153, noting that United States
would re-submit the revised Management Plan to SC-CAMLR for
approval (CEP XXV, Final Report, paragraphs 85-87).
At SC-CAMLR-42, it was noted that CEP XXV endorsed the revised
plan, including keeping the two protected subareas at their original
sizes and making vertical boundary adjustments to establish a
subsurface boundary at 20 m depth, which allows freedom of vessel
transit over the
area. The Scientific Committee recommended that the Commission
approve the ASPA management plan and forward it to the ATCM
for final approval (SC-CAMLR-42, Final Report, paragraphs
4.38-4.39).
At CCAMLR-42, the Commission endorsed the advice of the SC-
CAMLR and approved the ASPA management plan and forwarded it
to the ATCM for final approval (CCAMLR 42, Final Report,
paragraphs 5.59 and 5.60)
Recommendation
The United States requests the Committee for Environmental
Protection to recommend to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting approval of the attached revised Management Plan and
maps for ASPA No. XX, Western Bransfield Strait and Eastern
Dallmann Bay.
