Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land,
East Antarctica
ASPA No. 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East
Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation 8 (1985) - SSSI
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation 8 (1985)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000), Measure 1 (2006), Measure 7 (2009), Measure 5
(2014)
Current management plan:
Measure 5 (2014), CEP XXII (2019) agreed the existing
management plan would remain in place with the next review to be
initiated in 2024
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Yes – Resolution 7 (1995)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East
Antarctica
Other relevant measures:
O1 (1991) – revised map
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes – changes to captions and graphics to represent updated bird
distributions, surrounding infrastructure, topographical features and
update key and publication details
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Introduction revised to include minor editorial changes
Section 1 revised to include updated research on bryophytes
Section 2 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 3 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 4 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 5 revised to reflect updated maps and figures
Section 6 revised to include updated research on Adélie penguins
(including a new figure) and vegetation in Area, and reorder
content
Section 7 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans (including RPAS recommended wording), and
describe the risk posed to vegetation from pedestrian access
Section 8 revised to update and consistently format references
Editorial amendments made throughout the document
Map A caption updated
Map B caption, bird distributions, structures and topographical
features updated
Map C caption and topographical features updated
Map D caption and topographical features updated
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2(c) – Areas with important or unusual assemblages of
species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or
mammals
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes – Environment D East Antarctic coastal geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes – Biogeographic Region 7 East Antarctica
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
Yes – Important Bird Area No. 147
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land,
East Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has
undertaken a five-yearly review of the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 136 Clark Peninsula,
Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. The review was
conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following
sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor
amendments to the Management Plan. Australia recommends that
the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
Clark Peninsula is situated in the Windmill Islands region on the
Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. ASPA 136 Clark
Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica is located
approximately 5 km north-west of Australia’s Casey station, and
was originally designated under Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
following a proposal made by Australia. Revised Management Plans
were adopted under Measure 1 (2000), Measure 1 (2006), Measure
7 (2009) and Measure 5 (2014). Following a five-yearly review
conducted by Australia, CEP XXII (2019) agreed the existing
Management Plan would remain in force with the next review to be
initiated in 2024.
The Area is primarily designated to protect the Clark Peninsula’s
largely undisturbed terrestrial ecosystem. This ecosystem possesses
one of the most extensive Antarctic flora communities outside of the
Antarctic Peninsula and significant breeding populations of Adélie
penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) and south polar skuas (Catharacta
maccormicki).
Review of Management Plan
During the process of this review, subject matter experts and
personnel permitted to enter the Area during the past five years
were consulted. Regulatory and operational advice was also sought,
a literature review conducted, and associated maps updated. The
proposed revisions to the Management Plan are intended to
enhance protection of the values that the Area was designated to
protect.
Summary of amendments to Management Plan for ASPA 136
A revised Management Plan for ASPA 136 is presented at
Attachment A. Only minor changes are proposed and there are no
changes to the Area boundary. Proposed amendments are
summarised as follows:
Introduction revised to include minor editorial changes
Section 1 revised to include updated research on bryophytes
Section 2 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 3 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 4 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans
Section 5 revised to reflect updated maps and figures
Section 6 revised to include updated research on Adélie penguins
(including a new figure) and vegetation in Area, and reorder
content
Section 7 revised to allow for consistency with other ASPA
Management Plans (including standard wording on the use of
remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS)), and describe the risk
posed to vegetation from pedestrian access
Section 8 revised to update and consistently format references
Editorial amendments made throughout the document
Map A caption updated
Map B caption, bird distributions, structures and topographical
features updated
Map C caption and topographical features updated
Map D caption and topographical features updated.
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
Management Plan for ASPA 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast,
Wilkes Land, East Antarctica.
