Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during
the intersessional period 2023-2024
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during
the intersessional period 2023-2024
Working Paper submitted by India on behalf of the SGMP
Summary
The SGMP reviewed draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)
Management Plans for two new protected areas during the
intersessional review, 2023-24, that were referred to the Subsidiary
Group by the CEP. In accordance with its Terms of Reference (ToRs)
1 to 3, the SGMP recommends that the Committee adopts the
attached draft ASPA Management Plans for (1) Danger Islands
Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic Peninsula), submitted by
Germany and the United States, and (2) Farrier Col, Horseshoe
Island, Marguerite Bay, submitted by Belgium, Türkiye and the
United Kingdom.
During CEP XXIV, it was agreed that the SGMP, rather than the
Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR), would
initiated discussion, under ToR 6, concerning reviewing and
revising where necessary existing management tools according to
provisions of Climate Change Work Response (CCRWP) action 2(e)
to; “update Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas” (CEP XXIV Final Report, para.
168).
With regard to ToRs 4 and 6, the SGMP shall start a pre-meeting
review of submitted reviewed and revised Management Plans,
immediately after the Working Paper deadline and report separately
to the CEP.
Tasks agreed by CEP XXV for the work of the SGMP during the
intersessional period
The Committee adopted the SGMP work plan for the intersessional
period 2023-24 under the ToRs agreed at CEP XV (Appendix A)
(CEP XXV Final Report, para 139). Accordingly, the SGMP
commissioned and proceeded with the tasks incorporated in the
Work Plan of the Group, which is presented below:
Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToRs 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional
review and provide advice to proponents (including the three
pending plans from the previous intersessional period)
Submit Working Paper to CEP 26 on SGMP ToRs 1 to 3
ToRs 4 to 6
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on the review of
management plans overdue for a five-year review
Pre-meeting review of all Management Plans with minor changes
and submit a summary of recommendations to CEP during the
discussion of revised Management Plans
Review and update the SGMP work plan (Additional task of SGMP
considering SGCCR Report):
To continue work on CCRWP action 2(e) "Review and revise where
necessary existing management tools for protection and subsequent
management of environments and habitats at risk from climate
change," consider if and how they effectively take climate change
issues into consideration and submit progress report to CEP 26
The CEP Vice-Chair from India, Dr Anoop Tiwari, convened the
SGMP. Members of SGMP (CEP Members and Observers)
participated in the intersessional work, noting that the new draft
Management Plans for (1) Danger Islands Archipelago (North-
eastern Antarctic Peninsula) and (2) Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island,
Marguerite Bay, were available for comment from any CEP Member
during the SGMP process. Discussions took place using the CEP
Discussion Forum, which may be accessed for further information.
Task under Terms of Reference 1 to 3
Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area in the Danger
Islands Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic Peninsula)
At CEP XXV, Germany introduced WP 11; Report on the informal
ICG to develop an ASPA Draft Management Plan for Danger Islands
Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic Peninsula), prepared jointly
with the United States. It noted that the Danger Islands Archipelago
was an area of exceptional ecological and scientific interest due to
its outstanding number and diversity of seabirds. It recalled that
CEP XXIV had agreed to a proposed prior assessment for the Danger
Islands. The proponents had led an informal ICG to draft a
management plan for the area and participants submitted useful
comments, which had been incorporated into WP 11. The
proponents recommended that the Committee take note of the draft
management plan and refer it to the SGMP for further
consideration.
The Committee commended the informal ICG participants for
collaborating with the proponents toward the final management
plan. It agreed to forward the management plan for the proposed
new ASPA to the SGMP for review during the intersessional period
(CEP XXV Final report, para. 108 and 114). The SGMP’s review of
the new management plan was coordinated by SGMP member Ewan
McIvor (Australia).
In the third week of October 2023, the SGMP convener invited all
CEP contact points to submit comments on the draft management
plan.
The SGMP provided its initial advice to the proponents in the first
week of January 2024, stating that the draft management plan is
generally comprehensive and that the proponents prepared a high-
quality draft management plan. The SGMP’s full advice is available
on the Discussion Forum. In particular, the group suggested that the
proponents:
include further guidance on appropriate landing sites for visiting
the Area (e.g. small boats, aircraft);
considering the appropriateness of visits to the islands and bird
colonies during periods of emerging wildlife disease (e.g. current
Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza);
clarifying provisions related to tourism activities within and near
the Area;
considering the possible value of including marine areas adjacent to
the islands within the ASPA boundary, noting the reference to the
marine Important Bird Area (IBA);
to add a graph to complement the description of tourist visits to the
region;
for future consideration, having publicly accessible GPX files which
those in the field would allow boundaries to be entered into GPS
devices (particularly hand-held devices); and
referring to SCAR Composite Gazetteer to place names.
The SGMP advised that, with these and other modifications, the
plan was likely to be effective in achieving the stated objectives for
the management of the Area.
In the second week of February 2024, proponents submitted an
updated draft management plan for the proposed new ASPA at
Danger Islands Archipelago, incorporating suggestions and
responses to the SGMP advice. The checklist endorsing the
coordinator’s comments concurrent to the response received from
the proponent has also been submitted, but no further comments
were received from the members.
The SGMP concluded that the updated draft management plan was
well written and of high quality, and proponents have closely
considered the SGMP's advice and have addressed the large
majority of the SGMP's suggestions. Therefore, the revised draft
management plan is improved and likely to effectively achieve the
area's management objectives. The resulting revised draft
management plan and updated maps are presented in Attachment A
to this Working Paper. Introductory comments and a coversheet
prepared by Germany and the United States are presented in
Appendix B.
The SGMP advice to the CEP
The SGMP recommends that the CEP approve the “Proposal for a
new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Danger Islands
Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic Peninsula).”
Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Farrier Col,
Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
At CEP XXIV (2022), Belgium, Türkiye and the United Kingdom
submitted ATCMXLIV WP 38 Prior assessment of a proposed
Antarctic Specially Protected Area on Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island,
Marguerite Bay. The co-proponents explained that the proposed
ASPA would protect a range of scientific and environmental values
associated with lakes in the region. They emphasised that research
had characterised the lakes as rare examples of refugia for species
through the last glacial cycle, as well as rare examples in the region
of rock-bound oligotrophic lakes, making them ecologically
significant. The proponents further noted that the lakes were
important to international research and held aesthetic and
wilderness value. The proponents expressed that a higher level of
protection for the lakes was appropriate in light of the fact that the
lakes were in proximity to a newly proposed Turkish research
station. The Committee noted the value of turning the CEP’s
attention to the importance of lakes in the region. The Committee
agreed that the value of the proposed ASPA merited special
protection and endorsed the development of a management plan for
the area led by the three proponents.
At CEP XXV (2023) Belgium, Türkiye and the United Kingdom
submitted ATCMXLV WP60rev.1 Draft Antarctic Specially Protected
Area Management Plan for Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island,
Marguerite Bay. The Committee, noting the important history of the
lakes and the relevance of their protection to understanding
processes such as dispersion across the continent, agreed that the
area merited protection and that the draft management plan be
forwarded to the SGMP for review in the 2023/24 intersessional
period. The SGMP’s review of the management plan was
coordinated by the SGMP member from Spain (Prof. Antonio
Quesada). In October 2023, the SGMP convener issued an invitation
to all CEP contact points to submit comments on the draft
management plan.
In December 2023, the SGMP provided its initial advice to the
proponents. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the Discussion
Forum. In particular, the group suggested that the proponents:
should include more information on the broader picture of activities
in the proposed area and more granular detail of the research or
other activities that could be carried out on site in and around the
proposed ASPA;
should further consider management within the corridor to ensure
protection of the catchment for Rasp Lake;
should provide more detailed information on access to the area to
support informed EIAs and approvals;
should add some comments on the different vulnerability of the
lakes seasonally; and
should consider the preparation of a further map showing the Area
boundary, but without the underlying satellite imagery.
The SGMP advised that, with these and other minor modifications,
the plan was likely to be effective in achieving the stated objectives
for management of the Area.
In the second week of March 2024, Belgium, Türkiye, and the
United Kingdom provided an updated draft management plan and
other suggested documents as advised by SGMP, explaining its
responses to the SGMP’s advice.
The SGMP concluded that the updated draft management plan was
well written and of high quality, and proponents have closely
considered the SGMP's advice and have addressed the large
majority of the SGMP's suggestions. Therefore, the revised draft
management plan is improved and likely to be effective in
achieving the management objectives for the Area. The resulting
revised draft management plan and updated figures are presented in
Attachment B to this Working Paper. Introductory comments and a
coversheet prepared by the proponents are presented at Appendix
C.
The SGMP advice to the CEP
The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the “Proposal for a
new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Farrier Col, Horseshoe
Island, Marguerite Bay” (Attachment B).
Review of other draft Management Plans under ToRs 1 to 3
At CEP XV (2012) the Committee considered draft revised
management plans prepared by Chile for ASPA 146 South Bay,
Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago, and decided to refer these
management plans to the SGMP for intersessional review (CEP XV
Final Report para. 92). At CEP XVII (2014) the Committee
considered further draft revised management plans prepared by
Chile for ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula, King George (25 de Mayo)
Island and ASPA 150 Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell
Bay, King George (25 de Mayo) Island, and decided to refer these
management plans to the SGMP for intersessional review (CEP
XXVII Final Report para. 153).
Chile reported during CEP XXV that it intends to submit draft
management plans for ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula, ASPA 146 South
Bay, and ASPA 150 Ardley Island before the next CEP meeting for
SGMP for review. The management plans are still under review by
the proponent (Chile), so there is no progress to report at the time
of the presentation of this paper.
Task under ToRs 4 and 6
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of
management plans overdue for five-year review
Through the SGMP forum, Parties were invited to contact the SGMP
if they so wished. No requests were received from Parties that may
need advice to initiate the five-year review of Management Plans,
but we should recall that the SGMP is available to advise, facilitate
or guide
the review tasks when necessary. A list of the Management Plan of
ASPA and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) due for review
during ATCM 46 may be accessed at;
https://www.ats.aq/devphBackEnd/StatusReport/pdf?lang=e
Pre-meeting review of all Management Plans with minor changes
and submission of a summary of recommendations to CEP
In accordance with SGMP ToR 4, a separate sub-forum was created
to initiate the regular pre-meeting review of Management Plans,
where relevant documents were posted in the forum by the
moderator, Dr. Polly Penhale (USA).
Since the pre-meeting review of Management Plans can only be
started after the due date of submission of the WP to the ATCM 46,
following the timeline and action adopted to achieve the objective,
the summary of discussions shall be submitted to the SGMP
Convener during CEP 26.
Review and update SGMP work plan
The SGMP has a task under its ToR 6 to ‘Review and revise where
necessary existing management tools for protection and subsequent
management of environments and habitats at risk from climate
change,’ and ‘consider if and how they effectively consider climate
change issues’. The SGMP had discussed this task through two
rounds of discussions and concluded that it might be appropriate to
prioritise in the first round the review of the Guidelines for
implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in
Article 3, Annex V of the Environment Protocol (Annex to
Resolution 1 (2000)) and the (Revised) Guide to the Preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
(Resolution 2 (2011)). The SGMP planned to initiate this work in
the next intersessional period and report back to CEP 26 on
progress.
Members from Norway (Kristin Storvik) and the United Kingdom
(Dr Kevin Hughes) led the review and the subsequent revision of
the (Revised) Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (2011). While the primary aim
of the revision was to consider how effectively the Guide considers
climate change issues, efforts were also made to update other
elements of the Guide that had grown out of date since its last
revision in 2011. The draft revised Guide was submitted to the
SGMP for consideration in February 2024, and the resulting
proposed amendments were incorporated into the draft revised
Guide. The draft revised Guide to the Preparation of Management
Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas is provided in
Attachment C for the consideration of the Committee.
In reviewing the document, it was noted that it would be useful if
Appendix 2 to the Guide, the Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) visit report form, were easily accessible as a stand-alone
document, noting that this is a form that most ASPA management
plans require visitors to complete and return to their authorities
after completing work/visit in an ASPA. It is therefore suggested
that the CEP request that the Secretariat make this document
available as a stand-alone document on the ATS website.
The SGMP advice to the CEP:
adopt the revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas through a Resolution (provided
in Appendix D and Attachment D); and
task the Secretariat to make Appendix 2 in this Guide available as a
stand-alone document on the ATS website.
Proposed Work Plan for the SGMP, for the intersessional period
2024-25
The SGMP proposes the following Work Plan, to which other
actions that CEP XXV may consider appropriate may be added.
Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToRs 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional
review and provide advice to proponents (including the three
pending plans from the previous intersessional period)
Submit Working Paper to CEP 27 on SGMP ToRs 1 to 3
ToRs 4 to 6
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on the review of
management plans overdue for five-year review
Pre-meeting review of all Management Plans with minor changes
and submit a summary of recommendations to CEP during the
discussion of revised Management Plans
Review and update the SGMP work plan (Additional task of SGMP
considering SGCCR Report):
To continue work on CCRWP action 2(e) "Review and revise where
necessary existing management tools for protection and subsequent
management of environments and habitats at risk from climate
change," consider if and how they effectively take climate change
issues into consideration and submit progress report to CEP 27
Other issues: Operational matters, SGMP Members
The current list of members of the SGMP is as follows:
Anna Fioretti (Italy) - anna.fioretti@igg.cnr.it
Anoop Kumar Tiwari (India) – anooptiwari.ncpor@nic.in
Antonio Quesada (Spain) - antonio.quesada@uam.es
Birgit Njaastad (Norway) - birgit.njaastad@npolar.no
Carla Ubaldi (Italy) - carla.ubaldi@enea.it
Ceisha Poirot (New Zealand) – c.poirot@antarcticanz.govt.nz
Ewan McIvor (Australia) - Ewan.McIvor@aad.gov.au
Heike Herata (Germany) - heike.herata@uba.de
Katarzyna Fudala (Poland)- fudala.katarzyna@ibb.waw.pl
Luis Caro Lara (Chile) - lcaro@inach.cl
Kevin Hughes (the United Kingdom) – kehu@bas.ac.uk
Kristin Storvik (Norway) – kristin.storvik@npolar.no
Paula Casela (Argentina) – cxn@mrecic.gov.ar
Polly Penhale (the United States) – ppenhale@nsf.gov
Observers:
Claire Christian (ASOC) - claire.christian@asoc.org
Lisa E. Kelley (IAATO) - lkelley@iaato.org
Susie Grant (SCAR) – suan@bas.ac.uk
Members are invited to propose more members to the Group.
Nonetheless, we should recall that all CEP Members are invited to
participate in the established discussions or intersessional tasks.
The SGMP advice to the CEP
The SGMP provides the following advice to CEP:
that the three management plans pending in the previous periods
continue to be within the scope of the SGMP, in order to provide
advice once the proposing country has made the revised versions
available to the Group and that the CEP endorses the proposal to
explore mechanisms and additional tools to facilitate the review of
pending plans;
that the CEP approves the “Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially
Protected Area at Danger Islands Archipelago (North-eastern
Antarctic Peninsula).”
that the CEP approves the “Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially
Protected Area at Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay”
(Attachment B).
that, under ToR 6, the CEP recommends to the ATCM the adoption
of the revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas through a Resolution (provided
in Appendix D and attachment D); and
that the CEP tasks the Secretariat to make Appendix 2 in this Guide
available as a stand-alone document on the ATS website.
that the CEP considers the Work Plan and suggest appropriate
modifications if needed, based on the deliberations during CEP 27.
Appendix A Revised Terms of Reference for the Subsidiary Group
on Management Plans. (CEP XIV, Final Report. Appendix 4)
The original four Terms of Reference for the SGMP were defined in
Appendix 3 of the CEP XI (2008) report. Following a review of the
effectiveness of the SGMP at CEP XIII (2010), a fifth Term of
Reference was added. In 2022, an additional Term of Reference was
introduced to reflect the new regular task of pre-meeting review of
Management Plans. The current Terms of Reference are presented
in Appendix 4 to the CEP XXIV report:
Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan recommended
by the Committee for intersessional review to consider, in
consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the
Protocol, particularly, Articles 3, 4 and 51, and with relevant CEP
guidelines2;
its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness3;
whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation4; and
whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the
Antarctic protected
areas system as a whole5.
Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft
Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.
Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the
adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management
Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by
Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing
so. The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans
and the information required by the ATCM's Legal and Institutional
Working Group.
Operate a pre-meeting subforum on the review of all revised
Management Plans with minor changes, irrespective of whether or
not they have been submitted to the SGMP, and provide a summary
of the recommendations arising from the pre-meeting review for
consideration by the CEP during the discussion of revised
management plans.
Provide advice to the CEP as necessary for the purpose of improving
Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review.
Develop and suggest procedures that would assist in achieving a
long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA
management plans contain adequate content, and are clear,
consistent and likely to be effective6
________________________________________________________________
Modified from "Terms of Reference for an Intersessional Contact
Group to Consider draft Management Plans" ToR #2 (CEP VII
Report, Annex 4).
2 Currently including – for ASPAs – Resolution 2 (1998) Guide for
the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas, Resolution 1 (2000) Guidelines for Implementation
of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V
of the Environmental Protocol and Resolution 2 (2021) Revised
Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals
for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed
Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments
3 From "Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft
ASPA and ASMA Management Plans" paragraph 8 (CEP VI Report,
Annex 4), and "Terms of Reference for an Intersessional Contact
Group to Consider draft Management Plans" ToR #2 (CEP VII
Report, Annex 4).
4 Agreement at CEP VIII (Report paragraph 187).
5 Agreement at CEP VIII (Report paragraph 187).
6 Term of Reference added at CEP XIII (Report paragraph162)
Appendix B: Introductory Comments by Germany and the United
States
Draft Management Plan for Danger Islands Archipelago (North-
eastern Antarctic Peninsula)
The Danger Islands are located east of the northern tip of the
Antarctic Peninsula, about 10 – 25 km east of Joinville Island, in
the region of 54°56‘– 54°35‘W, 63°22‘- 63°30’S. The Antarctic
Specially Protected Area includes seven islands and has a terrestrial
area of approximately 4.48 km².
The objective of the proposed ASPA is to protect scientific,
environmental, aesthetic and wilderness values. The primary reason
for designation of the Area is its outstanding number and diversity
of seabirds, which are representative of the region. The Area hosts
large colonies of seabirds, which are of exceptional ecological and
scientific interest. This relates above all to Adélie penguins
(Pygoscelis adeliae). The Area hosts the third and fourth largest
Adélie penguin colonies in the world and more Adélie penguins
than the rest of the Antarctic Peninsula region combined. In
addition, there are breeding sites of nine further species of Antarctic
seabirds on the Danger Islands, including a large colony of Antarctic
shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps). Currently, main activities of
ongoing scientific research focus on the seabird population of the
area. The Area is designated because it has been rarely visited and
is in almost pristine condition, i.e., it is of great value as a reference
site for comparative scientific studies and long-term monitoring.
Germany and the United States presented a prior assessment for the
proposed ASPA at CEP XXIV (WP13 Prior assessment of a proposed
Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Danger Islands Archipelago).
At CEP XXIV, the Parties agreed to the proposed prior-assessment
for Danger Islands. The CEP noted ‘the quality of the evaluation put
forward by the proponents and considered this to be an area worth
taking forward in the intersessional period with the aim of drafting
a management plan for the area. The Committee encouraged
Members with knowledge and information relevant to this process
to engage in these intersessional discussions’ (see Final Report CEP
XXIV and WP13 XLIV ATCM). In 2022/2023, Germany and the
United States updated the Draft Management Plan respectively after
evaluating and considering the incoming comments and proposals
from the experts of an informal ICG.
During CEP XXV, the CEP reaffirmed that it had recognised that the
outstanding values of the site warranted protection and had
forwarded the draft management plan for the area to the SGMP for
review.
In response to comments received from the SGMP, Germany and the
United States revised the proposed management plan, e.g. adapting
the wording to the standard wording presented in the Guide. The
most notable revisions were updating chapter 1 Description of the
values to be protected, e.g. by clarifying the description of the
wilderness and aesthetic values. Further, in chapter 3 Management
Activities aspects on projected impacts of climate change to the
protected values of the Area have been addressed. The boundaries
of the area were clarified in chapter 5. The chapter 7 Terms and
conditions for entry permits has been revised as well, e.g. including
aspects of possible HPAI outbreaks, coordination between and
established scientific programs and/or appropriate national
authorities and clarifying activities that may be conducted within
the are as well as requirements for visitor reporting. Finally, an
additional map and a graph about the history of touristic visits to
the Danger Islands were added to the Management Plan.
The revised management plan is presented to the CEP for approval.
Cover page
ASPA No. XXX Danger Islands Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic
Peninsula)
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? Note: this
information may be found on the ATS website in the Documents
database by searching under the name of the area. While the ATS
has made every effort to ensure the completeness and accuracy of
the information in the database, occasional errors or omissions may
occur. The proponents of any revision to a protected area are best
placed to know the history of that area, and are kindly requested to
contact the Secretariat if they notice any apparent discrepancy
between the regulatory history as they understand it and that
displayed on the ATS database.
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as a SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes, Environment Domain E - Antarctic Peninsula, Alexander and
other islands
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes, ACBR 3: North-west Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
Yes, ANT062, ANT063, ANT064, Antarctic marine IBA 13,
proximity to Area of Ecological Significance (AES)
Appendix C: Introductory Comments by Belgium, Türkiye and the
United Kingdom.
Draft Management Plan for Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island,
Marguerite Bay
The primary reason for proposing the designation of Farrier Col,
Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay as an Antarctic Specially
Protected Area is to protect scientific and environmental values
associated with the freshwater lakes in the area. The proposed area
incorporates the scientifically important lakes and much of the
associated lake catchment areas. The designation of the area as an
ASPA would protect a variety of outstanding values:
Sediment cores from Puller Lake show it to have the longest known
biological occupation of any lake in the Antarctic Peninsula region. 
Thus, these lakes were likely refugia for biota through the last
glacial cycle and make the site of importance for future scientific
research.
The oligotrophic lakes are exceptional as few other examples exist
in the region. Furthermore, the lakes contain the fairy shrimp,
Branchinecta gaini, and form the southern boundary of its known
range on Horseshoe Island.
The proposed area has been subject to little human impact and no
human infrastructure is present.
The proposed area also protects outstanding wilderness and
aesthetic values.
Planned scientific activities within the Area include monitoring of
lakes for anthropogenic pollutants that are derived from local and
global sources, and analysis of the variation in lake hydrological
features, chemistry and biodiversity under different environmental
conditions, including those resulting from climate change.
At CEP XXIV, Belgium, Türkiye and the United Kingdom presented
WP38 Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected
Area on Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay. Following
discussion of the merits of the designation of the areas as an ASPA,
the Committee agreed that the values of the proposed ASPA merited
special protection and endorsed the development of a management
plan for the area led by the three proponents. At CEP XXV, the
proponents presented WP60rev.1 Draft Antarctic Specially
Protected Area Management Plan for Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island,
Marguerite Bay. The Committee agreed to forward the Management
Plan for the proposed new ASPA to the SGMP for review during the
forthcoming intersessional period.
Following the subsequent receipt of comments from the SGMP, the
proponents provided an updated draft Management Plan.
Changes to the draft Management Plan included the provision of:
more information on the broader picture of activities in the
proposed area;
more detail of the research or other activities that could be carried
out in and around the proposed ASPA;
further details with regard to the management of the corridor
between the two sites that comprise the proposed area;
additional information on the different vulnerability of the lakes
seasonally; and
a further map showing the proposed area boundary, but without the
underlying satellite imagery.
The SGMP concluded that the revised draft Management Plan was
improved and likely to be effective in achieving the management
objectives for the area.
The revised Management Plan is presented to the CEP for approval.
Cover page
ASPA No. XXX Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes, Environment Domain B - Antarctic Peninsula mid-northern
latitudes geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes, ACBR 3: North-west Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
None
Appendix D
Draft Resolution X (2024)
Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
The Representatives, Recalling the requirements under Article 5 of
Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) to prepare and revise Management
Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas;
Recalling also the Action within the CEP Climate Change Response
Work Programme (CCRWP) to ‘Review and revise where necessary
existing management tools to consider if they aﬀord the best
practical adaptation measure to areas at risk from climate change’.
Noting that under Resolution 2 (1998) the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (“ATCM”) adopted a Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas;
Noting that under Resolution 2 (2011) the ATCM adopted a revised
version of the Guide; Desiring to update the Guide to reflect current
best practice in the preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas, including with regard to climate change;
Considering the revision of the Guide by the Committee for
Environmental Protection and its Subsidiary Group on Management
Plans; Recommend that: 1. the Guide to the Preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas annexed
to this Resolution replace the Guide adopted by Resolution 2 (2011)
and be used by those engaged in the preparation or revision of
Management Plans; 2. the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat post the text
of Resolution 2 (2011) on its website in a way that makes clear that
it is no longer current; and
3. the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat make Appendix 2 of this Guide
available as a stand-alone document on the ATS website.
