Air Safety in Antarctica
Importance of ATCM XLIV Resolution 3 (2022) Provisions
Air Safety in Antarctica
Importance of ATCM XLIV Resolution 3 (2022) Provisions
Summary
Promoting operational safety in the Antarctic Treaty area is a key
priority for COMNAP. Through COMNAP, the community has
provided advice to ATCMs on operational safety, including on a
range of aviation issues. This paper is intended to remind Parties of
the importance of ATCM XLIV Resolution 3 (2022) Air Safety in
Antarctica which was agreed to by the ATCM based on recent
COMNAP advice to improve air safety in Antarctica.
Air Safety Reminders for the Whole Antarctic Community
After extensive community involvement in the COMNAP Antarctic
Aviation Project 2019–2022, COMNAP provided initial advice in
ATCM XLIII (2021) WP008 Preliminary COMNAP advice in regards
to ATCM review of Resolution 1 (2013), and further advice in
ATCM XLIV (2022) WP017 Additional COMNAP advice in regards
to ATCM review of Resolution on Air Safety In Antarctica,
supported by the outcomes of the workshop presented in ATCM
XLIV (2022) IP006 COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Workshop Report
COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Workshop 2022 Final Report (Report),
18 March 2022. Can be found on page: www.comnap.aq/
symposiums-workshops-reports. (Report).
Reminder: Transponders on
The number 1 recommendation from the workshop was “All aircraft
must operate with transponders turned on while operating in the
Antarctic Treaty Area.” This advice was adopted by the ATCM as
Resolution 3 (2022), paragraph 6b.
Installed and working transponders provide “at least a minimal
level of flight awareness/deconfliction and informs inflight
decision-making. Even in areas of little to lite flight activity”
(Report, page 5). For all larger personned aircraft (fixed and rotary-
wing) transponders are installed with the pilot having to turn them
on. Technology advances mean that transponders are also now
available for unpersonned Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS). They can also now be added to untethered balloons and
other autonomous or untethered (or tethered) air equipment.
Parties should remind their military, governmental, and non-
governmental operators of aircraft, including contractors, to ensure
that the pilot of any airborne equipment in the Antarctic Treaty
area turns the transponder on for the duration of the flight.
Reminder: “All flights”
Air safety in Antarctica depends on “all flights” and all flight
operators contributing to air safety in the Antarctic Treaty area.
This includes military and non-military aircraft alike and applies
equally to inter-continental and intra-continental flights regardless
of duration or region. As per Resolution 3 (2022) this recognises
that there is “increasing diversification of aviation activities” and
also reaffirms the safety aspects of “traditional” air activities, that
is, activity that has been used in support of Antarctic operations for
much of the past 60 years.
Reminder: Information Exchange
Information exchange is two-fold: exchange of information in
advance of the season and information exchange in real-time.
ATCM Resolution 3 (2022) contains several provisions related to
information exchange in advance of activity, including, “the
importance of ensuring effective communications between all actors
involved in Antarctic air activities, including air operators, National
Competent Authorities and COMNAP, and consistency of
information across the various data repositories within the Antarctic
Treaty System.”; and “that, for the purpose of the safety of air
operations in the Antarctic Treaty area, Parties should exchange,
preferably by 1 September and no later than 15 November each
year, information about their planned air operations in accordance
with the standardised format of the Electronic Information
Exchange System (“EIES”)”.
“Consistency of information” across the various ATS data
repositories is currently poor. For example, the COMNAP database
which contains information on Antarctic ground facilities, Antarctic
communications centres, vessels and other information for the
purposes of maintaining the Antarctic Flight Information Manual
(AFIM) is often not always regularly checked by national Antarctic
programs to ensure currency. Programs should remove the
presumption of currency by regularly reviewing their information in
the COMNAP database.
In addition, given that COMNAP information is generally the
responsibility of the national Antarctic program representative,
there is often a lack of consistency with the COMNAP database
information and the information that can, at the same given time,
be found in the EIES. This is likely because, generally, information
input in the EIES is done by other entities within an ATS country
(the Competent Authority or an ATCM delegate that is different to
the data entry person for the COMNAP database). Consistency of
information is often critical to having full understanding of any
given situation.
In respect of real-time information including situation awareness,
Resolution 3 (2022) reaffirms the use of PAIS, SAIS, and TIBA
procedures, with the TIBA frequency for Antarctica established
through agreement in COMNAP as SCALOP Notice 10, 26 February
1990, Action 3-90 as 129.7MHz. “Common TIBA use in the
Antarctic”. There are greater opportunities to share real-time
information on air activities now due to technological advances,
including increased bandwidth capabilities in many Antarctic areas.
With increase in and diversification of air activity, lack of real-time
situational awareness may contribute to accidents, incidents and
near-misses. Lack of situational awareness also impacts ability to
respond in case of emergency. Parties are reminded of the
Resolution 3 (2022), paragraph 6b statement that “operators should
strongly consider the installation and use of Automatic Dependent
Surveillance – Broadcast (“ADS-B”) In and/or Traffic Collision
Avoidance System (“TCAS”) technology in all aircraft operating in
the Antarctic Treaty area’. Operators are urged to contribute aircraft
positional data into the COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS),
IAATO’s, or to publicly available (subscription service) off-the-shelf
global tracking systems for community situational awareness.
Recommendation
We urge the Parties to ensure that their operators, governmental
and non-governmental alike, and those that provide information
into the various data repositories of the ATS are implementing the
provisions of Resolution 3 (2022) in order to support safety of air
operations in the Antarctic Treaty area and are reminded to
consider the strong recommendation to install and use advanced
technologies to contribute to situation awareness of all air activity
in the Antarctic Treaty area.
