ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                    XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                        SEOUL
                   May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 10
May 8, 1995
English
Original: English


                PRE-SESSIONAL DOCUMENT CIRCULATION
              DOCUMENT HANDLING:  SUBMISSION AND CIRCULATION

                      Agenda Item 18
              (Submitted by New Zealand)
PRE-SESSIONAL DOCUMENT CIRCULATION
(submitted by New Zealand)

(Agenda Item 18)

DOCUMENT HANDLING: SUBMISSION AND CIRCULATION

The revised Rules of Procedure (1992) set broad time-lines in respect of the preparation 
of the Agenda for ATCMs but they do not provide guidance on the submission and 
circulation of documents (see Appendix I for relevant rules). In order to improve the 
procedures for the pre-sessional circulation of papers (and therefore more efficient and 
effective meetings), New Zealand proposes that an arrangement for the handling and 
exchange of documents prior to the ATCMs be agreed by parties. Such an arrangement 
would not relate to documents produced during the course of the meeting.

2       Submission of Papers

There is a lack of clarity in the Rules of Procedure in respect of document handling. 
New Zealand proposes that parties consider providing more precise guidance on the 
nature of working and information papers. Possible definitions might be:

"It is expected that Working Papers will relate to specific agenda items and 
contain proposals, conclusions and recommendations intended to lead directly to 
decisions. Working Papers shall be translated into the four official languages of the 
meeting (Rule 22). Working Papers may be submitted by Consultative Parties or 
Observers (Rule 2)".

"It is expected that Information Papers will provide detailed discussion, factual 
information or research results relevant to specific agenda items. Information Papers 
may be submitted by Consultative Parties, Observers (Rule 2), non-Consultative 
Parties, and Experts from International Organisations (Rules 28-41). Unless a 
Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise, such documents shall be 
available only in the languages in which they were submitted. It is suggested that a 
volume limit of 30 pages be applied to Information Papers, particularly those requiring 
translation".

3       To assist the Host Government, it might be stated that:

"The Host Government shall be responsible for translating and transmitting 
Working Papers and Information Papers to Consultative Parties. The addressees shall 
be those advised as National Contact Points for the purposes set out in paragraphs 3 and 
5 of Recommendation XIII-1 of the Antarctic Treaty".
4     Time-Lines for the submission of papers

With the introduction of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, parties are now dealing with an increasing amount of information, some of which is quite complex. This, coupled with the move to annual meetings, would suggest that the time periods in the Rules of Procedure (Rules 35-37) are very generous.

5     New Zealand suggests that the following scheme for providing for the timely and orderly provision of documentation to Consultative Parties prior to an ATCM be considered with a view to implementing it on a trial basis for the XX th ATCM. This trial would be on an optional basis and refers only to pre-sessional document handling. Such a trial would not affect documents produced during the course of the meeting.

120 days before the meeting: - ATCPs may propose to the Host Government supplementary items for the preliminary agenda; such items shall be accompanied by an explanatory memorandum;

100 days before the meeting: - distribution of the provisional agenda by the Host Government together with explanatory memoranda and any other papers related thereto;

45 days before the meeting: -  submission to the Host Government by CPs or Observers (Rule 2) of Working Papers requiring translation;

30 days before meeting: -      submission to the Host Government of Working and Information Papers already translated into the four official languages by CPs and Observers;
                            circulation of these Working and Information Papers to CPs in two copies (as per paragraphs 3 and 5 of Recommendation XIII-1);

                            Other Working and Information Papers received at this point will be circulated in the language in which they are submitted and, if possible, in translation but failing that, will be circulated in translation by the Host Government at the ATCM;

                            Papers received after the 30 day deadline and before 0900 on the first day of the meeting shall be accepted for circulation on the understanding that the submitter provide the necessary translations.

eve of meeting:             
NOTE: For the purposes of this document it is assumed that the submission of 
documents to, and the circulation of documents by, the Host Government will be 
through diplomatic channels. It is also assumed that Working Papers , which shall be 
translated into the official languages of the meeting, will relate to specific agenda items 
and contain proposals, conclusions and recommendations. Similarly, it is assumed that 
Information Papers will provide detailed discussion, factual information or research 
results related to specific agenda items.
Appendix 1

REVISED RULES OF PROCEDURE (1992)

1.

Meetings held pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic
Treaty shall be known as Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings. Contracting Parties entitled to participate in
those Meetings shall be referred to as "Consultative
Parties"; other Contracting Parties which may have been
invited to attend those Meetings shall be referred to as
"non-Consultative Parties".

2.

The Representatives of the Commission for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, invited to
attend those Meetings in accordance with Rule 30, shall
be referred to as "observers".

Representation

3.

Each Consultative Party shall be represented by a
delegation composed of a Representative and such
Alternate Representatives, Advisers and other persons as
each State may deem necessary. Each non-Consultative
Party which has been invited to attend a Consultative
Meeting shall be represented by a Delegation composed of
a Representative and such other persons as it may deem
necessary, within such numerical limit as may from time
to time be determined by the host Government in
consultation with the Consultative Parties. The
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources and the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research shall be represented by the Chairman
and President respectively or other persons appointed to
this end. The names of members of Delegations shall be
communicated to the host Government prior the opening of
the Meeting.

                                                                   419
21. Decisions of the Meeting on all matters of procedure 
shall be taken by a majority of the Representatives of 
Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting, each 
of whom shall have one vote.

Languages

22. English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the 
official languages of the Meeting.

23. Any other Representative may speak in a language other 
than the official languages. However, in such cases he 
shall provide for interpretation into one of the official 
languages.

Recommendations and Final Report

24. The Recommendations formulated by the Meeting shall be 
approved by the Representatives of all Consultative 
Parties presented and shall be set forth in the Final 
Report.

25. The Final Report shall also contain a brief account of 
the proceedings of the Meeting. It will be approved by a 
majority of the Representatives of Consultative Parties 
present and shall be transmitted by the Secretary of the 
Meeting to all Governments of all Consultative Parties 
which have been invited to take part in the Meeting, for 
their consideration.

424
on-Consultative Parties

26.

Representative of non-Consultative Parties, if invited to
attend a Consultative Meeting, may be present at:

a)      all plenary sessions of the Meeting and

b)      all formal Committees or Working Groups, comprising all
Consultative Parties, unless a Representative of a
Consultative Party requests otherwise in any particular
case.

27.

The relevant Chairman may invite a Representative of a
non-Consultative Party to address the Meeting, Committee
or Working Group which he is attending, unless a
Representative of a Consultative Party requests
otherwise. The Chairman shall at any time give priority
to Representatives of Consultative Parties who signify
their desire to speak, and may, in inviting
Representatives of non-Consultative Parties to address
the Meeting, limit the time to be allotted to each
speaker and the number of times he may speak on any
subject.

28.

Non-Consultative Parties are not entitled to participate
in the taking of decisions.

29. a)  Non-Consultative Parties may submit documents to
the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting
as information documents. Such documents shall be
relevant to matters under consideration at the
Meeting.
                                                                    425
No later than 120 days before the Meeting, the host Government shall transmit to all the Contracting Parties the provisional agenda, together with explanatory memoranda and any other papers related thereto.

Experts from International Organisations

38. At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Meeting shall decide which international organisations having a scientific or technical interest shall be invited to designate an expert to attend the forthcoming Meeting in order to assist it in its substantive work.

39. Any Contracting Party may thereafter propose that an invitation be extended to other international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica to assist the Meeting in its substantive work; each such proposal shall be submitted to the host Government for that Meeting not later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting and shall be accompanied by a memorandum setting out the basis for the proposal.

40. The host Government shall transmit these proposals to all Contracting Parties in accordance with the procedure in Rule 37. Any Consultative Party which wishes to object to a proposal shall do so not less than 90 days before the Meeting.

428
41.

Unless such an objection has been received, the host Government shall extend invitations to international organisations identified in accordance with Rules 38 and 39 and shall request each international organisation to communicate the name of the designated expert to the host Government prior to the opening of the Meeting. All such experts may attend the Meeting during consideration of all items, except for those items relating to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System which are identified by the previous Meeting or upon adoption of the Agenda.

42.

The relevant Chairman, with the agreement of all the Consultative Parties, may invite an expert to address the Meeting he is attending. The Chairman shall at any time give priority to Representatives of Consultative Parties or non-Consultative Parties or observers referred to in Rule 30 who signify their desire to speak, and may in inviting an expert to address the meeting limit the time to be allocated to him and the number of times he may speak on any subject.

43.

Experts are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

44.

a)  Experts may, in respect of the relevant agenda item, submit documents to the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents.

b)  Unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise, such documents shall be available only in the language or languages in which they were submitted.

                                                                  429
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(New Zealand)

PREPARATION FOR THE XXTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-16, and XIII-1

Noting paragraph 129 of the Final Report of ATCM XVIII

Recommend to their Governments that the following procedure be adopted to provide for the more orderly submission and circulation of documents on a trial basis prior to the XXth ATCM.

45 days before the meeting: - submission to the Host Government by CPs or Observers
(Rule 2) of Working Papers requiring translation;

30 days before the meeting: - submission to the host Government of Working and
Information Papers already translated into the four official
languages by CPs and Observers;

- circulation by Host Government of these Working and
Information Papers to CPs in two copies (as per
paragraphs 3 and 5 of Reccommendation XIII-1);

2      Other Working and Information papers received at this point will be circulated in
the language in which they are submitted and, if posssible, in translation but failing that,
will be circulated in translation by the Host Govermement at the ATCM.

3      Papers received after the 30 day deadline and before 0900 on the first day of the
meeting shall be accepted for consideration on the understanding that the submitter
provide the necessary translations.

4      The suggested guidelines refer only to pre-sessional document circulation and
would not apply to papers produced during the meeting. Documents produced during
the ATCM will be translated by the Host Government into any or all four official
languages at the request of the submitter.

5      The implementation of the procedures shall be discussed at the ATCM and
amendments may be made in the light of experience gained.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


SEOUL
May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 10 Rev. 1
May 17, 1995
Original: English

PRE-SESSIONAL DOCUMENT CIRCULATION
DOCUMENT HANDLING: SUBMISSION AND CIRCULATION

Agenda Item 18
(Submitted by New Zealand)
PREPARATION FOR THE XXTH ATCM

A contact group met to discuss the question of pre-sessional document 
circulation for ATCM XX. The following are the suggestions of the group in this 
respect.

1   With the aim of assisting a more timely and orderly pre-sessional 
submission and circulation of documentation to and by the Host Government 
for ATCM XX, the Meeting suggested that the Parties and Host Government 
adopt the following procedure to improve the effectiveness of the discussions 
of the Meeting.

2   The intention is that Papers for ATCM XX be circulated where possible 
pre-sessionally to Consultative Parties,and also to Observers, Non-
Consultative Parties and Invited Experts. and any other party invited to attend 
the meeting.

3   All Working Papers prepared by Parties,and Observers referred to in 
Rule 2, and Information Papers for which a Representative of a Consultative 
Party requests a translation, should be submitted to the Host Government no 
later than 45 days before the meeting. The Host Government should circulate 
these papers in translation no later than 30 days before the meeting through 
diplomatic channels. It is suggested that Information Papers for which a 
translation has been requested should ordinarily be limited in volume to 30 
pages. Information Papers not requiring translation, including from non-
Consultative Parties in accordance with Rule 29 (a) and Experts in accordance 
with Rule 44 (a),should be submitted to the Host Government no later than 30 
days before the meeting for pre-sessional circulation by the Host Government.

4   Working Papers, and those Information Papers for which a 
Representative of a Consultative Party has requested a translation, received 
after this date (ie.45 days before the Meeting) will be circulated pre-sessionally 
where practicable in the language in which they are submitted and, if possible, 
in translation by the Host Government. If pre-sessional circulation and 
translation have not been possible, such Papers will be available in 
translation at the Meeting. No Working Paper or Information Paper submitted 
to the ATCM should be used as the basis for a discussion in formal groups 
unless it has been translated into the four official languages of the ATCM.

5   Any revisions of a paper requiring translation that are made after its 
initial submission should be clearly contrasted and marked by the submitter.

6   The above timelines refer only to pre-sessional document circulation. All 
Working Papers and Information Papers which are produced during the course of the 
ATCM will be translated and circulated as at present. Parties may also 
request the translation of Information Papers circulated pre-sessionally in the 
original language only.
The Contact Group suggested that the following matters, which arose during its discussions, be given further consideration by the ATCM:

i) the desirability of the translation of all Information Papers into the working languages of the ATCM, or to the provision of an Executive Summary for Information Papers of more than 10 pages.

ii ) the difficulties in preparing papers for the ATCM when the Antarctic season ends in March and ATCMs are held in April/May.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                             XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                             ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                             XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                             SEOUL
                                                             May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 10 Rev. 2
May 18, 1995
Original: English

PRE-SESSIONAL DOCUMENT CIRCULATION
DOCUMENT HANDLING: SUBMISSION AND CIRCULATION

Agenda Item 18
(Submitted by New Zealand)
PREPARATION FOR THE XXTH ATCM

A contact group met to discuss the question of pre-sessional document circulation for ATCM XX. The following are the suggestions of the group in this respect.

1.      With the aim of assisting a more timely and orderly pre-sessional submission and circulation of documentation to and by the Host Government for ATCM XX, the Meeting suggested that the Parties and Host Government adopt the following procedure to improve the effectiveness of the discussions of the Meeting. [This procedure is without prejudice to the procedure for the handling of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations.]

2.      The intention is that Papers for ATCM XX be circulated where possible pre-sessionally to Consultative Parties, Non-Consultative Parties, and also to Observers and Invited Experts.

3.      All Working Papers prepared by Consultative Parties and Observers referred to in Rule 2, and Information Papers which a Representative of a Consultative Party requests be translated, should be submitted to the Host Government no later than 45 days before the meeting. The Host Government should circulate these papers in translation no later than 30 days before the meeting through diplomatic channels. It is suggested that Information Papers for which a translation has been requested should ordinarily be limited in length to 30 pages. Those Information Papers for which translation has not been requested by a Consultative Party should be submitted to the Host Government no later than 30 days before the meeting for pre-sessional circulation by the Host Government. Such papers will include those from non-Consultative Parties in accordance with Rule 29 (a) ("Non-Consultative Parties may submit documents to the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents. Such documents shall be relevant to matters under consideration at the Meeting.") and Experts in accordance with Rule 44 (a) ("Experts may, in respect of the relevant agenda item, submit documents to the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents.").

4.      Working Papers, and those Information Papers for which a Representative of a Consultative Party has requested a translation, received after the 45 day deadline will, where practicable, be circulated pre-sessionally in the language in which they are submitted and, if possible, in translation by the Host Government. [If pre-sessional circulation and translation have not been possible, such Papers will be available in translation at the Meeting].

5.      When a revised version of a Paper made after its initial submission is resubmitted to the Host Government for translation, the revised text should indicate clearly the amendments that have been incorporated.
2

6. When Working Papers and Information Papers are generated during the course of the ATCM, Working Papers will be translated and circulated and Information Papers will be circulated at the ATCM.

7. A Consultative Party may request the translation of any Information Paper either pre-sessionally or during the ATCM.

8. No Working Paper or Information Paper submitted to the ATCM should be used as the basis for a discussion at the ATCM unless it has been translated into the four official languages.

The Contact Group suggested that the following matters, which arose during its discussions, be given further consideration by the ATCM:

i)  the desirability of the translation of all Information Papers into the working languages of the ATCM, or to the provision of an Executive Summary for Information Papers of more than 10 pages.

ii) the difficulties in preparing papers for the ATCM when the Antarctic season ends in March and ATCMs are held in April/May.
XIX ATCM/WP10
Associated work

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(New Zealand)

PREPARATION FOR THE XXTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-16, and XIII-1

Noting paragraph 129 of the Final Report of ATCM XVIII

Recommend to their Governments that the following procedure be adopted to provide for the more orderly submission and circulation of documents on a trial basis prior to the XXth ATCM.

30 days before the meeting: - submission to the Host Government by CPs or Observers 
                                  (Rule 2) of Working Papers requiring translation;
                                  and Information

Less than 30 days before the meeting: - submission to the host Government of Working and 
Information Papers already translated into the four official 
languages by CPs and Observers;

                                  - circulation by Host Government of these Working and 
Information Papers to CP's in two copies (as per 
paragraphs 3 and 5 of Reccommendation XIII-1);

2    Other Working and Information papers received at this point will be circulated in   does not
     the language in which they are submitted and, if posssible, in translation but failing that,   seem
     will be circulated in translation by the Host Governement at the ATCM.                  very clear

3    Papers received after the 30 day deadline and before 0900 on the first day of the 
     meeting shall be accepted for consideration on the understanding that the submitter 
     provide the necessary translations.in the 4 official languages

4    The suggested guidelines refer only to pre-sessional document circulation and 
     would not apply to papers produced during the meeting. Documents produced during 
     the ATCM will be translated by the Host Government into any or all four official 
     languages at the request of thesubmitter. any CP. No WP can be discussed, nor 
     any INF,if not tra

5    The implementation of the procedures shall be discussed at the ATCM and 
     amendments may be made in the light of experience gained.
(1) translation : length of programme
   & its translation
   is the programme translated only in the request of parties

   - granted

(2) time limit
   2 days /45 1/30 days    (cellular times)

Korea : 1-90 days 3= days (real or 6) for translation in condition
- major objective is to facilitate meeting directive or
  rather than ease host Govt. burden

- recommendation not applied

rejected 2nd wk before the expiry

Nek. - Korea translate not lack for consultation and word before 'agree
for any.

Fr. - 45 days better than 30, prefer no deadlines
- translation of key essential. Should advise
into project + length the size. Money to 'experts' in the
way, appear ( eg. the Aus Agency on development)

Spain - no decision of date unless formal letter.

Arg - timing ok any
uk
Belgium
Germany
Sweden

Us - appear the nice & lengthy limits of our page limits.

France - perhaps make different wording for the project was not
disregarded (non-project)

Korea with Fr, Jap : noZ - would working jointly
with conditions
Paris, le 19 A[?]T[?]M[?]h[?]r[?]o
WAT 1705 1995 A

Comments on WP 10 on behalf of the French delegation

The French delegation welcomes WP10, and wishes to make one remark 
and propose amendments.

one remark : it is our understanding that WPs and INFs should be 
treated in the same way, because :

     1- information is one of the main objectives of the Antarctic 
Treaty system (cf art VII of the Treaty)
     2- some documents are very important, although they are not 
WPs. E.q. : Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs)
     3- lots of WPs are in fact backed by INF's

Amendments proposed by the French delegation :

1st proposed amendment

Paragraph 1 : replace : "45 days" by "30 days" because the 
present sentence does not seem consistent with the following 
sentence : "30 days...CPs and observers" :
What' happens to a WP submitted 40 days before the ATCM ? is 
it requiring translation by the host government (but for this the 
deadline is 45 days) or should it be translated by the author ? 
(but for this the deadline is 30 days) according to the present 
text, if I understand it correctly.
So let us have only one deadline, as proposed in para. 3. Each 
and every document transmitted 30 days before the ATCM should be 
translated in the 4 official languages by the host Government. Each 
and every document submitted less than 30 days before the ATCM or 
even during the ATCM itself should be circulated only if the author 
provides the translations in the official languages.

   Add "and Information Papers" after "working Papers" since they 
shoul be treated the same way.

2nd proposed amendment

Rewriting of para.2 because it is not clear who has to make 
the translation. Does this paragraph mean that the host Government 
must translate if the author has failed to do it and submits a 
document less than 30 days before the ATCM ? if it is so, the 
deadline does not mean anything.

3rd proposed amendment

Just add at the end "in the 4 official languages" for more 
clarity

4th proposed amendment

Replace at the end of the sentence "of the submitter" by "of 
any CP". In fact, the one interested to have a document in an 
official language he understands best is not the submitter, but of 
course the receiver, i.e. "any other CP". The French delegation 
wishes too to have this done before the discussion of the referred 
Paper (it is less interesting to have it after, of course).
PREPARATION FOR THE XXTH ATCM

A contact group met to discuss the question of pre-sessional document circulation for ATCM XX. The following are the suggestions of the group in this respect.

1    With the aim of assisting a more timely and orderly pre-sessional submission and circulation of documentation to and by the Host Government for ATCM XX, the Meeting suggested that the Parties and Host Government adopt the following procedure to improve the effectiveness of the discussions of the Meeting.

2    The intention is that Papers for ATCM XX be circulated where possible pre-sessionally to Consultative Parties, and also to Observers, Non-Consultative Parties and Invited Experts, and any other party invited to attend the meeting.

3    All Working Papers prepared by Parties and Observers referred to in Rule 2, and Information Papers for which a Representative of a Consultative Party requests a translation,should be submitted to the Host Government no later than 45 days before the meeting. The Host Government should circulate these papers in translation no later than 30 days before the meeting through diplomatic channels. It is suggested that Information Papers for which a translation has been requested should ordinarily be limited in volume to 30 pages. Information Papers not requiring translation, including from non-Consultative Parties in accordance with Rule 29 (a) and Experts in accordance with Rule 44 (a), should be submitted to the Host Government no later than 30 days before the meeting for pre-sessional circulation by the Host Government.

4    Working Papers and those Information Papers for which a Representative of a Consultative Party has requested a translation, received after this date will be circulated pre-sessionally where practicable in the language in which they are submitted and, if possible, in translation by the Host Government. [if pre-sessional circulation and translation have not been possible, such Papers will be available in translation at the Meeting.] No working paper document should be used as the basis for a discussion in formal groups unless it has been translated into the four official languages of the ATCM.

5    Any revisions of a paper requiring translation that are made after its initial submission should be clearly contrasted and marked by the submitter.

6    [The above timelines refer only to pre-sessional document circulation.] All Working Papers and Information Papers which are produced during the ATCM will be [translated and circulated as at present.] Parties may also request the translation of Information Papers circulated pre-sessionally in the original language only. 
[and not translated]

The Contact Group suggested that the following matters, which arose during its discussions, be given further consideration by the ATCM:
i) the desirability of the translation of all Information Papers into the working languages of the ATCM.

ii ) the difficulties in preparing papers for the ATCM when the Antarctic season ends in March and ATCMs are held in April/May.
XIX ATCM/IP 30
Australia

PREPARATION FOR THE XXTH ATCM

A contact group met to discuss the question of pre-sessional document circulation for ATCM XX. The following are the suggestions of the group in this respect.

1   With the aim of assisting a more timely and orderly pre-sessional submission and circulation of documentation to and by the Host Government for ATCM XX, the Meeting suggested that the Parties and Host Government adopt the following procedure to improve the effectiveness of the discussions of the Meeting.

2   The intention is that Papers for ATCM XX be circulated where possible pre-sessionally to Consultative Parties, and also to Observers, Non-Consultative Parties and Invited Experts, and any other party invited to attend the meeting.

3   All Working Papers prepared by Parties and Observers referred to in Rule 2, and Information Papers for which a Representative of a Consultative Party requests a translation should be submitted to the Host Government no later than 45 days before the meeting. The Host Government should circulate these papers in translation no later than 30 days before the meeting through diplomatic channels. It is suggested that Information Papers for which a translation has been requested should ordinarily be limited in volume to 30 pages. Information Papers not requiring translation, including from non-Consultative Parties in accordance with Rule 29 (a) and Experts in accordance with Rule 44 (a), should be submitted to the Host Government no later than 30 days before the meeting for pre-sessional circulation by the Host Government.

4   Working Papers and those Information Papers for which a Representative of a Consultative Party has requested a translation, received after this date will be circulated pre-sessionally where practicable in the language in which they are submitted and, if possible, in translation by the Host Government. If pre-sessional circulation and translation have not been possible, such Papers will be available in translation at the Meeting. No document should be used as the basis for a discussion in formal groups unless it has been translated into the four official languages of the ATCM.

5   Any revisions of a paper requiring translation that are made after its initial submission should be clearly contrasted and marked by the submitter.

6   The above timelines refer only to pre-sessional document circulation. All Working Papers and Information Papers which are produced during the ATCM will be translated and circulated as at present. Parties may also request the translation of Information Papers circulated pre-sessionally in the original language only.

The Contact Group suggested that the following matters, which arose during its discussions, be given further consideration by the ATCM:
i) the desirability of the translation of all Information Papers into the working languages of the ATCM.

ii ) the difficulties in preparing papers for the ATCM when the Antarctic season ends in March and ATCMs are held in April/May.
