AU-ATADD-3-BB-AQ-472 TEivs
not approved
for me[?]e 9(1995)

ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                  XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XIX ATCM/WP 5
                                  May 8, 1995
                                  English
                                  Original: English

                                  ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM -
                                  SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS
REVISED DESCRIPTIONS AND PROPOSED MANAGEMENT PLANS
FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS
MOE ISLAND AND SOUTHERN POWELL ISLAND
AND ADJACENT ISLANDS

                                  Agenda Item 12 a

                                  (Submitted by the United Kingdom)
Draft Recommendation

REVISED DESCRIPTIONS AND PROPOSED MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR 
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management 
Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Noting also that the format of these revised Area Descriptions 
and proposed Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;

Recommend to their Governments that for the Specially 
Protected Areas listed below :

    (i) the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially 
Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora be deleted;

    (ii) the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially 
Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted 
in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

The Specially Protected Areas involved are :

Area No 13   Moe Island, South Orkney Islands;

Area No 15   Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, 
             South Orkney Islands
Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 13

MOE ISLAND, SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1. Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-13 (1966, SPA No 13) after a 
proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that Moe Island provided a representative 
sample of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem, that intensive experimental research on the 
neighbouring Signy Island might alter its ecosystem and that Moe Island should be 
specially protected as a control area for future comparison.

These grounds are still relevant. Whilst there is no evidence that research activities at 
Signy Island have significantly altered the ecosystems there, a major change has occurred 
in the low-altitude terrestrial system as a result of the rapidly expanding Antarctic fur seal 
(Arctocephalus gazella) population. Plant communities on nearby Signy Island have been 
physically disrupted by trampling by fur seals and nitrogen enrichment from the seals' 
excreta has resulted in replacement of bryophytes and lichens by the macro-alga Prasiola 
crispa. Low-lying lakes have been significantly affected by enriched run-off from the 
surrounding land. So far Moe Island has not been invaded by fur seals to any great extent 
and its topography makes it less likely that seals will penetrate to the more sensitive areas.

The values to be protected are those associated with the biological composition and 
diversity of a near-pristine example of the maritime Antarctic terrestrial and littoral marine 
ecosystems. In particular, Moe Island contains the greatest continuous expanses of 
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf found in the Antarctic. Moe Island has been 
visited on few occasions and has never been the site of occupation for periods of more 
than a few hours.

2. Aims and Objectives

Management of Moe Island aims to:

    avoid major changes to the structure and composition of the terrestrial vegetation, 
    in particular the moss turf banks,

    prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area,

    permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere, 
    particularly research related to determining the differences between the ecology of 
    an undisturbed island and that of an adjacent occupied and fur seal perturbed 
    island.

1
3. Management Activities

Ensure that the biological condition of Moe Island is adequately monitored, preferably by 
non-invasive methods, and that the sign-boards are serviced.

If fur seals were to gain access to the interior of Moe Island it would be necessary to take 
action to prevent damage to the vulnerable moss banks. This action would most likely 
consist of the erection of a seal-proof fence at the head of the gully at the northeast of 
Landing Cove. Any direct management activities in the Area would be subject to an 
environmental impact assessment before any decision to proceed is taken.

4. Period of Designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-13 for an indefinite period.

5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of Moe Island in relation to the South Orkney Islands.  Map 2 
shows Moe Island in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Moe Island, South Orkney Islands, is a small irregularly-shaped island lying 300 m off the 
southwestern extremity of Signy Island, from which it is separated by Fyr Channel. It is 
about 1.8 km from the northeast to southwest and 1 km from northwest to southeast. Its 
position on Admiralty Chart No 1775, latitude 60°44'S, longitude 45°45'W, does not 
agree closely with that in Map 2 (lat. 60°44'S, long. 45°41'W).

The island rises precipitously on the northeastern and southeastern sides to Snipe Peak 
(226 m altitude). There is a subsidiary summit above South Point (102 m altitude) and 
lower hills on each of three promontories on the western side above Corral Point (92 m), 
Conroy Point (89 m) and Spaull Point (56 m). Small areas of permanent ice remain on 
the east- and south-facing slopes with late snow lying on the steeply dipping western 
slopes. There are no permanent streams or pools.

The rocks are metamorphic quartz-mica schists, with occasional biotite and quartz-rich 
beds. There is a thin bed of undifferentiated amphibolite on the northeastern coast. Much 
of the island is overlain with glacial drift and scree. Soils are predominantly immature 
deposits of fine to coarse clays and sands intermixed with gravels, stones and boulders. 
They are frequently sorted by freeze-thaw action in high or exposed locations into 
small-scale circles, polygons, stripes and lobes. There are deep accumulations of peat (up 
to 2 m thick on western slopes), considerable expanses of the surface of which are bare 
and eroded.

2
The dominant plant communities are Andreaea-Usnea fellfield and banks of
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf (the largest known example of this community type
in the Antarctic). These moss banks constitute a major biological value and the reason for
the designation of the Area. The cryptogamic flora is diverse.

The mites Gamasellus racovitzai and Stereotydeus villosus and the springtail Cryptopygus
antarcticus are common under stones.

There were five colonies of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) totalling about
11,000 pairs in 1978-79. A more recent visit (February 1994) noted fewer than 100 pairs
on the northern side of Landing Cove and more than a thousand on the southern side.
Numerous other birds breed on the island, notably about 2000 pairs of cape petrels
(Daption capensis) in 14 colonies (1966) and large numbers of Antarctic prions
(Pachyptila desolata).

Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) are found
in the bays on the west side of the island. Increasing numbers of fur seals (Arctocephalus
gazella), mostly juvenile males, come ashore on the north side of Landing Cove and have
caused some damage to vegetation in that area. However, it is possible that the nature of
the terrain will restrict these animals to this small headland where damage may intensify.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

None.

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board is located at the back of the small shingle beach in the northeast corner of
Landing Cove, beyond the splash zone on top of a flat rock, to which it is bolted. The
board was erected on 2 February 1994.

There is a cairn and the remains of a survey mast, erected in 1965-66, on Spaull Point.
This mast is of interest for lichenometric studies and should not be removed. There are
no other structures on Moe Island.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No 14, Lynch Island, lies about 10 km north-north-east of Moe Island. SPA No 18,
North Coronation Island, lies about 19 km away on the northern side of Coronation Island.
SPA No 15, Southern Powell Island, is about 41 km to the east.

7.    Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by appropriate
national authorities as designated under Article 7 of Annex V of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

                                  3
Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:

	•	it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere

	•	the actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural ecological system in the Area

	•	any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan

	•	the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan

	•	the Permit, or an authorized copy, must be carried within the Specially Protected Area

	•	a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

There are no restrictions on landing from the sea, which is the preferred method. No special access points are specified, but landings are usually most safely made at the northeast corner of Landing Cove.

Helicopter landings should be avoided where practicable. Helicopters may land only on the col between hill 89 m and the western slope of Snipe Peak. To avoid overflying bird colonies approach should preferably be from the south, though an approach from the north is permissible.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250 m altitude above the highest point except for access to the landing point specified above.

No pedestrian routes are designated but persons on foot should at all times avoid disturbances to birds or damage to vegetation and periglacial features. Vehicles are prohibited on Moe Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place

	•	Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere and which will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area

	•	Essential management activities, including monitoring

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for essential scientific or management activities, as specified in the Permit.

4
7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties should not normally camp in the Area. If this is essential for reasons of safety, tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to vegetation or disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be taken into the Area.

No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.

Fuel, food and other materials are not to be depoted in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depots are not permitted.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit, except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of the Area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for laboratory examination.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be deposited in the sea.

7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain notice boards, or protective measures.

5
7(x) Requirements for reports

The Principal Permit Holder for each issued Permit shall submit a report of activities conducted in the Area using the accepted Visit Report form. This report shall be submitted to the authority named in the Permit as soon as practicable, but not later than 6 months after the visit has taken place. Such reports should be stored indefinitely and made accessible to interested Parties, SCAR, CCAMLR and COMNAP if requested, to provide the documentation of human activities within the Area necessary for good management.

dwhwgen\moe.doc
27.4.95.

 
6
Map 1. Moe Island Specially Protected Area in relation to the South Orkney Islands
45°42'W
          45°41'W

                      N

FYR CHANNEL

60°44'S

Landing area for
small boats

Conroy Point

Corral
Point

Spaull
Point

Landing
Cove

SPA sign

Snipe Peak

60°44'S

MOE ISLAND
Specially Protected Area No. 13

South Point

MARIHOLM

60°45'S

LEGEND
  Permanent snow/ice
  Ice-free area
  Moss vegetation
  Penguin colony (Chinstrap)
........ Limiting offshore danger line
  Contour (10 m)
  Index contour (50 m)
226 Survey station (occupied)
89 Survey station (intersected)
  12 Spot height (photogrammetric)

0                  500
METRES

60°45'S
45°42'W          45°41'W

Map 2. Moe Island Specially Protected Area
Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.15

SOUTHERN POWELL ISLAND AND ADJACENT ISLANDS,
SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1.    Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-15 (1966, SPA No 15)
after a proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that[Southern Powell Island
and the adjacent islands support substantial vegetation and a considerable bird and
mammal fauna.  The Area was representative of the natural ecology of the South
Orkney Islands, and was rendered more important by the nucleus of an expanding
colony of Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella).

These grounds are still relevant, though the expansion of the fur seal colony is
progressing only slowly.

The values to be protected are primarily those associated with the large concentrations
of breeding birds and seals, and to a lesser extent, the terrestrial vegetation.

2.    Aims and Objectives

Management of southern Powell Island and adjacent islands aims to:

•    avoid major changes in the structure and composition of the terrestrial
vegetation;
•    prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
•    permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served
elsewhere.

3.    Management Activities

Because of its use as an anchorage in the past, it is important that the signs which
identify the Area as a Specially Protected Area and point out that landing without a
permit is forbidden are maintained.

Visits should be made as necessary to assess the biological composition of the Area,
in particular the state of the fur seal colony, and to maintain sign boards.

4.    Period of designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-15 for an indefinite period.

1
5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of southern Powell Island in relation to the South Orkney 
Islands. Map 2 shows the Area in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates and natural features

The Area, which is centered on latitude 60°43'S and longitude 45°01'W includes all 
of Powell Island, South Orkney Islands, south of the latitude of the southern summit 
of John Peaks (375 m altitude), together with the whole of Fredriksen Island, 
Michelsen Island (a tidal peninsula at the southern tip of Powell Island), Christoffersen 
Island, Grey Island and unnamed adjacent islands. All but the Crutchley Ice Piedmont 
of southern Powell Island are ice-free in summer, though there are patches of semi-
permanent or late-lying snow in places.

The rocks of southern Powell Island, Michelsen Island and Christoffersen Island are 
conglomerates of Cretaceous-Jurassic age. The two promontories to the west of John 
Peaks are Carboniferous greywacke-shales. There are boulders containing plant fossils 
in the glacial deposits around Falkland Harbour. Much of central and southern 
Fredriksen Island is composed of sandstone and dark phyllitic shales. The north-east, 
and probably most of the north, of this island is highly sheared conglomerate with 
laminated mudstone. The Area has only a thick mantle of glacial till, strongly 
influenced by seabird guano.

Michelsen Island is almost devoid of land vegetation, although on the rocks there are 
extensive communities of lichens dominated by nitrophilous crustose species. These 
are also widespread on Fredriksen Island and elsewhere on bird-influenced cliffs and 
rocks near the shore. The most diverse vegetation on Powell Island occurs on the two 
promontories and associated scree west of Falkland Harbour. Here, and on 
Christoffersen Island and the northern part of Fredriksen Island, moss banks with 
underlying peat occur. Wet areas support stands of moss carpet. There are extensive 
areas of the nitrophilous macroalga Prasiola crispa associated with the penguin 
colonies in the area. Snow alga are prominent on the ice piedmont and snow patches 
in late summer.

No information is available on the arthropod fauna, but is probably very similar to that 
at Signy Island. The springtails Cryptopygus antarcticus and Parisotoma octoculata 
and the mites Alaskozetes antarcticus, Stereotydeus villosus and Gamasellus racovitzai 
occur in great numbers beneath stones.

There are few observations on marine biota in the Area, but this is likely to be very 
similar to the well-researched Signy Island area. The relatively enclosed Falkland-
Ellefsen Harbour area and the bay on the east side of the peninsula are highly 
influenced by glacial run-off from the ice piedmont.

2
Large numbers of penguins and petrels breed throughout the Area. There are many 
thousand pairs of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica), mostly on Fredriksen 
Island. Similarly large numbers of Adélie penguins (P. adeliae) occur principally on 
the southern Powell-Michelsen Island area. Here there are also several thousand pairs 
of gentoo penguins (P. papua) and a very few scattered pairs of macaroni penguins 
(Eudyptes chrysolophus) breeding among the gentoos.

Other breeding birds include southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), cape 
petrels (Daption capensis), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson’s storm petrels 
(Oceanites oceanicus), blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) Dominican gulls 
(Larus dominicanus), brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergi), sheathbills (Chionis alba), 
and possibly Antarctic prions (Pachyptila desolata) and black-bellied storm petrels 
(Fregatta tropica).

Michelsen Island is the longest known breeding site in the Antarctic of fur seals since 
their near-extermination in the nineteenth century. The number of pups born annually 
has increased slowly but fairly steadily from 11 in 1956 to about 60 in 1989. Thirty-
four live pups were recorded in January 1994. Many non-breeding males visit the 
Area during the summer. Other seals are frequent on the beaches, mainly elephant 
seals (Mirounga leonina) and Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli). Leopard seals 
(Hydrurga leptonyx) and crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) are occasionally 
seen on ice floes.

6(ii)Restricted zones within the Area

None

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board (erected January 1994) is positioned on southern Powell Island on top 
of a small rock outcrop at the back of the shingle beach on the east side of the 
southern promontory of the island.

On Michelsen Island the marker board (erected January 1994) is situated on a low-
lying rock about 50 m from the shoreline at the back of a high shingle beach at the 
southern tip of the island.

On Christoffersen Island the marker board (erected January 1994) is located on a 
small promontory on the northeastern shore of the island at the entrance to Falkland 
Harbour. The board is located at the back of the beach just below a small Adélie 
penguin rookery.

On Fredriksen Island a marker board (erected January 1994) is located at the northern 
end of the pebble/boulder beach on the western side of the island, below a small 
chinstrap penguin rookery. The board is at the back of the beach on top of a small 
rock outcrop.

3
There are no other structures within the Area, but various mooring chains and rings associated with the use of Ellefson and Falkland Harbours by floating whale factories in the 1920s are to be found on the shore.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No. 13, Moe Island, and SPA No. 14, Lynch Island, are about 35 km west by south and about 35 km west of the Area respectively. SPA No. 18, North Coronation Island, is about the same distance away on the northern side of Coronation Island.

7. Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by appropriate national authorities as designated under Article 7 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
- it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere;
- the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in the Area;
- any management activities are in support of the objectives of this Management Plan;
- the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan;
- the Permit must be carried within the Specially Protected Area;
- a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Anchoring within Falkland Harbour and Ellefsen Harbour is prohibited except in emergency.

No pedestrian routes are designated within the Area, but persons on foot should avoid walking on vegetated areas or disturbing wildlife wherever possible. Vehicles are not allowed in the Area.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250m altitude above the highest point except for purposes of landing (when essential) on the beach on the east side of the southern-most tip of Powell Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place
- Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere
- essential management activities, including monitoring.

4
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except 
for essential scientific or management activities, as specified in the Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties shall not camp in the Area, except in an emergency for reasons of safety. In 
this case, tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to the 
vegetation or disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall 
be taken into the Area.

No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, 
which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, 
shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which 
the Permit was granted.

Fuel, food or other materials are not to be depoted in the Area, unless required for 
essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. 
All such materials are to be removed when no longer required.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or 
harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum 
standard.

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a 
Permit, except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of 
the Area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for 
laboratory examinations.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be 
deposited in the sea.

5
7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant 
material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, or to erect or maintain 
notice boards, or to carry out protective measures.

7(x)  Requirements for reports

The principal Permit holder for each issued Permit shall submit a report of activities 
conducted in the Area using the accepted Visit Report form. This report shall be 
submitted to the appropriate authority or authorities named in the Permit as soon as 
practicable, but not later than six months after the visit has taken place. Such reports 
should be stored indefinitely by the appropriate authority and made accessible to 
interested Parties, SCAR, CCAMLR and COMNAP if requested, to provide the 
documentation of human activities within the Area necessary for good management.

dwhwgenjpowell.doc
27.4.95.

6
60°30'S                                 
46°00'W         45°30W         45°00'W         44°30W
                                                
                        South Orkney Islands
                    
                Coronation Island                          
SPA No.18
Northern Coronation
Island
Signy
Island
SPA No.14
Lynch Island
SPA No.13
Moe Island
Robertson
Islands
Powell
Island
Saddle
Island
SPA No.15
Southern Powell
Island
Laurie
Island
0         10         20
         km
60°50'S                                 
                                                
Map 1.  Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands Specially
Protected Area in relation to the South Orkney Islands
Orne Island

north                  Landing site
0.0 km                 64° 39' 50" S
                       62° 39' 65" W

                       OCEANITES
To Cuverville Island
Cape Disappointment

Cruchley Ice 
Piedmont

John 
Peaks

415
355

Falkland Harbour
CHRISTOFFERSEN 
ISLAND

Ellefsen Harbour

SPA signs

MICHELSEN 
ISLAND

GREY 
ISLAND

Southern Powell Island 
Specially Protected Area No. 15

FREDRIKSEN 
ISLAND

LEGEND
Permanent snow/ice
Ice-free area
Moraine
Lake
Limiting offshore danger line
Formline (50 m)
Index formline (250 m)
Survey station (occupied)
Survey station (intersected)
Spot height (barometric)

Map 2. Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands Specially Protected Area
