KOREN
AU-ATDD-3-BB-AQ-483

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                             XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                    SEOUL
                                    May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 16
May 8, 1995
English
Original: French

ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA
POINTE-GEOLOGIE ARCHIPELAGO

Agenda Item 12

(Submitted by France)
ANtarctic specially protected area
pointe-geologie archipelago

JEAN ROSTAND, ALEXIS CARREL, LAMARCK AND CLAUDE BERNARD ISLANDS,
BON DOCTEUR NUNATAK AND MARINE EMPEROR PENGUINS BREEDING COLONY.

1. DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

Four islands and the breeding site of Emperor penguins are proposed for a new Antarctic Specially
Protected Area on the ground that it provides a representative sample of aesthetic, biologic and
geologic values of terrestrial antarctic ecosystems.
One mammal specie, Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) and various bird species are nesting
here : Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) ; South Polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki); Adelie
penguin (pygoscelis adeliae) ; Wilson's storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) ; Southern giant petrel
(Macronectes giganteus) ; Snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea) ; Cape petrel (Daption capensis).

Well-marked hills display assymetrical transverse profiles with gently dipping northern slopes
compared to the steeper southern ones. The terrain is affected by a lot of cracks and fractures
leading to very rough surfaces. The basement rocks mainly consit of sillimanite, cordierite and
garnet-rich gneisses which are intruded by abundant dikes of pink anatexites. The lowest parts of the
islands are covered by morainic boulders (few centimeters to more than a meter across).

Long-term research and monitoring programmes have been continuing a long time already (since
1952 or 1964 according to the species). A data base implemented in 1981 is directed by C.E.B.C.
(Centre d'Etudes biologiques de Chizé).

The Emperor penguins breeding colony is a site of special scientific interest which could further be
included in the Convention on Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources Environmental
Monitoring Programme (CCAMLR/CEMP) in order to achieve the Convention requirements.

..../....
- 2 -

SOUTH
POLE

TERRE ADELIE
(France)

DUMONT D'URVILLE SEA

Glacier du
Pourquoi Pas ?

Glacier du
Commandant Charcot

Glacier du Français

Pointe Géologie

Glacier de l'Astrolabe

Glacier de la Zélée

WILKES
LAND

TERRE ADELIE

GEORGE V
LAND

Map 1. Location of Terre Adélie and Pointe Géologie Archipelago
- 3 -
Map 2. Pointe Géologie archipelago showing the Antarctic Specially Protected Area 
(dotted lines) and avifauna breeding sites. The South polar skuas territories and the 
Wilson's storm petrels nests are not mapped (see table 1).The additional access of 
terrestrial vehicles to the continent (Nunatak) is indicated with large arrows.

Colonies of 
□ Adélie penguins
 Southern giant petrels
★ Snow petrels
△ Cape petrels
Y landing point
I building

                         -66°39'30"
                          ↑
-66°40'      
Pétrels Is.
Dumont d'Urville 
station

C. Bernard Is.

Lamasck Is.

J. Rostand Is.

A. Carrel Is.               Emperor Penguins 
                            breeding colony

Nunatak du 
Bon Docteur

  0     100   200m
Glacier de 
l'Astrolabe
- 4 -

2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of Pointe-Géologie area aims to :
* prevent unnecessary disturbance on the area face to the growing flux of cruising tourist ship.
* permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere.
* avoid major change to the structure and composition of flora and fauna and the association of different species of vertebrates harboured in the area, which therefore constitutes one of the most representative for both faunistic and scientific interest on Adelie coast.
* permit research on ethological, ecological, physiological and biochemical programmes in progress especially those related to demographic monitoring and impact assessment of surrounding human activities comprising tourism. Physiology and biochemistry programmes relating to fasting mecanisms and thermogenesis of emperior penguins could be pursued in compliance with permit provisions.
* permit research in geology with a particular attention to the programmation of visits, especially when thermomecanical means for sampling are required.

3. MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The plan is kept under review to ensure that the values of the area are wholly protected. Any direct management action to the area would be subject to an environmental impact assessment before being undertaken.

Inspection visits are restricted to essential management purposes.

4. PERIOD OF DESIGNATION

The area is designed under ATCM recommendations as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area for an indefinite period.

5. MAPS

Map 2 shows with dotted lines location of each island and other zones of the area inside Pointe-Géologie Archipelago.

6. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features.

Jean ROSTAND, Alexis CARREL, LAMARCK and Claude BERNARD Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak and Emperor penguins breeding colony are situated in the heart of Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, coastal area of Adelie Land (140 to 140°02'E ; 66°39'30" to 66°40'30"S).

The area consists of the southernmost rock exposure of the Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, between the Petrels Island and the western edge of the Astrolabe glacier. It is a very large ice free ground within Adélie Land.

As a whole, the surface of the outcropping rocks does not exceed 2 square kilometers. The highest points are distributed along NE-SW ridges (Cl. Bernard Island : 47.6 m ; J.B. Lamarck Island : 22.2 m ; J. Rostand Island : 36.39 m ; Carrel Island : 28.24 m and Nunatak : 28.50 m). During the summer, only the southern flanks of the islands are still covered by compressed snow caps.

There are no boundary markers since natural features delimit the wholly protected islands. However, markers could further be set up in Nunatak.

No tracks or roads exist in the area.
- 5 -

Table 1. Annual breeding pairs of seabirds in the French Antarctic Specially Protected Area(ASPA). The population breeding within theASPA is given compared to the Pointe Géologie (PG) popuration (from Thomas 1986).

 Islands                  Emperor     Adélie     South       Snow        Cape        Wilson's     Southern giant 
                          penguin     penguin    polar skua  petrel      petrel      storm petrel petrel

C. Bernard                   -         3421          5         153         192         178           -       
Lamarck                      -         1007          1          38          15          45           -       
J. Rostand                   -         4793          3          53          18          35          11       
A. Carrel                    -         4075          6          25          -           72           -       
Nunatak                      -         1961          1          11          -           41           -       
Emperor Penguin                                                                                               
Breeding Colony          3119           -          -           -          -           -           -       

Total                      3119       15257         16         280         225         371          11       

%SPA/PG                     100         71          67         36          68          31          79       

Table 2. Presence of birds on breeding colonies.

                  Emperor     Adélie     South       Snow        Cape        Wilson's     Southern giant 
                  penguin     penguin    polar skua  petrel      petrel      storm petrel petrel

First arrival     March.      October    October     September   October     November      July       
First laying      May         November   November    November    November    December      October   
Last departure    January     March      March       March       March       March         April     

Table 3. Sensibility to human disturbance and starus of the Pointe Géologie populations.

                  Emperor     Adélie     South       Snow        Cape        Wilson's     Southern giant 
                  penguin     penguin    polar skua  petrel      petrel      storm petrel petrel

Sensibility to               
human disturbance  High       Medium      Low        Medium       High        High         High       

Status 1952-1984  decreasing   increasing   stable       ?           ?           ?         decreasing   
Status 1984-1993  stable      increasing   stable      stable       stable      ?           stable
- 6 -

ii) Identification of restricted or prohibited zones.

Access to every part of the area is prohibited unless authorized by a permit.

Location of breeding colonies is shown on the map. The birds are present on colonies from October to March, except Emperor penguins which breed in winter (Table 2). Their sensibility to human disturbance varies depending on the species (Table 3). The implantation of the Dumont d'Urville station has resulted in a drastic decrease of the populations of Emperor penguins and Southern giant petrels in Pointe-Géologie Archipelago. Since the last ten years the breeding areas of these birds are protected and the populations are now consecutively stable (Table 3).

Anyone, except permit holders, is not allowed to approach or to disturb the Emperor penguins colony in any manner when incubating eggs from mid-July to mid-December when the chicks fledge. The particularily sensitive Emperor penguins are equally protected beyond the definite limits of their breeding area since the colony is not always located at the same place.

The southeastern part of Jean ROSTAND Island is designated as a Restricted Zone in order to preserve the remaining breeding colony of Southern giant petrels. All access to the Restricted Zone is prohibited during the breeding period from August to February. The access is restricted to one ornighologist permit holder in order to monitore the population three times each year. The boundary off the Restricted Zone is defined by a 20 meters width buffer zone around the colony and is marked on the soil by paintings. The prohibition of access to the Restricted Zone shall be for an indefinite period, but shall be subject to reevaluation each time the Management Plan is reviewed.

iii) Location of structures in the area.

Prevost hut and a shelter take place in ROSTAND Island. There are no other building anywhere else in the area.

iv) Location in or near the area of other "Antarctic Specially Protected Areas" or "Antarctic Specially Managed Areas".

It is likely that this area will be located within an "Antarctic Specially Managed Area" (ASMA) icluding Dumont d'Urville station and other surrounding areas of activities.

7. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED.

i) Access to and movement within the area.

No helicopters, nor terrestrial vehicles are authorized either to access or within the area. No overflight all over the area, either by helicopters or other aeroplanes are authorized.

Access to the area is therefore only permitted by foot or by zodiacs (in summer).

However, very rare departures of terrestrial vehicles from Nunatak could be allowed, only when sea ice conditions hinder from proceeding otherwise and with a special attention to the presence of birds in the area.

Access to and movement within the area shall, in any case, be limited and vigilant in order to avoid unnecessary disturbance to birds, especially by crossing their pathways, and to ensure that breeding areas or their access are not damaged nor endangered.

../.
- 7 -

ii) Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the area, including restrictions on time and place.

* compelling scientific activities which cannot be conducted elsewhere and for necessary 
management activities with regard to the special provisions relating to Emperor penguins and the 
Restricted Zone of Southern Giant Petrels (see § 6.ii).

* visitors granted entry in the area by a permit shall ensure that no disturbance will occur from their 
visits to monitoring programmes.

iii) The installation, modification or removal of structures.

No structures are to be erected in the area or scientific equipements installed except for essential 
scientific or management activities as specified in the permit.

iv) The location of field camps.

Only in case of safety tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage or 
disturbance to fauna.

v) Restriction on materials and organisms which may be brought into the area.

* no living animals or plant materials shall be deliberetely introduced in the area.
* no poultry products including food products containing uncooked dried eggs should be taken into 
the area.
* no chemicals shall be brought into the area, except chemicals which may be introduced for a 
compelling scientific purpose as specified in the permit. Any chemical introduced shall be removed 
from the area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted.
* fuel, food and other materials are not to be depoted in the area, unless required for essential 
purposes connected with the activity for which the permit has been granted. All such materials 
introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depot are not permitted.

vi) The taking of or harmful interference with nature flora and fauna.

Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved, this should be in accordance with SCAR 
Code of conduct.

vii) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit holder.

Collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by a permit holder is prohibited unless 
specified in permit for scientific or management purposes. However, debris of man-made origin may 
be removed from the area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for 
laboratory examination.

viii) The disposal of waste.

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the area.
- 8

ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan 
can continue to be met.

Permit may be granted to enter the area to carry out monitoring, other scientific programs and sites 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of biological materials and 
animals.

Permits shall specify the maximum number of persons allowed entry at any one time.

Visits to the area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the scientific and management 
objectives.

x) Requirements for reports of visits to the area.

The principal permit holder for each issued permit shall submit a report of activities conducted in the 
area using the accepted Visit Report form. This report shall be submitted to the appropriate authority 
as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the visit has taken place. Such report 
should be stored indefinitively by the authority to provide the documentation of human activities 
within the area necessary for good management.

8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

JOUVENTIN P., STAHL J-C., WEIMERSKIRCH, M. & MOUGIN J-L. 1984.
The seabirds of the French Subantarctic Islands and Adélie Land, their status and conservation. In 
status and conservation of the world's seabirds. Cambridge. ICBP technical publication N° 2 : 609 - 
625.

THOMAS T., 1986. L'effectif des oiseaux nicheurs de Pointe-Géologie (Terre Adélie) et son 
évolution au cours des trente dernières années. L'Oiseau et la FRO, 56(4) : 349 - 368.

TREHEN P., 1992. Comprehensive Environnmental Evaluation of impact of the construction and 
operation of a scientific base at Dome C - Concorde base : 60 pp.

SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas report ; Cambridge, UK ; June-July 1992.
