AU-ATCMO-3-BB-AQ-498

ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                  SEOUL
                                May 8-19, 1995

TRATADO ANTARTICO            
XIX REUNION CONSULTATIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ        
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XIX ATCM/WP 31
May 15, 1995
Original: English


____________________________________________________
|                                                      |
|  REPORT OF THE TEWG TO THE XIX ATCM                 |
|                                                      |
|  (Submitted by the Secretariat)                     |
|____________________________________________________|
REPORT OF THE TRANSITIONAL 
ENVIRONMENTAL WORKING GROUP TO THE XIX ATCM

The following is the report on the activities of the Transitional Environmental 
Working Group (TEWG) during its first meeting from 8 to 12 May 1995. These activities 
were conducted in accordance with the instructions and the agenda provided by the XVIII 
ATCM. The TEWG examined its role in the first section of this report, and recommends 
that the ATCM confirm the role it requires the TEWG to take:

      The Debate Held on 
11 May 1995 about the Role of the TEWG

Many delegations expressed their views on the nature, mandate and functions of the 
TEWG, and on the support mechanisms that the TEWG would need to be effective in its role 
of giving advice to the ATCM.

The following important points were mentioned on a number of occasions:

1.    The TEWG is an advisory group constituted by the ATCM, pending the entry 
into force of the Protocol, to provide advice and recommendations to the Plenary of the 
ATCM on scientific and technical aspects regarding the protection of the environment in 
Antarctica. Most participants to the debate believed that the TEWG should have the basic 
functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) to be established under the 
Protocol.

2.    The TEWG should be composed of specialists with appropriate environmental, 
scientific or technical competencies.

3.    The need for the TEWG to be a standing group in order to tackle the diversity 
of issues and emergencies.

4.    Consequently, the need:

      (a)  for meetings or work by correspondence or other means as required 
between ordinary sessions which take place during the ATCMs;

      (b)  for ad hoc specialists subgroups.

5.    The need for secretariat support for the TEWG was stressed. It would be 
essential to circulate in due time the numerous documents from the TEWG, to ensure the 
continuity of data collection and the interface, relations, two-way information and 
coordination with other bodies of the System or with other organizations.
2

6.  The need to improve the working conditions of the TEWG, in particular the 
need to:

    (a)  send documents in advance to the members of the TEWG;

    (b)  pass in advance to the TEWG items on the agenda for the ATCM, so 
that the documents can be distributed beforehand and the work of the 
TEWG itself can be organized in advance of the regular sessions.

7.  Consensus cannot be the only way for an effective advisory body to operate.  
In the absence of consensus, the report of the TEWG shall reflect all views expressed.
3

Item 7 (b) - The Environmental Impacts of Tourism

The TEWG was presented with a number of information papers regarding the nature, frequency, and scale of tourism activities in Antarctica (XIX ATCM/INF 13, 19, 28, 29, 33, 34, 45, 46, 47, and 48). On this basis, the TEWG examined the issue of environmental impacts of tourism in relation to the Protocol and Recommendations VIII-9 and XVIII-1, and identified the following five substantive issues as warranting further action.

1. General Data and Information Needs

The TEWG noted that existing information generally is insufficient either to predict or to serve as a baseline for detecting environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism. Therefore, the TEWG recommends that the ATCPs should support activities toward:

(a) identifying sites that possibly have been or may be affected by tourism in Antarctica, and control sites that may be used for comparison;

(b) surveying selected sites and, if possible, determine indicator variables most likely to be sensitive to tourism activities; and

(c) determining and evaluating the effectiveness of measures taken to minimize the impact of different types, frequencies, timing, and levels of tourism activities.

2. Site Inventories

With respect to the goal specified in paragraph 1(a), the TEWG recommends that ATCPs take steps to identify sites affected by tourism, and to ensure the collection of reliable and comparable information regarding the nature, frequency, and scale of tourism activities.

A number of delegates commended the work being done by the United States on an Antarctic Site Inventory (XIX ATCM/INF 47). This work contributes to meeting the information goals specified above, and helps provide baseline information to assess the potential environmental impacts of tourism.

The TEWG recommends to the ATCM that the protocols presented in INF 47 be examined to determine their application for expanding the site inventory work more widely in Antarctica, and that the Parties cooperate as fully as possible in the development of an Antarctic site inventory.

3. Cumulative Impacts

To prevent irreversible, detrimental effects upon the Antarctic environment, the TEWG noted that there is an urgent need to consider not only the environmental impacts
4

associated with tourist visits, but also the nature, magnitude, and trend of cumulative impacts 
of all human activities.

In this regard, the TEWG further noted that there is a need to design protocols and 
implement programs for detecting cumulative impacts.

There is also the need to elaborate procedures set out in Annex 1 of the Protocol so 
that cumulative impacts may be adequately assessed. This would enable tour operators to be 
better informed of how to address cumulative impacts when preparing EIAs of their 
activities. The TEWG recommends the ATCM to ask SCAR to address the issue of 
monitoring of cumulative impacts.

4.  Monitoring

The TEWG recognized that baseline assessment and monitoring of selected sites must 
be sufficient to distinguish the impacts of tourism from the impacts of other human activities 
or from natural environmental variations or change. Therefore, the TEWG recommends that 
ATCPs seek SCAR's advice regarding the design of such baseline assessment and monitoring 
programs.

SCAR advised the TEWG (XIX ATCM/WP 24) that, subsequent to its workshops 
planned for September and October 1995, it should be possible to consider technical advice 
on the structure and development of these programs.

The TEWG noted that some ATCPs have performed perturbation experiments to 
verify cause-effect relationships and to measure possible adverse impacts of tourism. The 
TEWG also recognized that further, directed research may be valuable in determining 
appropriate techniques for managing tourism and other activities.

5.  Methods for Ensuring Compliance

The TEWG recognized the importance of ensuring the compliance of tourism 
operators with the Protocol and all other measures designed to minimize potential 
environmental impacts on the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated 
ecosystems.

The TEWG considered that this issue warranted discussion by the ATCM.

6.  Education and Training

The TEWG noted that for the effective management of Antarctic visitor activities, and 
to help ensure the protection of the Antarctic environment, education and training programs 
are essential.
5

Item 10 (a) - Environmental Monitoring of 
the Impacts of Human Activities in the Antarctic

1.  The TEWG welcomed the SCAR-COMNAP report (XIX ATCM/WP 24) 
describing progress with environmental monitoring initiatives since XVIII ATCM. It was 
noted that COMNAP was unable at present to propose a representative subset of facilities in 
Antarctica, considering that this should await agreement on monitoring protocols.

2.  The TEWG noted that arrangements for two technical workshops had been 
finalised and that a preliminary report was expected to be made available at the XX ATCM 
meeting in 1996.

3.  The TEWG thanked SCAR for its report on incineration (XIX ATCM/WP 25). 
The meeting agreed that it is important to seek means of reducing pollution caused by the use 
of incineration at Antarctic stations. The SCAR proposals for minimising the use of 
incineration and the reduction of its impact in cases where incineration can not be avoided 
highlighted the need for two-stage incineration with close temperature control, adequate 
filtering for particulate material and monitoring of flue gases to ensure optimal incinerator 
performance. The present lack of appropriate ecotoxicological information made it difficult 
to determine internationally agreed emission limits for specific components.

4.  The TEWG recommends to the ATCM that:

    (a)     whenever practicable waste which is presently incinerated should be 
removed from Antarctica;

    (b)     where it is necessary to continue incineration, Parties should investigate 
means of minimising the impact of emissions;

    (c)     incinerators should only be operated by trained personnel.

5.  The TEWG thanked the Korean delegation for useful and welcome information 
papers (XIX ATCM/INF 51 and 53) on environmental monitoring at King Sejong Station.

Item 10 (b) - Data Requirements

The meeting received an information paper (XIX ATCM/INF 81) in which Japan 
advises that it is establishing a Centre on Antarctic Environmental Monitoring which will 
also have the function of processing, management, storage and distribution of data.

The meeting noted advice from SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 24) that it proposed to hold 
two technical workshops in late 1995 and that among other items these workshops would 
address:
6

(a) baseline data requirements;

(b) data management.

It was agreed that this issue should be taken up at the next meeting of the TEWG when the reports of the SCAR technical workshops could be considered.

Item 10 (c) - Regulation of the Extraction,
Use and Custody of Scientific Samples obtained in the Antarctic Expeditions

The meeting noted the SCAR-COMNAP information paper (XIX ATCM/INF 73) which advised that the inclusion of information on collections of scientific samples in the Antarctic Data Directory System would assist in the planning and development of Antarctic Research programs.
7

Item 11 - Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures

The TEWG considered a number of papers regarding environmental impact 
assessments procedures (XIX ATCM/WP 3, and XIX ATCM/INF 8, 14, 37, 40, 55 and 63), 
and noted the statement from ASOC (XIX ATCM/INF 85). As a result, the TEWG 
identified the following as key issues.

Item 11 (a) - Implementation of Procedures of IEIs and CEEs

1.	The United Kingdom delegation submitted a working paper (XIX 
ATCM/WP 3) concerning the circulation of information on Environmental Impact 
Assessments. This paper proposed that a list of completed Initial Environmental Evaluations 
and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations carried out by each Consultative Party during 
the preceding calendar year should be transmitted as a separate document to the Host 
Government of the next ATCM not later than 1 March. The lists would be collated by the 
Host Government and published as an Annex to the final Report of the ATCM. The TEWG 
welcomed this initiative which would allow Parties to meet their obligations in Annex I of 
the Protocol and to make EIA information more accessible. The TEWG recommends to the 
ATCM that this proposal should come into operation from the end of the XIX ATCM, as an 
interim arrangement, pending the establishment of a Secretariat.

2.	The TEWG considered a "Draft Guide on Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) of Activities in Antarctica" (XIX ATCM/INF 14) submitted by the United Kingdom. 
A number of delegations welcomed this Guide as a useful contribution. Chile considered that 
the UK paper could be used as a basis for the TEWG to develop a Guide for EIA for use by 
those planning activities in Antarctica. Chile commented that such a Guide would help 
ensure greater consistency in the preparation of EIAs.

3.	An information paper submitted by New Zealand and South Africa (XIX 
ATCM/INF 63) outlined an approach they would take in respect of any changes required to 
an activity previously described in a final CEE. This approach (the outcome of which New 
Zealand and South Africa will report to ATCM XX) is as follows:

    (a)	review of the actual activity against the CEE;

    (b)	reporting on the CEE implementation in the annual Exchange of 
        Information, e.g., activities completed in the year, any changes from 
        the CEE;

    (c)	any changes from the original CEE to be treated in the same way as the 
        original activity for which the CEE was prepared.

4.	The delegation of South Africa submitted two papers (XIX ATCM/INF 37 and 
55) describing the development and the implementation of an Environmental Health and
8

Safety Management system adopted by the South African Antarctic Programme. South 
Africa will advise on the progress of this to the XX ATCM.

Item 11 (b) - Examination of CEEs produced during 1994-95

5. The TEWG welcomed reports on the "Construction and Operation of a 
Scientific Base at Dome C" and "Drilling Activity at Dome C, Antarctica" (XIX ATCM/INF 
8 and 40, respectively) from France and Italy, and complimented them on their preparation 
of the final draft CEE for Concordia Base located at Dome C.

6. Parties, who had forwarded comments on the draft CEE circulated by France, 
noted that these comments had been taken into account in the revisions (XIX ATCM/INF 8 
and 40). The TEWG noted that it did not have any further points or concerns to raise with 
regard to the CEEs. The TEWG commended France and Italy for providing a clear example 
of how compliance with Article 3 of Annex I of the Protocol can be met. Some countries 
noted that not all countries in the system can produce studies of this level.

7. The role of the TEWG in assessing CEEs was discussed. The meeting agreed 
that the TEWG should advise the ATCM on CEEs, according to Item 6 (b) of the Final 
Report of the XVIII ATCM and Article 12 and Annex I of the Protocol.
9

Item 12 - The Antarctic Protected Area System

Item 12 (a) - Revised and New Management Plans for SPAs and SSSIs

The United Kingdom and New Zealand delegations tabled working papers (XIX ATCM/WP 5 and 7, respectively) which set out revised area descriptions and proposed management plans for the following Specially Protected Areas and Site of Special Scientific Interest:

    SPA No. 13   Moe Island, South Orkney Islands;
    SPA No. 15   Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands,
                 South Orkney Islands;

    SSSI No. 11  Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, Ross Island

The French delegation tabled a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 16) which set out an area description and proposed management plan for a proposed Specially Protected Area:

    SPA No. 24   Pointe-Geologie, Terre Adelie

The TEWG examined the above area descriptions and management plans and advised the XIX ATCM that, with minor modifications, they should be adopted as .... and ....

Concerning the numbering of SPAs and SSSIs, the Dutch delegation suggested a new system, based on the use of three digits. The existing SPAs would be given numbers 101 through 123, the existing SSSIs 124 through 159 and new areas would be numbered starting with numbers 160. The TEWG recommends to the ATCM that this renumbering proposal should be adopted.

The Australian delegation submitted a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 14) which advised Parties that the designations for two SSSIs in Wilkes Land expire on 31 December 1995. Several delegations pointed out that this was a more widespread problem.

A total of twelve SSSIs have expiry dates for their management plans of 31 December 1995. The SSSIs are:

    SSSI No. 1   Cape Royds, Ross Island
    SSSI No. 3   Barwick Valley, Victoria Land
    SSSI No. 8   Western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island
    SSSI No. 9   Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
    SSSI No. 13  Potter Peninsula, King George Island
    SSSI No. 14  Harmony Point, west coast of Nelson Island,
                 South Shetland Islands
    SSSI No. 15  Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
10

SSSI No. 16     North-East Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast,
                  Wilkes Land
SSSI No. 17     Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
SSSI No. 19     Linnaeus Terrace, Asgaard Range, Victoria Land
SSSI No. 20     Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
SSSI No. 21     Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands

The TEWG agreed that for all protected areas with designations due to expire on or
before 31 December 1995, the expiry dates should be extended to 31 December 2000. The
TEWG advised the XIX ATCM that this be done and the proposal adopted in the form of .....

Item 12 (b) - Historic Sites and Monuments

The delegations of the United Kingdom, New Zealand/Norway/UK, and Chile
submitted proposals for new Historic Sites and Monuments (ATCM WP/4 rev.1, ATCM/WP 8, ATCM WP/21, respectively). The TEWG examined these proposals and advised the XIX
ATCM that the following historic monuments be added to the "List of Historic Monuments
Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to
Recommendation VII-9:

No. 61         Port Lockroy (Base A), Goudier Island, Wiencke Island
No. 62         Argentine Islands (Base F), Winter Island, Argentine Islands
No. 63         Horseshoe Island (Base Y), Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land
No. 64         Stonington Island (Base E), Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay,
                  West Graham Land
No. 65         Message Post, Svend Foyn Island
No. 66         Prestrud's Cairn, Scott Nunataks, Queen Alexandra Mountains
No. 67         Rock shelter "Granite House", Cape Geology, Granite Harbour
No. 68         Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay
No. 69         Message Post, Cape Crozier
No. 70         Message Post, Cape Wadworth, Coulman Island
No. 71         Whalers Bay whaling station, Whalers Bay, Deception Island

The TEWG also examined a proposal from the delegation of New Zealand (XIX
ATCM/WP 9) to amend the description of Historic Site No. 14, and advised the XIX ATCM
that the amendment be accepted as .....

The delegation of New Zealand tabled a Working Paper which proposed guidelines
for the designation of historic sites and monuments (XIX ATCM/WP 9). These guidelines,
based on internationally accepted criteria, were endorsed by several delegations. The TEWG
advised the XIX ATCM that this proposal should be adopted as .....
11

_Item 12 (c) - Review and Implementation of the System_

1.    SCAR presented a series of papers concerning the general development and 
improvement of the Antarctic Protected Area System (XIX ATCM/WP 26, 27, and 28) in 
response to requests from earlier ATCMs, and a summary of the actions related to SSSI 
No. 2 Arrival Heights, Ross Island (XIX ATCM/INF 57). The delegations of New Zealand 
and the USA also tabled an information paper concerning SSSI No. 2 (XIX ATCM/INF 86). 
New Zealand also tabled a paper describing the use of short summaries of protected area 
management plans by field parties in the Ross Sea area (XIX ATCM/INF 59).

2.    A working paper presented by SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 26) examined the 
development of ecosystem matrices which could be used by the Parties when considering the 
objectives, distribution and location of protected areas. The TEWG welcomed this work, 
and considered that the matrices would be a useful basis for ensuring representative examples 
of all ecosystems types are included in the Antarctic Protected Area System. The TEWG 
encouraged Parties to use the matrices when selecting sites to be proposed as protected areas.

3.    SCAR also introduced a model visit report for recording information for all 
visits to protected areas (XIX ATCM/WP 27). The Representative of SCAR informed the 
Group that the data collected by the use of such reports would facilitate revision of the 
management plans and provide a valuable scientific archive of usage. The TEWG considered 
that the report format would be valuable in compiling and exchanging information on visits 
to protected areas.

4.    A third paper by SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 28) proposed a model format for 
management plans for protected areas. This used Moe Island (SPA 13) as an example. The 
TEWG considered that the use of a model format for management plans would help to make 
them easier to use by those visiting protected areas, and make the plans more consistent with 
each other. The TEWG advised the XIX ATCM that this plan be used as a model for 
developing management plans for protected areas, and that .... should be adopted.
12

Item 13 - Scientific Environmental Protection Measures

     Item 13 (a) - Marine Pollution

1.  A paper from Chile (XIX ATCM/WP 22) described the organization being 
    established for oil spill control in the northern Antarctic Peninsula region.

2.  The Russian delegation made the comment that this is a very good 
    development and that they hope that a similar arrangement may be established on King 
    George Island where many research stations are located.

     Item 13 (b) - Waste Disposal and Waste Management

3.  The TEWG examined a working paper by the Netherlands concerning waste 
    disposal (XIX ATCM/11). This raised concerns that the prohibition on disposal of nuclear 
    waste in Antarctica contained in Article V-1 of the Antarctic Treaty might be affected if 
    negotiations on a nuclear waste convention were to lead to a convention to which all CPs 
    become parties. Article V-2 of the Antarctic Treaty specifies that the rules established under 
    such a convention would apply in Antarctica. The TEWG recommends that the ATCM 
    consider this matter.

4.  The TEWG examined a second paper by the Netherlands (XIX ATCM/WP 15) 
    on the application of Best Available Techniques in the Antarctic. The TEWG noted that in 
    determining whether a set of procedures, facilities or methods of operation constituted the 
    best available techniques, issues including the economic and logistic feasibility of such 
    techniques and time limits for installation should be taken into account. With this 
    understanding the TEWG recommends to the ATCM that it:

    (a) invite COMNAP to consider, in consultation with SCAR, the 
        desirability and feasibility of employing the concept of Best Available 
        Techniques for the protection of the Antarctic environment, and to 
        recommend appropriate action to the next Consultative Meeting;

    (b) include an examination of this matter in the agenda of the next 
        Consultative Meeting.

     Item 13 (c) - Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna

     Introduction and Continued Presence of Non-native Species of Animals and Plants

5.  The meeting examined a working paper by Australia (XIX ATCM/WP 29) 
    which raised concern about the introduction and continued presence of non-native species of 
    animals and plants to Antarctica through human activities. The Parties noted that Article 4 
    of Annex II of the Protocol requires that no species of animal or plant not native to the
13

Antarctic area shall be introduced onto land or ice shelves, or into water in the Antarctic Treaty area except in accordance with a permit.

6. The meeting acknowledged concerns about the introduction and continued presence of non-native species of animals and plants. Some delegations pointed out that new species may become present due to climate change or by natural means and that it is important to be sure before removing a species that it has been introduced by human activity. One delegation raised concerns about the dispersion of species within Antarctica by natural means and by human activity. The meeting agreed that before removing a species from Antarctica it should be reasonably established that the species had been introduced by human activity.

7. The TEWG recommends that the ATCM urge Parties to:

(a) examine all their facilities in Antarctica to identify any non-native species of animals or plants present which have been introduced by human activity;

(b) remove any such non-native species of animals or plants found in or associated with those facilities unless they are present in accordance with an appropriate permit;

(c) take action as necessary within their authority to ensure that tourists and non-government activities do not result in the introduction of non-native species of animals or plants into Antarctica.
14

Item 17 - Global change

1. The meeting noted the papers by SCAR (XIX ATCM/INF 75) and ASOC (XIX ATCM/INF 56). SCAR reported that lack of resources made it impossible to coordinate the many fields of existing research and stimulate new areas on as wide a front as had originally been envisaged. Accordingly, GLOCHANT had been requested to rank the key research issues to provide a clearer focus. SCAR had appointed a project officer to improve interdisciplinary communication and the links developed with the International Geosphere-Biosphere Program, the World Climate Research Program and the International Arctic Science Committee.

2. Whilst it is not yet clear that atmospheric warming observed in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula was necessarily continent-wide, the meeting heard of strong evidence from glaciology, oceanography, meteorology, geology, geophysics and biology indicating significant regional changes in the Antarctic climate. It was widely recognized that indications of global change were likely to be most easily detected in polar regions which could therefore be considered as early warning areas for impacts on the rest of the world. The potential importance of changes detected in the polar regions for increasing sea levels and changing weather patterns was emphasised, and attention was drawn to the need for coherent and sustained research to improve the accuracy of future predictions. Many delegations commented on the importance and value of continued Antarctic research to an understanding of global change, and of the need to ensure that this was well understood by governments.

3. The meeting welcomed the linkages between SCAR and the global programmes. Delegates drew the attention of SCAR to the value of having good links with the Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Attention should also be paid to linking Antarctic marine and terrestrial biological research with the global programme BIODIVERSITAS. SCAR agreed to consider these suggestions. The TEWG recommends to the ATCM that Parties draw the attention of the IPCC and the framework Climate Change Convention to the importance of Antarctica in the study of climate change and the need for good linkages with SCAR.
15

Introduction

Several delegations suggested that a re-organisation of the Agenda initially proposed 
for the TEWG could provide a means for increasing the efficiency of the work performed by 
the Group.

In this regard, taking into account as a basis the list of functions of the future CEP, as 
set forth in Article 12, paragraph 1 of the Protocol, and in the light of the experience already 
gained in the function of the TEWG during the XIX ATCM, an attempt was made to review 
the agenda items and to advise the ATCM on how it might re-structure them in a more 
logical manner, so as to provide a more coherent framework for the operation of the TEWG 
and for the provision of advice to the plenary.

Agenda Items

1. Effectiveness of Environmental Protection Measures

2. Application and implementation of EIA procedures
      a. Comments on draft CEEs
      b. Means for assessing cumulative impacts
      c. Monitoring needs and programmes
      d. Subjects (features) of EIA
      e. List of IEEs

3. Means of minimizing and mitigating environmental impacts (= specific 
   environmental protection measures)
      a. Tourism guidelines
      b. Education and training
      c. Compliance monitoring
      d. Waste management
      e. Marine pollution
      f. Regulation on extraction of scientific samples

4. Operation and elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Area System
      a. Proposal for revised and new:
            SPAs (Specially Protected Areas)
            SSSIs (Sites of Special Scientific Interest)
            MPAs (Multiple-use Planning Areas)
            SRAs (Specially Reserved Areas)
            HSMs (Historic Sites and Monuments)
      b. Site inspections
      c. Ecological matrices or other means for evaluating 
         possible gaps in the system
16

5. Collection, archiving, exchange and evaluation of environmental information

6. Environmental monitoring

7. The state of the Antarctic environment

8. Operation of the TEWG
ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING    XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE   XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                              SEOUL
                              May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 31 Rev. 1
May 19, 1995
Original: English


REPORT OF THE TEWG TO THE XIX ATCM

(Submitted by the Secretariat)
Item 6 - Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty

a) Implementation

The Meeting had an extensive exchange of views on efforts to implement the Protocol. 
Parties reported on their ratification progress, including preparation of national legislation to 
implement the Protocol and its Annexes. Parties that have not yet ratified the Protocol were 
urged to do so as quickly as possible.

It was decided at ATCM XVIII that agenda items which, under article 12 of the Protocol, 
would be dealt with by the Committee for Environmental Protection, would be dealt with at 
ATCM XIX by a Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) reporting to the plenary. 
The TEWG met from 8-12 May 1995. It considered and provided advice and recommendations 
to the plenary on agenda items assigned to it.

Many delegations expressed their views on the nature, mandate, and functions of the 
TEWG, and on support mechanisms that the TEWG would need to be effective in its role of 
giving advice and recommendations to the ATCM.

The Meeting confirmed that the TEWG is an advisory group constituted by the ATCM, 
pending entry into force of the Protocol, to provide advice and recommendations to the plenary 
on scientific, technical, and environmental issues related to implementation of the Protocol.

Most delegations believed that the TEWG should have the basic function of the CEP, 
which will be established when the Protocol enters into force. Most delegations also believed 
that the TEWG should be a standing group and be composed of specialists with the appropriate 
scientific, environmental, and technical competence.

The Meeting recognized that the TEWG could not work effectively unless documents to 
be considered at its meetings were prepared and distributed well in advance of the meetings. 
Parties were urged to prepare and provide working papers for consideration by the TEWG to 
the host of the next ATCM for translation and distribution well in advance of the meeting.

The need for secretarial support for the TEWG was stressed by several delegations. It 
was recognized that effective operation of the TEWG could require specialists sub-groups and 
meetings or work by correspondence or other means between ordinary sessions during the 
ATCMs.

The Meeting recognized that effective advisory bodies cannot always operate by 
consensus. It agreed that, in the absence of consensus, the report of the TEWG shall reflect all 
views expressed.
2

Item 7 (b) - The Environmental Impacts of Tourism

The Meeting received information papers regarding the nature, frequency, and scale of tourism activities in Antarctica (XIX ATCM/INF 13, 19, 28, 29, 33, 34, 45, 46, 47, and 48), and examined the issue of environmental impacts of tourism in relation to the Protocol and Recommendations VIII-9 and XVIII-1. The Meeting considered the following six issues:

1.      General Data and Information Needs

Existing information generally is insufficient either to predict or to serve as a baseline for detecting environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism. Therefore, the Meeting urged Parties to support activities toward:

        (a)     identifying sites that possibly have been or may be affected by tourism in Antarctica, and control sites that may be used for comparison;

        (b)     surveying selected sites and, if possible, determine indicator variables most likely to be sensitive to tourism activities; and

        (c)     determining and evaluating the effectiveness of measures taken to minimize the impact of different types, frequencies, timing, and levels of tourism activities.

2.      Site Inventories

With respect to the goal specified in paragraph 1(a), the Meeting urged Parties to take steps to identify sites affected by tourism, and to ensure the collection of reliable and comparable information regarding the nature, frequency, and scale of tourism activities.

A number of delegations commended the work being done by the United States on an Antarctic Site Inventory (XIX ATCM/INF 47). This work contributes to meeting the information goals specified above, and helps provide baseline information to assess the potential environmental impacts of tourism.

The Meeting considered that the protocols presented by the United States in INF 47 could be examined by other Parties to determine their application in expanding the site inventory work more widely in Antarctica, and that the Parties cooperate as fully as possible in the development of Antarctic site inventories.

3.      Cumulative Impacts

To prevent irreversible, detrimental effects upon the Antarctic environment, the Meeting noted that there is an urgent need to consider not only the environmental impacts associated with tourist visits, but also the nature, magnitude, and trend of cumulative impacts of all human
3

activities. In ths regard, the Meeting further noted that there is a need to design protocols and 
implement programmes for detecting cumulative impacts.

The Meeting also noted the need to elaborate procedures as set out in Annex 1 of the 
Protocol so that cumulative impacts may be adequately assessed. This would enable tour 
operators to be better informed of how to address cumulative impacts when preparing EIAs of 
their activities. The Meeting agreed to ask SCAR to address the issue of monitoring of 
cumulative impacts, and to report back to the XX ATCM.

4. Monitoring

The Meeting recognized that baseline assessment and monitoring of selected sites must 
be sufficient to distinguish the impacts of tourism from the impacts of other human activities or 
from natural environmental variations or change. Therefore, the Meeting agreed to seek 
SCAR's advice regarding the design of such baseline assessment and monitoring programs.

SCAR advised the Meeting (XIX ATCM/WP 24) that, subsequent to its workshops 
planned for September and October 1995, it should be possible to consider technical advice on 
the structure and development of these programs.

The Meeting also recognized that further, directed research may be valuable in 
determining appropriate techniques for managing tourism and other activities.

5. Methods for Ensuring Compliance

The Meeting recognised the importance of ensuring the compliance of tourism operators 
with the Protocol and all other measures designed to minimize potential environmental impacts 
on the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.

The Meeting agreed that this issue warranted discussion at the next ATCM.

6. Education and Training

The Meeting noted that for the effective management of Antarctic visitor activities, and 
to help ensure the protection of the Antarctic environment, education and training programs are 
essential.
4

Item 10 (a) - Environmental Monitoring of 
the Impacts of Human Activities in the Antarctic

1.  The Meeting welcomed the SCAR-COMNAP report (XIX ATCM/WP 24) 
describing progress with environmental monitoring initiatives since XVIII ATCM. It was 
noted that COMNAP was unable at present to propose a representative subset of facilities in 
Antarctica, considering that this should await agreement on monitoring protocols.

2.  The Meeting noted advice from SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 24) that it proposed 
to hold two technical workshops in late 1995 and that among other items these workshops 
would address:

    (a) baseline data requirements;

    (b) data management.

3.  The Meeting thanked SCAR for its report on incineration (XIX ATCM/WP 
25). The meeting agreed that it is important to seek means of reducing pollution caused by 
the use of incineration at Antarctic stations. The SCAR proposals for minimising the use of 
incineration and the reduction of its impact in cases where incineration can not be avoided 
highlighted the need for two-stage incineration with close temperature control, adequate 
filtering for particulate material and monitoring of flue gases to ensure optimal incinerator 
performance. The present lack of appropriate ecotoxicological information made it difficult 
to determine internationally agreed emission limits for specific components.

4.  The Meeting agreed that the Parties should:

    (a) wherever practicable waste which is presently incinerated should be 
removed from Antarctica;

    (b) where it is necessary to continue incineration, Parties should investigate 
means of minimising the impact of emissions;

    (c) incinerators should only be operated by trained personnel.

5.  The Meeting thanked the Korean delegation for useful and welcome 
information papers (XIX ATCM/INF 51 and 53) on environmental monitoring at King 
Sejong Station.

Item 10 (b) - Data Requirements

The Meeting received an information paper (XIX ATCM/INF 81) in which Japan 
noted that it has established a Centre on Antarctic Environmental Monitoring which will also 
have the function of processing, management, storage and distribution of data.
5

It was agreed that this issue should be taken up again at the XX ATCM when the 
reports of the SCAR technical workshops could be considered.

Item 10 (c) - Regulation of the Extraction,
   Use and Custody of Scientific Samples obtained in the Antarctic Expeditions

The Meeting noted the SCAR-COMNAP information paper (XIX ATCM/INF 73)
which advised that the inclusion of information on collections of scientific samples in the 
Antarctic Data Directory System would assist in the planning and development of Antarctic 
Research programs.
6

Item 11 (a) - Implementation of Procedures of IEEs and CEEs

The Meeting received a number of papers regarding environmental impact assessments procedures (XIX ATCM/WP 3, and XIX ATCM/INF 8, 14, 37, 40, 55 and 63), and noted the statement from ASOC (XIX ATCM/INF 85).

1. The United Kingdom delegation submitted a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 3) concerning the circulation of information on Environmental Impact Assessments. This paper proposed that a list of completed Initial Environmental Evaluations and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations carried out by each Consultative Party during the preceding calendar year should be transmitted as a separate document to the Host Government of the next ATCM not later than 1 March. The lists would be collated by the Host Government and published as an Annex to the final Report of the ATCM. The Meeting welcomed this initiative which would allow Parties to meet their obligations in Annex I of the Protocol and to make EIA information more accessible. The Meeting agreed that this proposal should come into operation from the end of the XIX ATCM, as an interim arrangement, pending the establishment of a Secretariat.

2. The Meeting considered a “Draft Guide on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of Activities in Antarctica” (XIX ATCM/INF 14) submitted by the United Kingdom. A number of delegations welcomed this Guide as a useful contribution. Chile considered that the UK paper could be used as a basis for the TEWG to develop a Guide for EIA for use by those planning activities in Antarctica. Chile commented that such a Guide would help ensure greater consistency in the preparation of EIAs.

3. An information paper submitted by New Zealand and South Africa (XIX ATCM/INF 63) outlined an approach they would take in respect of any changes required to an activity previously described in a final CEE. This approach (the outcome of which New Zealand and South Africa will report to ATCM XX) is as follows:

(a) review of the actual activity against the CEE;

(b) reporting on the CEE implementation in the annual Exchange of Information, e.g., activities completed in the year, any changes from the CEE,

(c) any changes from the original CEE to be treated in the same way as the original activity for which the CEE was prepared.

4. The delegation of South Africa submitted two papers (XIX ATCM/INF 37 and 55) describing the development and the implementation of an Environmental Health and Safety Management system adopted by the South African Antarctic Programme. South Africa will advise on the progress of this to the XX ATCM.
7

Item 11 (b) – Examination of CEEs produced during 1994–95

5. The Meeting welcomed reports on the “Construction and Operation of a 
Scientific Base at Dome C” and “Drilling Activity at Dome C, Antarctica” (XIX ATCM/INF 
8 and 40, respectively) from France and Italy, and complimented them on their preparation 
of the final draft CEE for Concordia Base located at Dome C.

6. Parties, who had forwarded comments on the draft CEE circulated by France, 
noted that these comments had been taken into account in the revisions (XIX ATCM/INF 8 
and 40). The Meeting noted that it did not have any further points or concerns to raise with 
regard to the CEEs. The Meeting also commended France and Italy for providing a clear 
example of how compliance with Article 3 of Annex I of the Protocol can be met. Some 
countries noted that not all countries in the system can produce studies of this level.

7. The role of the TEWG in assessing CEEs was discussed. The meeting agreed 
that the TEWG should advise the ATCM on CEEs, according to Item 6 (b) of the Final 
Report of the XVIII ATCM and Article 12 and Annex I of the Protocol.
8

Item 12 - The Antarctic Protected Area System

Item 12 (a) - Revised and New Management Plans for SPAs and SSSIs

The United Kingdom and New Zealand delegations tabled working papers (XIX ATCM/WP 5 and 7, respectively) which set out revised area descriptions and proposed management plans for the following Specially Protected Areas and Site of Special Scientific Interest:

    SPA No. 13   Moe Island, South Orkney Islands;
    SPA No. 15   Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney 
                 Islands;
    SSSI No. 11  Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, Ross Island

The French delegation tabled a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 16) which set out an area description and proposed management plan for a proposed Specially Protected Area:

    SPA No. 24   Pointe-Geologie, Terre Adelie

The Meeting adopted the above area descriptions and management plans with minor modifications.

Concerning the numbering of SPAs and SSSIs, the Dutch delegation suggested a new system, based on the use of three digits. The existing SPAs would be given numbers 101 through 123, the existing SSSIs 124 through 159 and new areas would be numbered starting with numbers 160. [The Meeting recommends that this renumbering proposal should be adopted when the Protocol enters into force.]

The Australian delegation submitted a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 14) which advised Parties that the designations for two SSSIs in Wilkes Land expire on 31 December 1995. Several delegations pointed out that this was a more widespread problem.

A total of twelve SSSIs have expiry dates for their management plans of 31 December 1995. The SSSIs are:

    SSSI No. 1   Cape Royds, Ross Island
    SSSI No. 3   Barwick Valley, Victoria Land
    SSSI No. 8   Western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island
    SSSI No. 9   Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
    SSSI No. 13  Potter Peninsula, King George Island
    SSSI No. 14  Harmony Point, west coast of Nelson Island, South Shetland 
                 Islands
    SSSI No. 15  Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic 
                 Peninsula
9

SSSI No. 16      North-East Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
SSSI No. 17      Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
SSSI No. 19      Linnaeus Terrace, Asgaard Range, Victoria Land
SSSI No. 20      Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
SSSI No. 21      Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands

The Meeting, on the basis of advice from TEWG, agreed that for all protected areas with designations due to expire on or before 31 December 1995, the expiry dates should be extended to 31 December 2000.

Item 12 (b) - Historic Sites and Monuments

The delegations of the United Kingdom, New Zealand/Norway/UK, and Chile submitted proposals for new Historic Sites and Monuments (ATCM WP/4 rev.1, ATCM/WP 8, ATCM WP/21, respectively). The Meeting examined these proposals and added the following historic monuments to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9:

No. 61         Port Lockroy (Base A), Goudier Island, Wiencke Island
No. 62         Argentine Islands (Base F), Winter Island, Argentine Islands
No. 63         Horseshoe Island (Base Y), Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land
No. 64         Stonington Island (Base E), Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay, 
               West Graham Land
No. 65         Message Post, Svend Foyn Island
No. 66         Prestrud's Cairn, Scott Nunataks, Queen Alexandra Mountains
No. 67         Rock shelter "Granite House", Cape Geology, Granite Harbour
No. 68         Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova 
               Bay
No. 69         Message Post, Cape Crozier
No. 70         Message Post, Cape Wadworth, Coulman Island
No. 71         Whalers Bay whaling station, Whalers Bay, Deception Island

The Meeting also received a proposal from the delegation of New Zealand (XIX ATCM/WP 9) to amend the description of Historic Site No. 14. This amendment was accepted.

The delegation of New Zealand proposed guidelines for the designation of historic sites and monuments (XIX ATCM/WP 9). These guidelines, based on internationally accepted criteria, were endorsed by several delegations. The Meeting, on the basis of advice from TEWG, adopted this proposal.
10

Item 12 (c) - Review and Implementation of the System

1.  SCAR presented a series of papers concerning the general development and improvement of the Antarctic Protected Area System (XIX ATCM/WP 26, 27, and 28) in response to requests from earlier ATCMs, and a summary of the actions related to SSSI No. 2 Arrival Heights, Ross Island (XIX ATCM/INF 57). The delegations of New Zealand and the USA tabled an information paper concerning SSSI No. 2 (XIX ATCM/INF 86). New Zealand tabled a paper describing the use of short summaries of protected area management plans by field parties in the Ross Sea area (XIX ATCM/INF 59).

2.  A working paper presented by SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 26) examined the development of ecosystem matrices which could be used by the Parties when considering the objectives, distribution and location of protected areas. The Meeting welcomed this work, and considered that the matrices would be a useful basis for ensuring representative examples of all ecosystems types are included in the Antarctic Protected Area System. The Meeting encouraged Parties to use the matrices when selecting sites to be proposed as protected areas.

3.  SCAR also introduced a model visit report for recording information for all visits to protected areas (XIX ATCM/WP 27). The Representative of SCAR informed the Group that the data collected by the use of such reports would facilitate revision of the management plans and provide a valuable scientific archive of usage. The Meeting, acting on the advice of TEWG, considered that the report format would be valuable in compiling and exchanging information on visits to protected areas.

4.  A third paper by SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 28) proposed a model format for management plans for protected areas. This used Moe Island (SPA 13) as an example. The Meeting recognised that the use of a model format for management plans would help to make plans easier to use by those visiting protected areas, and make them more consistent with each other. The Meeting agreed that the Moe Island Plan should be used as a model for developing management plans for protected areas.
11

Item 13 - Scientific Environmental Protection Measures

Item 13 (a) - Marine Pollution

1.    A paper from Chile (XIX ATCM/WP 22) described the organization being established for oil spill control in the northern Antarctic Peninsula region.

2.    The Russian delegation made the comment that this is a very good development and that they hope that a similar arrangement may be established on King George Island where many research stations are located.

Item 13 (b) - Waste Disposal and Waste Management

3.    The Meeting examined a working paper by the Netherlands concerning waste disposal (XIX ATCM/11). This raised concerns that the prohibition on disposal of nuclear waste in Antarctica contained in Article V-1 of the Antarctic Treaty might be affected if negotiations on a nuclear waste convention were to lead to a convention to which all CPs become parties. Article V-2 of the Antarctic Treaty specifies that the rules established under such a convention would apply in Antarctica.

4.    The Meeting examined a paper by the Netherlands (XIX ATCM/WP 15) on the application of Best Available Techniques in the Antarctic. It was noted that in determining whether a set of procedures, facilities or methods of operation constituted the best available techniques, issues including the economic and logistic feasibility of such techniques and time limits for installation should be taken into account. On the basis of advice from the TEWG, the Meeting invites COMNAP to consider, in consultation with SCAR, the desirability and feasibility of employing the concept of Best Available Techniques for the protection of the Antarctic environment, and to recommend appropriate action to the next Consultative Meeting

The Meeting agreed that this matter will be included in the agenda of the next ATCM.

Item 13 (c) - Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna

Introduction and Continued Presence of Non-native Species of Animals and Plants

5.    The Meeting examined a working paper by Australia (XIX ATCM/WP 29) which raised concern about the introduction and continued presence of non-native species of animals and plants to Antarctica through human activities. The Parties noted that Article 4 of Annex II of the Protocol requires that no species of animal or plant not native to the Antarctic area shall be introduced onto land or ice shelves, or into water in the Antarctic Treaty area except in accordance with a permit.
12

6. The Meeting acknowledged concerns about the introduction and continued 
presence of non-native species of animals and plants. Some delegations pointed out that new 
species may become present due to climate change or by natural means and that it is 
important to be sure before removing a species that it has been introduced by human activity. 
One delegation raised concerns about the dispersion of species within Antarctica by natural 
means and by human activity. The meeting agreed that before removing a species from 
Antarctica it should be reasonably established that the species had been introduced by human 
activity.

7. The Meeting recommends that Parties:

    (a) examine all their facilities in Antarctica to identify any non-native 
        species of animals or plants present which have been introduced by 
        human activity;

    (b) remove any such non-native species of animals or plants found in or 
        associated with those facilities unless they are present in accordance 
        with an appropriate permit;

    (c) take action as necessary within their authority to ensure that tourists 
        and non-government activities do not result in the introduction of non-
        native species of animals or plants into Antarctica.
13

Item 17 - Global change

1.    The Meeting noted the papers by SCAR (XIX ATCM/INF 75) and ASOC (XIX ATCM/INF 56). SCAR reported that lack of resources made it impossible to coordinate the many fields of existing research and stimulate new areas on as wide a front as had originally been envisaged. Accordingly, GLOCHANT had been requested to rank the key research issues to provide a clearer focus. SCAR had appointed a project officer to improve interdisciplinary communication and the links developed with the International Geosphere-Biosphere Program, the World Climate Research Program and the International Arctic Science Committee.

2.    Whilst it is not yet clear that atmospheric warming observed in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula was necessarily continent-wide, the Meeting heard of strong evidence from glaciology, oceanography, meteorology, geology, geophysics and biology indicating significant regional changes in the Antarctic climate. It was widely recognized that indications of global change were likely to be most easily detected in polar regions which could therefore be considered as early warning areas for impacts on the rest of the world. The potential importance of changes detected in the polar regions for increasing sea levels and changing weather patterns was emphasised, and attention was drawn to the need for coherent and sustained research to improve the accuracy of future predictions. Many delegations commented on the importance and value of continued Antarctic research to an understanding of global change, and of the need to ensure that this was well understood by governments.

3.    The Meeting welcomed the linkages between SCAR and the global programmes. Delegates drew the attention of SCAR to the value of having good links with the Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Attention should also be paid to linking Antarctic marine and terrestrial biological research with the global programme BIODIVERSITAS. SCAR agreed to consider these suggestions. The Meeting recommends that Parties draw the attention of the IPCC and the framework Climate Change Convention to the importance of Antarctica in the study of climate change and the need for good linkages with SCAR. The Meeting also agreed that global change be considered in the next ATCM.
[Note: Secretariat to number resolutions in the order of agenda items]

RESOLUTION ... (1995)

FOR EXTENSION OF THE EXPIRY DATES
FOR SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendation VIII-3 and XII-5

Noting that:

i)  experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans for these sites 
had shown them to be an effective means of reducing the risks of harmful 
interference in areas of special interest;

Recommend that:

1. The date of the expiry of Site Numbers ..... be extended from 31 
December 1995 to 31 December 2000.

2. The Governments of the Consultative Parties should use their best 
endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of 
Recommendation VII-3, that the Management Plans are observed.
RESOLUTION ... (1995)

UNIFORM MODEL FOR MANAGEMENT PLANS

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling the requests made by ATCM XVII and ATCM XVIII that SCAR should assist Parties in reviewing and revising Management Plans to conform with the provisions of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and consider how a model could be developed to facilitate the preparation of new and revised Management Plans;

Recognising that a uniform model for such plans would eliminate repetition and would make them easier to use;

Recommend that:

The structure of the Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. ........, adopted under ....... be regarded as a model for the preparation for all new and revised Management Plans for protected areas for the purposes of Annex V.
3

RESOLUTION .... (1995)

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT:

CIRCULATION OF INFORMATION

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Articles 3, 6 (2) and 17 of the

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting that numerous recommendations of Consultative Meetings have established

requirements for exchange of information between Governments;

Noting also that Annex 1 to the Protocol creates further obligations to exchange

information annually, including information on Initial Environmental Evaluations and

Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations;

Desirous that such information should be easily accessible and in a comprehensive and

uniform format so that the scale and trend of activities and developments in Antarctica can be

readily monitored;

Recommend that:

1.    The Governments of the Consultative Parties should provide, through diplomatic

      channels, a list of the Initial Environmental Evaluations and Comprehensive

      Environmental Evaluations submitted to them during the preceding calendar year.

2.    The list, as a separate document, should be transmitted to the host Government

      of the next ATCM not later than [1 March].

3.    The list should, at minimum, contain the following information:  A short

      description of the development or activity; the type of environmental impact

      assessment undertaken (IEE or CEE); the location (name, latitude, and longitude)

      of the activity; the organisation responsible for the EIA; and the decision taken

      following consideration of the environmental impact assessment.

4.    The lists should be collated by the host Government of the ATCM and circulated

      as an information paper to the ATCM and thereafter, if the ATCM so agrees, be

      published as an Annex to the final Report of the ATCM.

5.    The above procedures should be reviewed following the establishment of a

      permanent Secretariat.
MEASURE 1 (1995)

REVISED DESCRIPTIONS AND 
MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9 and VIII-3;

Noting that revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Noting also that the format of these revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

For the Specially Protected Areas listed below:

(i)     the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora shall be deleted;

(ii)    the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, shall be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

The Specially Protected Areas concerned are:

 Area No. 13   Moe Island, South Orkney Islands (Annex A);

 Area No. 15   Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands (Annex B)
Annex A to Measure 1 (1995)
Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 13

MOE ISLAND, SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1. Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-13 (1966, SPA No 13) after a 
proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that Moe Island provided a representative 
sample of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem, that intensive experimental research on the 
neighbouring Signy Island might alter its ecosystem and that Moe Island should be 
specially protected as a control area for future comparison.

These grounds are still relevant. Whilst there is no evidence that research activities at 
Signy Island have significantly altered the ecosystems there, a major change has occurred 
in the low-altitude terrestrial system as a result of the rapidly expanding Antarctic fur seal 
(Arctocephalus gazella) population. Plant communities on nearby Signy Island have been 
physically disrupted by trampling by fur seals and nitrogen enrichment from the seals' 
excreta has resulted in replacement of bryophytes and lichens by the macro-alga Prasiola 
crispa. Low-lying lakes have been significantly affected by enriched run-off from the 
surrounding land. So far Moe Island has not been invaded by fur seals to any great extent 
and its topography makes it less likely that seals will penetrate to the more sensitive areas.

The values to be protected are those associated with the biological composition and 
diversity of a near-pristine example of the maritime Antarctic terrestrial and littoral marine 
ecosystems. In particular, Moe Island contains the greatest continuous expanses of 
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf found in the Antarctic. Moe Island has been 
visited on few occasions and has never been the site of occupation for periods of more 
than a few hours.

2. Aims and Objectives

Management of Moe Island aims to:

- avoid major changes to the structure and composition of the terrestrial vegetation, 
in particular the moss turf banks,

- prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area,

- permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere, 
particularly research related to determining the differences between the ecology of 
an undisturbed island and that of an adjacent occupied and fur seal perturbed 
island.
3. Management Activities

Ensure that the biological condition of Moe Island is adequately monitored, preferably by 
non-invasive methods, and that the sign-boards are serviced.

If fur seals were to gain access to the interior of Moe Island it would be necessary to take 
action to prevent damage to the vulnerable moss banks. This action would most likely 
consist of the erection of a seal-proof fence at the head of the gully at the northeast of 
Landing Cove. Any direct management activities in the Area would be subject to an 
environmental impact assessment before any decision to proceed is taken.

4. Period of Designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-IS for an indefinite period.

5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of Moe Island in relation to the South Orkney Islands.  Map 2 
shows Moe Island in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Moe Island, South Orkney Islands, is a small irregularly-shaped island lying 300 m off the 
southwestern extremity of Signy Island, from which it is separated by Fyr Channel. It is 
about 1.8 km from the northeast to southwest and 1 km from northwest to southeast. Its 
position on Admiralty Chart No 1775, latitude 60°44'S, longitude 45°45'W, does not 
agree closely with that in Map 2 (lat. 60°44'S, long. 45°41'W).

The island rises precipitously on the northeastern and southeastern sides to Snipe Peak 
(226 m altitude). There is a subsidiary summit above South Point (102 m altitude) and 
lower hills on each of three promontories on the western side above Corral Point (92 m), 
Conroy Point (89 m) and Spaull Point (56 m). Small areas of permanent ice remain on 
the east- and south-facing slopes with late snow lying on the steeply dipping western 
slopes. There are no permanent streams or pools.

The rocks are metamorphic quartz-mica schists, with occasional biotite and quartz-rich 
beds. There is a thin bed of undifferentiated amphibolite on the northeastern coast. Much 
of the island is overlain with glacial drift and scree. Soils are predominantly immature 
deposits of fine to coarse clays and sands intermixed with gravels, stones and boulders. 
They are frequently sorted by freeze-thaw action in high or exposed locations into 
small-scale circles, polygons, stripes and lobes. There are deep accumulations of peat (up 
to 2 m thick on western slopes), considerable expanses of the surface of which are bare 
and eroded.
7

The dominant plant communities are Andreaea-Usnea fellfield and banks of 
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf (the largest known example of this community type 
in the Antarctic). These moss banks constitute a major biological value and the reason for 
the designation of the Area. The cryptogamic flora is diverse.

The mites Gamasellus racovitzai and Stereotydeus villosus and the springtail Cryptopygus 
antarcticus are common under stones.

There were five colonies of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) totalling about 
11,000 pairs in 1978-79. A more recent visit (February 1994) noted fewer than 100 pairs 
on the northern side of Landing Cove and more than a thousand on the southern side. 
Numerous other birds breed on the island, notably about 2000 pairs of cape petrels 
(Daption capensis) in 14 colonies (1966) and large numbers of Antarctic prions 
(Pachyptila desolata).

Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) are found 
in the bays on the west side of the island. Increasing numbers of fur seals (Arctocephalus 
gazella), mostly juvenile males, come ashore on the north side of Landing Cove and have 
caused some damage to vegetation in that area. However, it is possible that the nature of 
the terrain will restrict these animals to this small headland where damage may intensify.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

None.

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board is located at the back of the small shingle beach in the northeast comer of 
Landing Cove, beyond the splash zone on top of a flat rock, to which it is bolted. The 
board was erected on 2 February 1994.

There is a cairn and the remains of a survey mast, erected in 1965-66, on Spaull Point. 
This mast is of interest for lichenometric studies and should not be removed. There are 
no other structures on Moe Island.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No 14, Lynch Island, lies about 10 km north-north-east of Moe Island. SPA No 18, 
North Coronation Island, lies about 19 km away on the northern side of Coronation Island. 
SPA No 15, Southern Powell Island, is about 41 km to the east.

7.    Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by appropriate 
national authorities, as designated under Article 7 of Annex V of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:

-   it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere

-   the actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural ecological system in the Area

-   any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan

-   the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan

-   the Permit, or an authorized copy, must be carried within the Specially Protected Area

-   a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

There are no restrictions on landing from the sea, which is the preferred method. No special access points are specified, but landings are usually most safely made at the northeast corner of Landing Cove.

Helicopter landings should be avoided where practicable. Helicopters may land only on the col between hill 89 m and the western slope of Snipe Peak. To avoid overflying bird colonies approach should preferably be from the south, though an approach from the north is permissible.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250 m altitude above the highest point except for access to the landing point specified above.

No pedestrian routes are designated but persons on foot should at all times avoid disturbances to birds or damage to vegetation and periglacial features. Vehicles are prohibited on Moe Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place

-   Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere and which will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area

-   Essential management activities, including monitoring

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for essential scientific or management activities, as specified in the Permit.
7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties should not normally camp in the Area. If this is essential for reasons of safety,
tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to vegetation or
disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be
taken into the Area.

No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, which
may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, shall be
removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit
was granted.

Fuel, food and other materials are not to be depoted in the Area, unless required for
essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All
such materials introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depots
are not permitted.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. [Where animal taking or harmful 
interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for 
Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.]
                  No
                  change

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit,
except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of the Area and
dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for laboratory
examination.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be deposited
in the sea.

7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the
Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area, to carry out biological monitoring and site
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant material
or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain notice boards, or
protective measures.
7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
Map 1.  Moe Island Specially Protected Area in relation to the South 
Orkney Islands
45°42'W                                  45°41'W
                                             
                                             
                                             
         N                                   
                                             
                                             
                                             
                      Landing area for       
                      small boats            
                      60°44'S               
                                             
         Conroy Point                         
                      Landing                
                      Cove                  
                                             
         Corral Point                         
                                             
                                             
                      South                   
                      Point                  
                                             
         MARIHOLM                             
                                             
                      60°45'S               
                                             
         45°42'W                    45°41'W   
                                             
                                             
MOE ISLAND                                   
Specially Protected Area No. 13              
                                             
LEGEND                                       
□ Permanent snow/ice                         
  Ice-free area                               
  Moss vegetation                             
■ Penguin colony (Chinstrap)                 
  Limiting offshore danger line               
  Contour (10 m)                              
~ Index contour (50 m)                        
▲226 Survey station (occupied)               
△ 89 Survey station (intersected)            
  12 Spot height (photogrammetric)            
                                             
                                             
                                             
         0                  500              
                   METRES                     
                                             
Map 2. Moe Island Specially Protected Area  
Annex B to Measu. 1 (1995)

for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.15

SOUTHERN POWELL ISLAND AND ADJACENT ISLANDS,
SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1.  Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-15 (1966, SPA No 15)
after a proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that southern Powell Island
and the adjacent islands support substantial vegetation and a considerable bird and
mammal fauna. The Area was representative of the natural ecology of the South
Orkney Islands, and was rendered more important by the nucleus of an expanding
colony of Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella).

These grounds are still relevant, though the expansion of the fur seal colony is
progressing only slowly.

The values to be protected are primarily those associated with the large concentrations
of breeding birds and seals, and to a lesser extent, the terrestrial vegetation.

2.  Aims and Objectives

Management of southern Powell Island and adjacent islands aims to:

-   avoid major changes in the structure and composition of the terrestrial
    vegetation;
-   prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
-   permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served
    elsewhere.

3.  Management Activities

Because of its use as an anchorage in the past, it is important that the signs which
identify the Area as a Specially Protected Area and point out that landing without a
permit is forbidden are maintained.

Visits should be made as necessary to assess the biological composition of the Area,
in particular the state of the fur seal colony, and to maintain sign boards.

4.  Period of designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-15 for an indefinite period.
•
5.    Maps

Map 1 shows the location of southern Powell Island in relation to the South Orkney 
Islands. Map 2 shows the Area in greater detail.

6.    Description of the Area

6(i)   Geographical coordinates and natural features

The Area, which is centered on latitude 60°42’S and longitude 45°01’W includes all 
of Powell Island, South Orkney Islands, south of the latitude of the southern summit 
of John Peaks (375 m altitude), together with the whole of Fredriksen Island, 
Michelsen Island (a tidal peninsula at the southern tip of Powell Island), Christoffersen 
Island, Grey Island and unnamed adjacent islands. All but the Crutchley Ice Piedmont 
of southern Powell Island are ice-free in summer, though there are patches of semi-
permanent or late-lying snow in places.

The rocks of southern Powell Island, Michelsen Island and Christoffersen Island are 
conglomerates of Cretaceous-Jurassic age. The two promontories to the west of John 
Peaks are Carboniferous greywacke-shales. There are boulders containing plant fossils 
in the glacial deposits around Falkland Harbour. Much of central and southern 
Fredriksen Island is composed of sandstone and dark phyllitic shales. The north-east, 
and probably most of the north, of this island is highly sheared conglomerate with 
laminated mudstone. The Area has only a thick mantle of glacial till, strongly 
influenced by seabird guano.

Michelsen Island is almost devoid of land vegetation, although on the rocks there are 
extensive communities of lichens dominated by nitrophilous crustose species. These 
are also widespread on Fredriksen Island and elsewhere on bird-influenced cliffs and 
rocks near the shore. The most diverse vegetation on Powell Island occurs on the two 
promontories and associated scree west of Falkland Harbour. Here, and on 
Christoffersen Island and the northern part of Fredriksen Island, moss banks with 
underlying peat occur. Wet areas support stands of moss carpet. There are extensive 
areas of the nitrophilous macroalga Prasiola crispa associated with the penguin 
colonies in the area. Snow alga are prominent on the ice piedmont and snow patches 
in late summer.

No information is available on the arthropod fauna, but is probably very similar to that 
at Signy Island. The springtails Cryptopygus antarcticus and Parisotoma octoculata 
and the mites Alaskozetes antarcticus, Stereorydeus villosus and Gamasellus racovitzai 
occur in great numbers beneath stones.

There are few observations on marine biota in the Area, but this is likely to be very 
similar to the well-researched Signy Island area. The relatively enclosed Falkland-
Ellefsen Harbour area and the bay on the east side of the peninsula are highly 
influenced by glacial run-off from the ice piedmont.
15

Large numbers of penguins and petrels breed throughout the Area. There are many 
thousand pairs of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica), mostly on Fredriksen 
Island. Similarly large numbers of Adélie penguins (P. adeliae) occur principally on 
the southern Powell-Michielsen Island area. Here there are also several thousand pairs 
of gentoo penguins (P. papua) and a very few scattered pairs of macaroni penguins 
(Eudyptes chrysolophus) breeding among the gentoos.

Other breeding birds include southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), cape 
petrels (Daption capensis), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson's storm petrels 
(Oceanites oceanicus), blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) Dominican gulls 
(Larus dominicanus), brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergi), sheathbills (Chionis alba), 
and possibly Antarctic prions (Pachyptila desolata) and black-bellied storm petrels 
(Fregatta tropica).

Michielsen Island is the longest known breeding site in the Antarctic of fur seals since 
their near-extermination in the nineteenth century. The number of pups born annually 
has increased slowly but fairly steadily from 11 in 1956 to about 60 in 1989. Thirty-
four live pups were recorded in January 1994. Many non-breeding males visit the 
Area during the summer. Other seals are frequent on the beaches, mainly elephant 
seals (Mirounga leonina) and Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli). Leopard seals 
(Hydrurga leptonyx) and crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) are occasionally 
seen on ice floes.

6(ii)Restricted zones within the Area

None

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board (erected January 1994) is positioned on southern Powell Island on top 
of a small rock outcrop at the back of the shingle beach on the east side of the 
southern promontory of the island.

On Michielsen Island the marker board (erected January 1994) is situated on a low-
lying rock about 50 m from the shoreline at the back of a high shingle beach at the 
southern tip of the island.

On Christoffersen Island the marker board (erected January 1994) is located on a 
small promontory on the northeastern shore of the island at the entrance to Falkland 
Harbour. The board is located at the back of the beach just below a small Adélie 
penguin rookery.

On Fredriksen Island a marker board (erected January 1994) is located at the northern 
end of the pebble/boulder beach on the western side of the island, below a small 
chinstrap penguin rookery. The board is at the back of the beach on top of a small 
rock outcrop.
16

There are no other structures within the Area, but various mooring chains and rings 
associated with the use of Ellefsen and Falkland Harbours by floating whale factories 
in the 1920s are to be found on the shore.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No. 13 Moe Island, and SPA No. 14, Lynch Island, are about 35 km west by south 
and about 35 km west of the Area respectively. SPA No. 18, North Coronation 
Island, is about the same distance away on the northern side of Coronation Island.

7. Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by 
appropriate national authorities. as designated under Article 7 of Annex V of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
    - it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served 
      elsewhere;
    - the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in the 
      Area;
    - any management activities are in support of the objectives of this Management 
      Plan;
    - the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan;
    - the Permit must be carried within the Specially Protected Area;
    - a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the 
      Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Anchoring within Falkland Harbour and Ellefsen Harbour is prohibited except in 
emergency.

No pedestrian routes are designated within the Area, but persons on foot should avoid 
walking on vegetated areas or disturbing wildlife wherever possible. Vehicles are not 
allowed in the Area.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250m altitude above the highest point except 
for purposes of landing (when essential) on the beach on the east side of the southern-
most tip of Powell Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time 
and place
    - Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere
    - essential management activities, including monitoring.
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except 
for essential scientific or management activities, as specified in the Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties shall not camp in the Area, except in an emergency for reasons of safety. In 
this case, tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to the 
vegetation or disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall 
be taken into the Area.

No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, 
which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, 
shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which 
the Permit was granted.

Fuel, food or other materials are not to be depoted in the Area, unless required for 
essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. 
All such materials are to be removed when no longer required.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or 
harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum 
standard.

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a 
Permit, except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of 
the Area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for 
laboratory examinations.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be 
deposited in the sea.
18

7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant 
material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, or to erect or maintain 
notice boards, or to carry out protective measures.

7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, 
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their 
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in 
a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of 
the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
18


                      45°30'W           45°00'W           44°30'W
        60°30'S




        60°40'S




        60°50'S
                  0         10        20
                             km


Map 1.    Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands Specially
Protected Area in relation to the South Orkney Islands
20


Cape
Disappointment




John
Peaks

Cruchley
Ice
Piedmont




Falkland Harbour
Elleisen
Harbour




CHRISTOFFERSEN
ISLAND




Southern
Powell Island
Specially Protected Area No. 15




                      GREY
                      ISLAND




MICHELSEN
ISLAND




FREDRIKSEN
ISLAND




LEGEND
Permanent snow/ice
Ice-free area
Moraine
Lake
Limiting offshore danger line
Formline (50 m)
Index formline (250 m)
Survey station (occupied)
Survey station (intersected)
Spot height (barometric)

                      0                  1                   2
                      Approximate scale
                      KILOMETRES

Map 2. Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands Specially Protected
Area
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                  21

Annex to Resolution  (995)
Management Plan
Site of Special Scientific Interest No.11
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.#4
TRAMWAY RIDGE, MT. EREBUS, ROSS ISLAND

1. Description of values to be protected
The lower end of Tramway Ridge was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI
No. 11) after a proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that the Area supports an unusual ecosystem
of exceptional scientific value to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists. Mt. Erebus (3794 m) is
one of only three known high altitude localities of fumarolic activity and associated vegetation in the
Antarctic. Tramway Ridge is an ice-free area of gently sloping warm ground 1.5 km to the
Northwest of the main crater of Mt. Erebus, located at an elevation of between 3350 m and 3400 m.
The single, as yet unidentified, moss species found in the Area is unusual in that it persists in the
protonematal stage. An unusual variety of a common thermophillic cyanobacterium is especially
noteworthy. The plant communities which have developed on the fumarolic soils within the Area
differ significantly from those found elsewhere in Antarctica. The regional uniqueness of the
communities is of substantial scientific interest and value. The very limited geographical extent of the
ecosystem, its unusual biological features, its exceptional scientific values and the ease with which it
could be disturbed through trampling or alien introductions, are such that the Area requires long-term
special protection.

2. Aims and objectives
Management at Tramway Ridge aims to:
- avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;
- prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
- permit research on the unique vegetation and microbial communities while ensuring they are
protected from over-sampling;
- minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;
- preserve a part of the Area, which is declared a Restricted Zone, as a reference site for future
studies;
- permit visits for management purposes in support of the objectives of the management plan.

3. Management activities
The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
- Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the designated helicopter landing site
whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings near the Area in a given season.
These should be replaced as needed and removed when no longer required.
- Markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no significant threat to the
environment, should be placed to mark the helicopter landing pad.
- A line of flags should be placed to mark the preferred snowmobile route (Map A) between the
USAP Upper and Lower Erebus Huts, which should pass no closer than 200 m to the Area.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                                         22

- Signs illustrating the location, boundaries and clearly stating entry restrictions shall be placed on 
  posts marking the boundaries of the Area.

- Signs showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
  displayed prominently, and a copy of this Management Plan should be kept available, in all of the 
  research hut facilities located close to the summit of Mt. Erebus.

- Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall 
  be maintained in good condition.

- Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the Area 
  continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and 
  maintenance measures are adequate.

- National Antarctic Programmes operating in the region shall consult together with a view to 
  ensuring these steps are carried out.

4. Period of designation
   Designated [?] for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs
   Map A: Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, location image-map. Image is rectified by affine 
   transformation and scale is approximate. Photography USGS/DOSLI (SN7842) 11 
   November 1993.

   Map B: Tramway Ridge, protected area orthophotograph. Orthophoto and protected area boundary 
   coordinates are tied to the Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, a local framework, using the 
   WGS72 spheroid. Precise GPS coordinates for the site will differ: these were unavailable 
   at the time of mapping. Photography US Navy (SN6480) 9 February 1980.

   Map C: Tramway Ridge, protected area map. Contours are derived from a digital elevation model 
   generated using a 10 m grid for the orthophotograph in Map B: accuracy ± 2m. Precise 
   area of warm ground is subject to variation seasonally and inter-annually.

   Figure 1: Perspective view of the Tramway Ridge area from an elevation of 6200 m, 5000 m out 
   from the Area at a bearing of 215°SW, showing the protected area boundary, the location of 
   the USAP Erebus huts, and the preferred helicopter landing site and snowmobile route. 
   Image source: Map A.

6. Description of the Area
   6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
   The boundary of the designated Area is defined as a square of 200 m by 200.8 m which encompasses 
   most of the warm ground area of lower Tramway Ridge (167°06'35"E, 77°31'05"S: Map B). The 
   Area is divided into two parts of almost equal size, the northern half being a Restricted Zone. The 
   boundaries of the Area and the Restricted Zone (marked by signposts at each corner) and prominent 
   features are shown on Map B. Several boundary signposts have been offset owing to dangerous 
   ground at the actual corner point.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                  23

The Area is in general on a gentle slope of about 5°, with much of the ice-free ground in the form of terraces which have a typical vertical height of about 0.5 m and steeper sides of up to 30° in slope. The steep sides of the terraces have the maximum development of crusts of vegetation, and it is from these sides that visible steam emissions occur. Visible vegetation covers about 16% of the Area. Low ice hummocks of up to about 1 m high are distributed over the Area where steam has frozen. Surface ground temperatures are up to about 75°C.

The steam-warmed lithosols in the Area provide an unusual habitat of limited extent. The acid reaction of the soils, the constant supply of moisture by condensation of steam and the regular supply of geothermal heat produce conditions which contrast markedly with most Antarctic soils. There is no evidence of the presence of microinvertebrate animals in the soils. The vegetation comprises protonematal moss and diverse microalgae, which has developed on the fumarolic soils and differs significantly from other Antarctic plant communities. The single moss species, which has not yet been identified, is unusual in that it has never been seen to produce leaves but persists in the protonematal stage. The vegetation occurs in zones related to surface temperature. Warmest ground, from about 35 – 60°C, is colonised by dark blue-green and reddish-brown mats of cyanobacteria, whereas cooler surfaces of about 10 – 30°C are dominated by green crusts of coccoid chlorophytes and moss protonema. Bare ground lacking a macroscopically visible vegetation occurs between 0 – 20°C.

The algal flora comprises four cyanobacteria and 11 coccoid chlorophytes. The presence of a thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially noteworthy as it is an unusual variety of the hot spring cyanobacterium Mastigocladus laminosus, which is common elsewhere in the world. Thermophilic bacteria have been isolated at 60°C. These include heterotrophic and a thiosulfate-utilising autotrophic species.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

The northern half of the Area is designated a Restricted Zone in order to preserve part of the Area as a reference site for future comparative studies, while the southern half of the Area (which is essentially similar in biology, features and character) is available for research programmes and sample collection. The south boundary of the Restricted Zone is defined by a line that bisects the Area into two halves (Map B), and is marked at both ends by signposts. This boundary may be identified on the ground approximately as an extension westwards of the south ridge line of lower Tramway Ridge. The other three boundaries of the Restricted Zone are defined by the boundaries of the Area. Access to the Restricted Zone is strictly prohibited until such time it is agreed by management plan review that access should be allowed.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area

Signposts mark the corner points of the boundaries. The USAP Lower and Upper Erebus Huts are located approximately 1 km to the Northeast (3400 m) and Southeast (3612.5 m) respectively.
6(iv) Location of other ASPAs within close proximity of the Area
None.

7. Permit conditions
Permits may be issued only by appropriate national authorities as designated under Article 7 of Annex 
V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty Conditions for issuing a 
Permit to enter the Area are that:

- it is issued only for scientific study of the ecosystem, or for a compelling scientific or 
management purpose that cannot be served elsewhere;
- access to the Restricted Zone shall be prohibited;
- the actions permitted are not likely to jeopardise the natural ecological system or scientific values 
of the Area;
- any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
- the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
- any Permit issued shall be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Landing of helicopters within the Area is strictly prohibited. Helicopter overflight of the Area should 
be avoided, except for essential scientific or management purposes when helicopters shall in no 
instance fly lower than 30 m above the ground surface of the Area. Use of helicopter smoke bombs 
is strictly prohibited within 200 m of the Area and is discouraged nearby. For short-duration visits 
which do not require camp establishment, access by helicopter should be to a designated landing site, 
located outside of the Area and 300 m to the Northwest (Map A and Figure 1). For visits which 
require camp establishment, helicopter access should be to the USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Huts, 
and thence on foot or by land vehicle to the edge of the Area at Tramway Ridge. Landing of 
helicopters at other sites close to the Area is strongly discouraged. Only those persons specifically 
authorised by Permit are allowed to enter the Area. No special restrictions apply to the air or land 
routes used to move to and from the Area, although those traveling between the Upper and Lower 
Erebus Huts should keep to the preferred snowmobile route and stay at least 200 m from the protected 
area boundary.

Access into the Area shall be on foot and land vehicles are prohibited. Visitors should avoid 
walking on visible vegetation and, as far as practicable, areas of warm ground. Visitors should be 
aware that walking in the Area can compact soil, alter temperature gradients (which may change rates 
of steam release), and break thin ice crusts which may form over warm ground, with resulting 
damage to soil and biota below. The presence of snow or ice surfaces is not a guaranteed indication 
of a suitable pathway: therefore every reasonable effort should be made to minimise the effects of 
walking activity. Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the 
objectives of any permitted activities.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place
- Scientific research which will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area;
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                  25

- Essential management activities, including monitoring.
- Entry to the Restricted Zone is prohibited.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures, except boundary markers and signs, are to be erected within the Area except as
specified in a Permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by Permit and
clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such
items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of
specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be the responsibility of the authority which
granted the original Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Camping required for work in the Area should be near the existing USAP Upper or Lower Erebus
Hut sites, and is discouraged anywhere within 500 m of the boundaries of the Area (Map A).

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area

To avoid compromising the microbial ecosystem for which this site is protected no living animals,
plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions shall
be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area.
Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for
scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or
before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.

Fuels are not to be brought into the Area. Food shall not be consumed within the Area.
Equipment and other materials are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes
connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials introduced shall
be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and
shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimised.

7(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna

Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a
Permit. Where taking of animals or harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance
with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a
minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit. Material of
human origin, not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder, but which is likely to compromise the
values of the Area may be removed from any part of the Area, including the Restricted Zone.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                  26

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All wastes, including all human wastes, must be removed from the Area. Excretion of human wastes 
is prohibited within the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can 
continue to be met

1. The Permit, or an authorised copy, must be carried within the Antarctic Specially Protected Area.

2. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection 
activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain 
signposts, or protective measures.

3. To help maintain the scientific value derived from the unique communities found at Tramway 
Ridge visitors shall take special precautions against introductions, especially when visiting several 
thermal regions in a season. Of particular concern are microbial or vegetation introductions sourced 
from:
      • thermal areas, both Antarctic and non-Antarctic;
      • soils at any other Antarctic sites, including those near stations;
      • soils from regions outside Antarctica.

To this end, visitors shall take the following measures to minimise the risk of introductions:

(a) Any sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area shall be sterilised and maintained in 
a sterile condition before being used within the Area. To the maximum extent practicable, 
footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including backpacks or carry-bags) 
shall be thoroughly cleaned or sterilised and maintained in this condition before entering the Area;

(b) Sterilisation should be by an acceptable method, such as by UV light, autoclave or by 
washing exposed surfaces in 70% ethanol solution in water.

(c) Sterile protective overclothing shall be worn. The overclothing shall be suitable for working at 
temperatures of -20°C or below and comprise at a minimum sterile overalls to cover arms, legs 
and body and sterile gloves suitable for placing over the top of cold-weather gloves.

7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, 
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their 
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in 
a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of 
the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
Map A - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus :
Site of Special Scientific Interest No.11
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.XX

Location image-map.

                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 11

Map B - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX

                                                                                           N

                                                                                        N (NZ)

                                      Restricted Zone
                                      (Entry Prohibited)

                                                                                  Tramway Ridge

                                     Warm Ground

Photography, 9 February 1980

0         metres        100

—  Protected area boundary
•  Survey marks
×  Boundary signpost

Orthophoto positional accuracy : +/- 2m
Protected Area boundary origin of coordinates : 
Station E0, Camp Area Plano Datum 1901, WGS72.
DOSLI survey; 37/142
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 11
Map C - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.XX

                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                 N
0         metres       100
Contour Interval : 2m                  Area of warm ground subject to change.
                                       Map 'C' Is digitally derived from orthophoto in Map 'B'
R
Figure 1 - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus :
Site of Speul Scientific Interest No. (1)
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX

Perspective view from 215°SW

 Helicopter Pad 
Tramway Ridge
 AREA NO. XX 
 SS[?] No. (1)6 
Preferred snowmobile route
 Lower Erebus Hut (USAP)

 Upper Erebus Hut (USAP) 
 Mt Erebus Summit
MEASURE ... (1995)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

For the Site of Special Scientific Interest mentioned below:

(i)     the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8
        Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest, be 
        deleted;

(ii)    the Management Plan of the Site of Special Scientific Interest, annexed to 
        this Recommendation, be inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 
        Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

The Site of Special Scientific Interest concerned is:

SSSI No. ... Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, Ross Island.
MEASURE ... (1995)

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM:
NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling the Measures adopted in Recommendations 1-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7,
XIII-16, and XIV-8;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with
paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty; that the following historic monuments be
added to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing
Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9.

..  Port Lockroy, Base A, on Goudier Island, off Wiencke Island, Antarctic
Peninsula (Lat 64° 49' S, Long 63° 31' W). Of historic importance as an
Operation Tabarin base and for scientific research.

..  Argentine Islands, Base F (Wordie House), South-west corner of Winter Island,
one of the group known as the Argentine Islands (Lat 65° 15' S, Long 64°
16' W). Of historic interest as an example of an early British scientific base.

..  Horseshoe Island, Base Y, Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land (Lat 67° 49' S,
Long 67° 18' W). Noteworthy as a relatively unaltered and completely equipped
base of a later period. Blaiklock, the refuge hut nearby, is taken to be an integral
part of the base.

..  Stonington Island, Base E, Northern end of Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay,
West Graham Land (Long 68° 11' S, 67° 00' W). Of historical importance in
the early period of exploration and later British Antarctic Survey (BAS) history
of the 1960s and 70s.

..  Message Post, Svend Foyn Island. A pole with a box attached was placed on 16
January 1895 during the whaling expedition of Henryk Bull and Captain Leonard
Kristensen of the ship "Antarctica". It was examined and found intact by the
British Antarctic Expedition of 1898-1900 and then sighted from the beach by the
USS Edisto in 1956 and USCGS Glacier in 1965 (latitude approximately 71°
52' S, longitude 171° 10' E).

..  Prestrud's Cairn, at the foot of main bluff Scott Nunataks, Queen Alexandra
Mountains. A small rock cairn at the foot of the main bluff on the north side of
the nunataks by Lieutenant K Prestrud on 3 December 1911 during the
Norwegian Antarctic Expedition of 1910-1912 (latitude 77° 12' S, longitude 154° 
30' W).

..  Rock Shelter "Granite House", Cape Geology, Granite Harbour. This shelter was 
constructed in December 1911 for use as a field kitchen by Taylor's second 
geological excursion during the British Antarctic Expedition of 1910-1913. It was 
enclosed on three sides with granite boulder walls and used as a sledge to form 
a roof tree which supported seal skins anchored by heavy rocks (latitude 77° 
00' E, longitude 162° 32' E). A 1981 inspection of the "house" found it in good 
condition although the sledge had begun to disintegrate. The most recent visit to 
the site in 1990 reported that this deterioration was accelerating.

..  Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay.  An 
emergency depot, consisting of a sledge loaded with supplies and equipment, was 
place on 25 January 1913 by the British Antarctic Expedition at the close of the 
1910-1913 expedition. The depot was established by the crew of the Terra Nova 
to provide security in the event the ship was unable to return and pick them up 
(latitude 74° 56' S, longitude 163° 48' E). In 1994, the sledge and supplies were 
removed in order to stabilise their condition as wind and scoria particles had 
started to cause rapid deterioration.

..  Message Post, Cape Crozier. Erected on 22 January 1902 by Captain Robert F 
Scott's Discovery Expedition (the National Antarctic Expedition of 1901-1904) 
and consists of a post to which a metal cylinder was attached containing an 
account of the Expedition's movements. It was intended to provide information 
for the expedition relief ships (latitude 77° 27' S, longitude 169° 16' E). The 
message post, although weathered, still stands, its grain blasted into high relief 
by countless storms. The record cylinder no longer exists.

..  Message Post, Cape Wadworth, Coulman Island. A metal cylinder nailed to a 
red pole 8 metres above sea level placed by Captain R F Scott on 15 January 
1902. He also painted the rocks behind the post red and white to make it more 
conspicuous (latitude 73° 19'S, longitude 169° 47' E).

..  Whalers Bay Whaling Station, Whalers Bay, Deception Island. Established in 
1906 by Captain Adolfo Andresen. Of historical importance as an example of an 
Antarctic whaling station. A map of the Site is attached

[Note for the Secretariat:        
1.      Check numbering of the Historic Sites
2.      Check map for Whalers Bay]
RESOLUTION ... (1995)

NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS:
SUGGESTED GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8;

Recommend that the following Guidelines for the Designation of Historic Sites and/or Monuments should be used by the Governments of the Consultative Parties in proposing sites for the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the proposing Government or Governments".

Guidelines

Proposals for Historic Sites and/or Monuments should address one or more of the following:

•   A particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica occurred at the place;
•   A particular association with a person who played an important role in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica;
•   A particular association with a notable feat of endurance or achievement;
•   Representative of, or forms part of, some wide-ranging activity that has been important in the development of knowledge of Antarctica;
•   Particular technical or architectural value in its materials, design or method of construction;
•   The potential, through study, to reveal information or has the potential to educate people about significant human activities in Antarctica;
•   Symbolic or commemorative value for people of many nations.
MEASURE ... (1995)

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS: AMENDMENT

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

    That an amendment of the description of Historic Site Number 14, which is 
    contained in the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the 
    proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9, be 
    approved.

Amendment to Listing:

Site Number 14: Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay, Scott Coast

This listing is currently described as "Remains of rock shelter".

It should be described as "Site of ice cave". The final sentence in this listing should also 
be amended to read "the party spent the winter of 1912 in this ice cave".
36


MEASURE ... (1995)

XIX-_: Antarctic Protected Area System:
Specially Protected Areas

Specially Protected Area No. 24: Pointe-Geologie Archipelago (Jean Rostand, Alexis 
Carrel, Lamarck and Claude Bernard Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan for the above area has been approved by the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that the Point Geologie Archipelago is important as a representative area of 
considerable biological, geological and aesthetic value; contains a high diversity of animals and 
plants and is an important area for scientific research; and that long-term research and 
monitoring programmes on bird colonies and geology have been conducted in the area since 1952.

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with 
paragraph 4 of the Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

That the following area shall be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, 
of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, 
together with the annexed Management Plan:

    Specially Protected Area No. ....

Jean Rostand, Alexis Carrel, Lamarck and Claude Bernard Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak and 
Breeding Marine Emperor Penguin Colony (140 to 140° 02' E; 66° 39' 30" to 66° 40' 30" S) 
in the heart of Pointe-Geologie Archipelago, coastal area of Adelie Land in the vicinity of 
Astrolabe Glacier.
39

Annex to Measure -- (1995)
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. --
POINTE-GEOLOGIE ARCHIPELAGO

JEAN ROSTAND, ALEXIS CARREL, LAMARCK AND CLAUDE BERNARD ISLANDS,
BON DOCTEUR NUNATAK AND MARINE EMPEROR PENGUINS BREEDING COLONY.
Management Plan

1. DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

Four islands and the breeding site of Emperor penguins are proposed for a new Antarctic Specially
Protected Area on the ground that it provides a representative sample of aesthetic, biologic and
geologic values of terrestrial antarctic ecosystems.
One mammal specie, Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) and various bird species are nesting
here : Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) ; South Polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki); Adelie
penguin (pygoscelis adeliae) ; Wilson's storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) ; Southern giant petrel
(Macronectes giganteus) ; Snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea) ; Cape petrel (Daption capensis).

Well-marked hills display assymetrical transverse profiles with gently dipping northern slopes
compared to the steeper southern ones. The terrain is affected by a lot of cracks and fractures
leading to very rough surfaces. The basement rocks mainly consit of sillimanite, cordierite and
garnet-rich gneisses which are intruded by abundant dikes of pink anatexites. The lowest parts of the
islands are covered by morainic boulders (few centimeters to more than a meter across).

Long-term research and monitoring programmes have been continuing a long time already (since
1952 or 1964 according to the species). A data base implemented in 1981 is directed by C.E.B.C.
(Centre d'Etudes biologiques de Chizé).

The Emperor penguins breeding colony is a site of special scientific interest which could further be
included in the Convention on Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources Environmental
Monitoring Programme (CCAMLR/CEMP) in order to achieve the Convention requirements.

../..
SOUTH
POLE

TERRE ADELIE
(France)

DUMONT D'URVILLE SEA

Glacier du
Pourquoi Pas ?

Glacier du
Commandant Charcot

Glacier du Francais

Pointe Géologie

Glacier de l'Astrolabe

Glacier de la Zélée

WILKES
LAND

TERRE ADELIE

GEORGE V
LAND

Map 1. Location of Terre Adélie and Pointe Géologie Archipelago
39

Map 2. Pointe Géologie Archipelago showing tha -ntaric Specially Protected Area 
(dotted lines) and avifauna breeding sites. The South polar skuas territories and the 
Wilson's storm petrels nests are not mapped (see Table 1).The additional access of 
terrestrial vehicles to the continent (Nunatak) is incicated with large arrows.

Colonies of
□ Adélie penguins
⋆ Southern giant petrels
✶ Snow petrels
∇ Cape petrels
∇ landing point
I building

-66°30' 
↑ 
N
Dumont d'Urville 
station
Pétrels Is.

-66°40'
C. Bernard Is.

Lamarck Is.

J. Rostand Is.

Emperor Penguins 
breeding colony

A. Carrel Is.

Nunatak du 
Bon Docteur

Glacier 
l'ASTROLABE

0    100   200m
## 2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of Pointe-Géologie area aims to :

* prevent unnecessary disturbance on the area face to the growing flux of cruising tourist ship.
* permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere.
* avoid major change to the structure and composition of flora and fauna and the association of different species of vertebrates harboured in the area, which therefore constitutes one of the most representative for both faunistic and scientific interest on Adelie coast.
* permit research on ethological, ecological, physiological and biochemical programmes in progress especially those related to demographic monitoring and impact assessment of surrounding human activities comprising tourism. Physiology and biochemistry programmes relating to fasting mecanisms and thermogenesis of emperor penguins could be pursued in compliance with permit provisions.
* permit research in geology with a particular attention to the programmation of visits, especially when thermomecanical means for sampling are required.

## 3. MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The plan is kept under review to ensure that the values of the area are wholly protected. Any direct management action to the area would be subject to an environmental impact assessment before being undertaken.

Inspection- visits are restricted to essential management purposes.

## 4. PERIOD OF DESIGNATION
designated
The area is [?]esigned under ATCM recommendations as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area for an indefinite period.

## 5. MAPS

Map 2 shows with dotted lines location of each island and other zones of the area inside Pointe-Géologie Archipelago.

## 6. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features.

Jean ROSTAND, Alexis CARREL, LAMARCK and Claude BERNARD Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak and Emperor penguins breeding colony are situated in the heart of Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, coastal area of Adélie Land (140 to 140°02'E ; 66°39'30" to 66°40'30"S).

The area consists of the southernmost rock exposure of the Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, between the Petrels Island and the western edge of the Astrolabe glacier. It is a very large ice free ground within Adélie Land.

As a whole, the surface of the outcropping rocks does not exceed 2 square kilometers. The highest points are distributed along NE-SW ridges (Cl. Bernard Island : 47.6 m ; J.B. Lamarck Island : 22.2 m ; J. Rostand Island : 36.39 m ; Carrel Island : 28.24 m and Nunatak : 28.50 m). During the summer, only the southern flanks of the islands are still covered by compressed snow caps. There are no boundary markers since natural features delimit the wholly protected islands. However, markers could further be set up in Nunatak.

No tracks of roads exist in the area.
Table 1. Annual breeding pairs of seabirds in the French Antarctic Specially Protected Area(SPA). The 
population breeding within the SPA is given compared to the Pointe Géologie (PG) population (from 
Thomas 1986).

Islands                  Emperor         Adélie          South           Snow            Cape            Wilson's        Southern giant 
                        penguin         penguin         polar skua      petrel          petrel          storm petrel   petrel                          

C. Bernard                      -               3421            5               153             192             178             -       
Lamarck                         -               1007            1               38              15              45              -       
J. Rostand                      -               4793            3               53              18              35              11      
A Carrel                        -               4075            6               25              -               72              -       
Nunatak                         -               1961            1               11              -               41              -       
Emperor Penguin 
Breeding Colony                3119            -               -               -               -               -               -       

Total                           3119            15257           16              280             225             371             11      

%SPA/PG                         100             71              67              36              68              31              79      

Table 2. Presence of birds on breeding colonies.

                        Emperor         Adélie          South           Snow            Cape            Wilson's        Southern giant 
                        penguin         penguin         polar skua      petrel          petrel          storm petrel   petrel                          

first arrival                   March           October         October         September       October         November        July        
first laying                    May             November        November        November        November        December        October     
last departure                  January         March           March           March           March           March           April       

Table 3. Sensibility to human disturbance and status of the Pointe Géologie populations.

                        Emperor         Adélie          South           Snow            Cape            Wilson's        Southern giant 
                        penguin         penguin         polar skua      petrel          petrel          storm petrel   petrel                          

sensibility to 
human disturbance               High            Medium          Low             Medium          High            High            High        

status 1952-1984                decreasing      increasing      stable          ?               ?               ?               decreasing      
status 1984-1995                stable          increasing      stable          stable          stable          ?               stable
ii) Identification of restricted or prohibited zones.

Access to every part of the area is prohibited unless authorized by a permit.

Location of breeding colonies is shown on the map. The birds are present on colonies from October 
to March, except Emperor penguins which breed in winter (Table 2). Their sensibility to human 
disturbance varies depending on the species (Table 3). The implantation of the Dumont d'Urville 
station has resulted in a drastic decrease of the populations of Emperor penguins and Southern giant 
petrels in Pointe-Géologie Archipelago. Since the last ten years the breeding areas of these birds are 
protected and the populations are now consecutively stable (Table 3).

Anyone, except permit holders, is not allowed to approach or to disturb the Emperor penguins 
colony in any manner when incubating eggs from mid-July to mid-December when the chicks fledge. 
The particulariy sensitive Emperor penguins are equally protected beyond the definite limits of their 
breeding area since the colony is not always located at the same place.

The southeastern part of Jean ROSTAND Island is designated as a Restricted Zone in order to 
preserve the remaining breeding colony of Southern giant petrels. All access to the Restricted Zone 
is prohibited during the breeding period from August to February. The access is restricted to one 
ornighologist permit holder in order to monitore the population three times each year. The boundary 
off the Restricted Zone is defined by a 20 meters width buffer zone around the colony and is marked 
on the soil by paintings. The prohibition of access to the Restricted Zone shall be for an indefinite 
period, but shall be subject to reevaluation each time the Management Plan is reviewed.

iii) Location of structures in the area.

Prevost hut and a shelter take place in ROSTAND Island. There are no other building anywhere else 
in the area.

iv) Location in or near the area of other "Antarctic Specially Protected Areas" or "Antarctic 
Specially Managed Areas".
The region nearby is being considered for 
ASMA 
It is likely that this area will be located within an "Antarctic Specially Managed Area" (ASMA) 
including Dumont d'Urville station and other surrounding areas of activities.

7. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED.

i) Access to and movement within the area.

No helicopters, nor terestrial vehicles are authorized either to access or within the area. No 
overflight all over the area, either by helicopters or other aeroplanes are authorized.

Access to the area is therefore only permitted by foot or by zodiacs (in summer).

However, very rare departures of terrestrial vehicles from Nunatak could be allowed, only when sea 
ice conditions hinder from proceeding otherwise and with a special attention to the presence of birds 
in the area.

Access to and movement within the area shall, in any case, be limited and vigilant in order to avoid 
unnecessary disturbance to birds, especially by crossing their pathways, and to ensure that breeding 
areas or their access are not damaged nor endangered.
ii) Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the area, including restrictions on time and place.

* compelling scientific activities which cannot be conducted elsewhere and for necessary management activities with regard to the special provisions relating to Emperor penguins and the Restricted Zone of Southern Giant Petrels (see § 6.ii).

* visitors granted entry in the area by a permit shall ensure that no disturbance will occur from their visits to monitoring programmes.

iii) The installation, modification or removal of structures.

No structures are to be erected in the area or scientific equipements installed except for essential scientific or management activities as specified in the permit.

iv) The location of field camps.

Only in case of safety tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage or disturbance to fauna.

v) Restriction on materials and organisms which may be brought into the area.

* no living animals or plant materials shall be deliberetely introduced in the area.
* no poultry products including food products containing uncooked dried eggs should be taken into the area.
* no chemicals shall be brought into the area, except chemicals which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose as specified in the permit. Any chemical introduced shall be removed from the area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted.
* fuel, food and other materials are not to be depoted in the area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the permit has been granted. All such materials introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depot are not permitted.

vi) The taking of or harmful interference with nature flora and fauna.
Taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a Code of conduct for the use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

vii) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit holder.

Collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by a permit holder is prohibited unless specified in permit for scientific or management purposes. However, debris of man-made origin may be removed from the area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for laboratory examination.

viii) The disposal of waste.

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the area.
. Y4

iv) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan 
can continue to be met.

Permit may be granted to enter the area to carry out monitoring, other scientific programs and sites 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of biological materials and 
animals.
Permits shall specify the maximum number of persons allowed entry at any one time.

Visits to the area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the scientific and management 
objectives.

x) Requirements for reports of visits to the area.

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, 
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their 
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in 
a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of 
the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
X4

ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan 
can continue to be met.

Permit may be granted to enter the area to carry out monitoring, other scientific programs and sites 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of biological materials and 
animals.
Permits shall specify the maximum number of persons allowed entry at any one time.

Visits to the area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the scientific and management 
objectives.

x) Requirements for reports of visits to the area.

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, 
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their 
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in 
a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of 
the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
