AU-ATADD-3-BB-AQ-479

ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                    XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                    XIX ATCM/WP 12
                                                    May 9, 1995
                                                    Original: English


                  THE ORGANIZATION OF
                  ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS
                  Agenda Item 8 a

                  (Submitted by Belgium/France/Germany/the United Kingdom)
WORKING PAPER

on the Organisation of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings
(under item No. 8a)

(submitted by Belgium, France, Germany and the United Kingdom)

1. Article IX paragraph 1 of the Antarctic Treaty provides for the Contracting Parties to meet two months after the entry into force of the Treaty "and thereafter at suitable intervals and places, for the purpose of exchanging information, consulting together on matters of common interest pertaining to Antarctica, and formulating and considering, and recommending to their Government, measures in furtherance of the Treaty ....".

2. The development of the Antarctic Treaty system has resulted in the establishment of three types of meetings, namely:

- Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) for the purpose of making recommendations to Consultative Parties, or for making decisions with respect to their own procedures;

- Special Consultative Meetings, for the purpose of making decisions, which may be binding on the Consultative Parties, limited to the specific purpose of the meeting;

- Meetings of Experts (under Recommendation IV-24) with the mandate to prepare a report which is circulated to the Consultative Parties for their consideration A report of a Meeting of Experts is submitted to a Consultative Meeting for consideration, except when the Consultative Parties have agreed otherwise.

3. The wording of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, as confirmed by subsequent practice, indicates that only the ATCPs, meeting as the ATCM, have the authority to formulate policy and recommend measures in respect of activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. It is the responsibility of the ATCPs to approve those measures (Article IX-paras 1 and 4). The establishment of any institution with similar or equivalent functions, and which does not report to the ATCM, risks running counter to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.

4. The rule-making functions of the ATCM must be preserved. Indeed, in view of the new challenges the Antarctic Treaty system is confronted with, in particular the implementation of the Environmental Protocol, those functions need to be strengthened. This will impose further

076-2
obligations. Whenever such functions are mandated to other institutions such 
functions shall be carried out under the responsibility of the ATCM, to which the 
institurions shall report.

5. To improve the effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty System, and therefore its legiti-
macy, the central role of the Consultative Meeting needs to be re-established.

6. To achieve this objective the work of the Plenary Assembly of the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting should be assisted by the formation of three Committees:

    - the Political and Juridical Committee: having competencies similar to the current 
      Working Group I. This Committee shall be composed of the heads - or any 
      members of their delegation - of the Parties to the Consultative Meeting;

    - The Scientific, Technical and Logistics Committee: having competencies similar 
      or greater than the current Working Group II. This Committee shall be com-
      posed of Representatives who may be managers of National Antarctic Programs 
      or such other alternate as may be designated by the Parties concerned. Repre-
      sentatives of SCAR may also participate in the work of this Committee. Issues 
      of a Scientific, Technical or Logistic nature shall be referred by the Plenary As-
      sembly to this Committee;

    - The Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) constituted in accor-
      dance with the decision of the XVIII ATCM (para 42). Following the entry into 
      force of the Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the 
      TEWG shall be replaced by the Committee for Environment Protection consti-
      tuted in accordance with Article 11 of the Protocol.

Observers and invited experts may attend the above three Committees in accordance 
with the Rules of Procedure of the ATCM.

7. The three Committees above shall prepare, elaborate and submit to the Plenary 
Assembly of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting draft Measures, 
Recommendations, Resclutions, Decisions, Reports and any other relevant 
material, for its consideration.
