AU-ATAD-3-BB-AQ-476

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  SEOUL
                                  May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 9
May 8, 1995
English
Original: English

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS: SUGGESTED GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES

Agenda Item 12 b

(Submitted by New Zealand)
HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS
(submitted by New Zealand)

(Agenda Item 12 b)

NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS : SUGGESTED GUIDELINES
FOR THE DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES

The Antarctic Treaty parties have long recognised the importance of historic sites and
monuments in Antarctica. The need to take steps to protect these sites was apparent at
the first ATCM where parties agreed that "all adequate measures to protect such tombs,
buildings or objects of historic interest, from damage and destruction" would be taken
(Recommendation I-IX). The XIVth ATCM noted:

"... the need to provide for continued and improved protection for those historic
monuments that stand as witnesses to a significant human presence in the Antarctic; and
which are an essential part of the record of human activity in Antarctica."

2       The Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty reinforced the concern of
parties for the preservation of historic sites and monuments. Annex V (Article 8) states
that listed historic sites and monuments "shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed".
It also provides for sites and monuments of recognised historic value to be designated as
a Protected Area. Sites and monuments located either within or outside these areas can
also be listed as a Historic Site or Monument.

3       In order to assist parties with this objective, New Zealand proposes that
guidelines (which are in accordance with international practice) be established for use
by parties.

4       Such guidelines, if approved, would in no way derogate from a party's right to
nominate any historic site or monument as accorded in Recommendation I-IX et al and
Annex V (Article 8) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty. If used, parties would have access to a list based on internationally accepted
criteria which could be of assistance in the designation of historic sites and/or
monuments.

5       Attached for this purpose is a draft recommendation with suggested guidelines,
based on international practice, for consideration by parties.
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(submitted by New Zealand)

NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS : SUGGESTED GUIDELINES
FOR THE DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8.

Recommend to their Governments that Guidelines for the Designation of Historic Sites 
and/or Monuments be approved to provide assistance for parties in determining sites for 
the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the proposing Government 
or Governments".

Proposed Suggested Guidelines

It is proposed that parties who might wish to nominate particular historic sites and or 
monuments for the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the 
proposing Government or Governments" consider the suggested guidelines and note that 
the proposed sites and or monuments could contain one or more of the following:

* A particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of 
Antarctica occured at the place;

* A particular association with a person who played an important role in the 
history of science or exploration of Antarctica;

* A particular association with a notable feat of endurance or achievement;

* Representative of, or forms part of, some wide-ranging activity that has been 
important in the development of knowledge of Antarctica;

* Particular technical or architectural value in its materials, design or method of 
construction;

* The potential, through study, to reveal information or has the potential to 
educate people about significant human activities in Antarctica;

* Symbolic or commemorative value for people of many nations.
HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS
(submitted by New Zealand)

(Agenda Item 12 b)

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS : AMENDMENT

The Antarctic Treaty parties have long recognised the importance of historic sites and monuments in the Antarctic Treaty area. A number of recommendations have been approved by the parties in this respect and this recognition has guaranteed the continued protection of historic sites and monuments.

2       In recognition of the parties' responsibility to ensure the maximum protection for these sites, New Zealand proposes that an amendment to the description of the text of Historic Site Number 14 be approved. The text as it currently appears in the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Decsribed by the proposing Government or Governments" requires some revision so that the site is provided with the maximum protection possible, as envisgaed by the Treaty Recommendations on this issue.

3       Attached is a draft recommendation proposing an amendment to the exisitng description of Historic Site Number 14. A copy of the text with the proposed amendment is also attached.
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(submitted by New Zealand)

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS : AMENDMENT

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8.

Recommend to their Governments that an amendment of the text describing Historic
Site Number 14 which is contained in the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and
Described by the proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation
VII-9, be approved and thereby continue to guarantee its full protection and respect as
envisaged by the Recommendations noted above.

Proposed Amendment to Listing:

Site Number 14: Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay, Scott Coast

This listing is currently described as "Remains of rock shelter".

It should be described as "Site of ice cave". The final sentence in this listing should also
be amended to read "the party spent the winter of 1912 in this ice cave".

A copy of the text with the proposed amendment is attached.
2.6.3.3 Historic Sites and Monuments

Annex to Recommendation VII-9

List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the
Proposing Government or Governments

Note: the Consultative Meeting does not approve or disapprove the place names
appearing in the texts of this List in the different languages.

13. Hut at Cape Denison, George V Land, built in January 1912 by Sir Douglas
Mawson for the Australasian Antarctic Expedition of 1911-14 (Lat 67°00'S, Long
142°42'E). This was the main base of the expedition.

14. Remains of rock shelter at Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay, constructed
in March 1912 by Victor Campbell's Northern Party, British Antarctic Expedition,
1910-13 (Lat 74°54'S, Long 163°43'E) The party spent the winter of 1912 in this
shelter and a nearby ice cave.

15. Hut at Cape Royds, Ross Island, built in February 1908 by Ernest Shackleton
(Lat 77°38'S, Long 166°07'E) Restored in January 1961 by Antarctic Division of
New Zealand Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.

Visit Report

Historic Monument No. 15, Shackleton's Hut at Cape Royds, was visited by the US
Inspection Team on February 10, 1989. The hut was reached by helicopter from the
US Coast Guard Ice Breaker. The helicopter landing site was marked with red painted
rocks and was well clear of the historic site.

The hut was well marked with signs explaining its historical significance in the four
Treaty languages. The hut was in good repair and showed no signs of inappropriate
activity. The interior of the hut was in excellent condition and reflected the work of the
New Zealand curatorial staff which had been present during the season. No evidence
of tampering, removal, or vandalism was observed.

A New Zealand research support hut is located approximately 100 yards from the
hut on a rise overlooking the Cape Royds SSSI.

The position of the site was confirmed to be as reported.

16. Hut at Cape Evans, Ross Island, built in January 1911 by Captain Robert
Falcon Scott (Lat 77°38'S, Long 166°24'E) Restored in January 1961 by Ant arctic
Division of New Zealand Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.

Visit report

Historic Monument No. 16, Scott's Hut at Cape Evans, Ross Island was visited by
three members of the [US] Inspection Team on February 10, 1989. The site was
reached by helicopter from the US Coast Guard Ice Breaker. Since the team did not
take the key to the hut (available from Scott Base) only the hut's exterior was inspected.

The hut was well marked with signs giving its history. It appeared to be in good
condition. Snow covered most of the ground. The Greenpeace organization has
established a station within approximately 200 meters of the monument, but outside of
the marked historic area. There were no apparent negative signs of this or other recent
human activity. The Greenpeace resupply vessel, Gondwana, could be seen anchored
offshore with helicopters on deck.

No wildlife were observed at the site.

The position of the site was confirmed to be as reported.

17. Cross on Wind Vane Hill, Cape Evans, Ross Island, erected by the Ross Sea
Party of Ernest Shackleton's Trans-Antarctic Expedition, 1914-16, in memory of
three members of the party who died in the vicinity in 1916 (Lat 77°38'S, Long
166°24'E).
