AU - ATADD - 3 -BB- AQ-494

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                SEOUL
                                May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 27
May 9, 1995
Original: English

VISITS TO PROTECTED AREAS

Agenda Item 12 c

(Submitted by SCAR)
ATCM WORKING PAPER FROM SCAR
VISITS TO PROTECTED AREAS

Introduction

At ATCM XVII Treaty Parties agreed that protected areas and historic sites and monuments 
might need to be visited periodically, to ensure that the objectives of their Management Plans 
were being met. The Meeting noted that at the ATCM XIV a suggested list of information that 
could be collected and included in reports of site visits had been appended to the report of the 
meeting. Parties agreed that this should be reviewed in the light of the new Management Plans 
for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas required under Annex V of the Protocol for 
Environmental Protection and specifically asked SCAR to review the original list and provide 
advice on:

a) how it should be revised to reflect the provisions of the Protocol;

b) how site visits should be carried out;

c) how the results of such visits should be reported to be most useful in implementing the 
Protocol.

Consideration by SCAR

SCAR referred the discussion on this to the Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and 
Conservation (GOSEAC). Using a variety of information, GOSEAC provided a reporting 
format to the SCAR XXIII delegates meeting in Rome in 1994 for endorsement .

In considering the implications of visits to protected areas, GOSEAC noted that the previous 
list of suggestions was useful in respect of the existing legislation for protected areas, but were 
not sufficiently focussed to ensure that the provisions of new management plans drawn up 
under Annex V were being met. The committee used the form of the new Management Plans 
(which is dealt with in an associated Working Paper) as the basis for designing the key features 
of the visit report. In addition, it had the opportunity to study a report style used by New 
Zealand in recent visits to protected areas.

Whilst recognising that inspection visits were necessary to ensure compliance with the 
management plan it seemed valuable on scientific grounds to reduce those as much as possible 
to avoid disturbance to the Area. GOSEAC concluded that formalised reports should be 
required for every visit to an ASPA, not just for inspection visits. In this way the need for 
visits purely to inspect for compliance with the Management Plan might be reduced. The visit 
reports themselves would provide cumulative evidence of usage of each protected area. This 
report data should be archived as it was considered to be important as a basis on which any 
necessary modifications to the Management Plan could be considered when the plan was 
reviewed under Annex V, para 6.3. In addition, it was considered that a structured format 
requesting specific items of information was essential to ensure adequate coverage of all 
important features at every visit, regardless of the expertise of the parties involved.

Recommendation

Responding to the request made by ATCM XVIII that SCAR produce a checklist for inspection 
of protected areas,

Recognising that there would be advantages under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol in 
recording all visits to protected areas,

Noting that these records could provide a valuable source of data for use in the management of 
such areas, especially if reports were provided for every permitted visit,

SCAR recommends that:

a. a standard visit report (Annex 1) is adopted as the format for recording all details of any 
visit to a protected area;

b. the standard visit report form be automatically issued, together with a copy of the 
Management Plan when any permit is issued for entry to a protected area;

c. such completed visit report forms be stored indefinitely and be made available, as 
required, to assist in the management of such protected areas.
Proposed Report Form for Visits to Protected Areas

Antarctic Specially Protected AREA
VISIT REPORT

1. Protected Area name and number:

2. Name and address of Authority issuing permit:                  3. Date Report filed:

4. Name and address of Authority to whom Report is made:         5. Person completing Report:

6. Name and address of Principal Permit Holder:                  7. List of all persons who 
                                                                    entered the Area under the 
                                                                    current Permit:

                                 International telephone:    +
                                 International facsimile:    +
                                 E-mail address:             

8. Objectives of the visit to the Area under the current Permit:

9. Date(s) and duration of visit(s) under the current Permit:

10. Mode of transport to/from the Area:

11. Activities conducted in the Area:

12. Descriptions and locations of samples collected (type, quantity, and details of any Permits for 
    sample collection):

13. Descriptions and locations of markers, instrumentation or equipment installed, or any material 
    released into the environment (noting how long these are intended to remain in the Area):

14. Descriptions and locations of markers, instrumentation or equipment removed:

15. Any departures from the provisions of the Management Plan during this visit, noting dates, 
    magnitudes and locations:
4 CONTENTS OF WASTE DUMP (IF KNOWN)
  4.1 Summary description of contents
  4.2 Are there any unused or unusable buildings at the site?
  4.3 Is any information available on previous assessments of the 
      contents of the dump?
  4.4 Types and quantities, including means and condition of 
      containment, of:
      a   radioactive materials
      b   electrical batteries
      c   fuel (both liqid and solid) and lubricants
      d   wastes containing harmful levels of heavy metals or acutely 
          toxic or harmful persistent compounds
      e   polyvinyl chloride (PVC), foam, polystyrene, rubber, plastics
      f   treated wood
      g   fuel drums
      h   other hazardous materials (medical wastes, broken glass, wire 
          etc)
      i   other solid non-combustible wastes
      j   organic wastes, if known (bones, non-native plant material 
          etc)
      k   sewage and domestic liquid wastes
      l   gas cylinders

5 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DUMP
  5.1 Environmental impacts associated with the dump:
      a   birds scavenging
      b   visible contamination of soil
      c   windblown debris
      d   run-off, seepage, oil slicks
      e   smell;
      f   dead vegetation
      g   dead birds or other animals
  5.2 Possible future impacts of the site, eg oil seeping into the ground
  5.3 Are there any sensitive sites nearby, that are vulnerable to 
      impacts?
  5.4 Evidence of measures taken to remediate or rehabilitate the site 
      or prevent dispersal of wastes
  5.5 Has a contaminated site assessment been done on the dump; is 
      the report available?
  5.6 EIAs prepared for dump (clean-up, removal of toxic materials etc)
5.7 Environmental monitoring of the dump (including monitoring 
of hydrocarbon or heavy metal contamination of soils)
5.8 Recommendations for additional steps that should be taken to 
manage the impacts of the dump and protect adjacent areas

6 FUTURE PLANS
6.1 Future plans for the site, for cleaning up, analysing 
environmental effects and minimising environmental effects.  Is 
the site included in a Waste Management Plan?
6.2 Heritage/historic considerations
6.3 Priority of action, that is, urgency of clean-up action
