ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ

                                    SEOUL
                                May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/WP 25
May 8, 1995
Original: English


===============================================================

                            INCINERATOR EMISSIONS

                            Agenda Item 10 a

                          (Submitted by SCAR)
ATCM WORKING PAPER FROM SCAR
INCINERATOR EMISSIONS

Introduction

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty calls, under Articles 3.2.d 
and 3.2.e, for regular and effective monitoring to allow assessment of the impact of ongoing 
activities and the verification of predicted impacts. As part of the progress in addressing this 
question the ATCM XVI provided for the establishment of a First Group of Experts Meeting on 
Environmental Monitoring. The report of this Group of Experts to ATCM XVII resulted in 
Recommendation XVII-1, which requested SCAR to provide advice on: "emission standards to 
ensure that combustion of fossil fuels and incineration of waste do not contaminate the 
Antarctic atmosphere, terrestrial, ice, aquatic or marine environments in a way that would 
compromise their scientific values".

Consideration by SCAR

SCAR referred this request to the Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and 
Conservation (GOSEAC) which, recognising the complexity of the problems, decided to 
consider the question of waste incineration first. To provide information on the extent and 
present usage of incinerators GOSEAC requested SCALOP to conduct a survey of all current 
incinerators within the Treaty area. A questionnaire was issued in August 1993 and responses 
were received from 15 countries. Nine of these countries currently operate incinerators. The 
others either have no incinerators or have discontinued the use of them.

Survey results

The results of the survey showed that all incinerators were small, all were operated at irregular 
intervals with apparently variable feedstock mix, and that many were apparently lacking 
monitoring systems to optimise performance or check on emissions. Despite the fact that 
Annex III of the Protocol already prohibits incineration of a range of substances which have the 
potential to produce harmful emissions there were indications that such material was incinerated 
by some operators.

Good working practices

During this period investigations were made in Europe and North America of current practices 
for small incinerators and the way in which regulatory regimes affected them.

It appeared that incinerators of the size commonly in use in the Antarctic were considered by 
most regulatory authorities to be too small to be able to operate reliably within strict emission 
limits. It was clear from the general operating procedures required in many countries that, in 
order to reduce the production of harmful effluents, it is vital that:

-   the feedstock mix is correct;
-   the burn profile, i.e. the temperature of primary incineration as well as residence time of 
    the effluent gases, is correct;
-   solid residues are dealt with properly, i.e. in this case taken out of Antarctica for proper 
    disposal elsewhere.

Compound classes of concern emitted from waste incinerators

The following groups of substances in the emissions of waste incinerators are of environmental 
concern:
-   toxic heavy metals such as lead, cadmium and mercury;
-   gaseous inorganic substances such as sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, hydrogen 
    chloride, hydrogen fluoride, etc.;
-   organic substances such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, polychlorinated aromatic 
    compounds (chlorobenzenes) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) and polychlorinated 
    dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzo-furans (Dioxins) compounds.

All of these are subject to strict emission control in most countries. However, small scale 
waste incineration capacity (200–1,000 kg per hour) is not common in most countries. 
Therefore, most emission standards are actually devised for incinerators with a capacity of 
more than 20 tonnes per hour, equipped with cleaning devices for particulate matter and gases. 
In most European countries the small incinerators that remain, e.g. hospital incinerators, are 
being phased out and the waste added to municipal incineration plants with better emission 
control.

Emission problems associated with small incineraters

Four features influence the emission of the compound classes listed:

1.  the composition, calorific value and type of waste to be incinerated;
2.  construction of the incinerator;
3.  incineration conditions;
4.  cleaning devices to remove particulate and/or gaseous emissions.

A waste mixture of low calorific value will generate insufficient combustion and require a 
secondary heat source in the primary combustion chamber, to maintain a favourable 
temperature. To optimise performance the incinerator construction should fulfill the following 
requirements:

-   two combustion chambers to ensure destruction of hazardous compounds in the flue 
    gases
-   a uniform temperature of at least 900°C in the primary combustion zone and c. 1100°C 
    in any secondary furnace
-   a residence time of flue gases at this temperature of at least three seconds
-   sufficient turbulence in the combustion zone to avoid the formation of "cold" gas 
    pockets.

The flue gases also need to be cooled down to a temperature of less than 200°C before entering 
any filtering device, to avoid the secondary formation of hazardous polychlorinated 
compounds. In addition, the incinerator should be equipped with dust collectors to remove 
particulate matter.

Combustion conditions are normally controlled in terms of temperature, carbon monoxide 
content and oxygen content to minimise the formation of hazardous organic compounds. It is 
very difficult to maintain reasonably good incineration conditions in small incinerators which 
are fed batch-wise with a feedstock of variable calorific value. Small incinerators which are not 
run continuously cause additional problems, since the emissions during the start-up period can 
be several orders of magnitude higher than during normal operation.

Although there is information regarding the toxicity of the hazardous compounds produced by 
waste incineration for organisms in temperate regions, SCAR is not aware that any detailed 
ecotoxicological data are available for Antarctic species in respect of these compounds. It is, 
therefore, not possible at present to determine, for example, precisely what constitutes a 
biologically-damaging level of PCBs in particular Antarctic organisms. Under these
circumstances, it would be scientifically sensible to adopt the precautionary principle inherent in 
the Protocol.

Concern was expressed that for those incinerators situated within stations an adequate chimney 
height should be used to ensure adequate dilution of any noxious emissions produced either 
during start-up or when an incinerator was running at too low a burn temperature. Of particular 
concern was the possible medical effects of dioxin production.

Monitoring and training

Municipal regulations normally require at least three variables to be monitored to allow 
optimisation of incineration: one temperature measurement a minute in each chamber, and 
measurement of carbon monoxide and oxygen in the flue gases. Environmental protection 
authorities may require further monitoring to determine output of dust, sulphur dioxide and 
hydrogen chloride as well as the periodic sampling for dioxins, heavy metals, nitrous oxide etc.

In addition most authorities require that incinerators only be operated and maintained by 
specially trained personnel.

Recommendation

Recalling a request from ATCM XVII that SCAR provide advice to ensure that the incineration 
of waste does not contaminate the Antarctic atmosphere, terrestrial, ice, aquatic or marine 
environments in a way that would compromise their scientific values,
Acknowledging that there are problems associated, in some instances, with the complete 
removal of all wastes from the Antarctic,
Noting that disposal of waste by incineration is acceptable under Article 3 of Annexe III of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection,

Considering that all Antarctic incinerators in current use are small, with discontinuous use and 
mixed feed stock, characteristics which are known to enhance total emissions, Desiring to 
ensure that pollution is reduced to a minimum,

SCAR recommends that:

a.	wherever possible, waste which is at present incinerated is removed from Antarctica 
and every effort is made to stop all incineration;

b.	where incineration is essential for logistic reasons, two- stage incinerators should be 
used, accurate temperature control (which should be over 1,000°C in the second stage) 
is maintained, and monitoring of carbon monoxide and carbon particles are undertaken 
during operation, to ensure optimal incinerator performance;

c.	all prohibited products, but especially plastics, rubber and waste oil, are rigorously 
excluded from incineration;

d.	emission stack height should be at least 20m to improve dilution of flue gases;

e.	monitoring of flue gases for persistent organic compounds and heavy metals should be 
undertaken with a view to ensuring that these remain at or below the national standards 
required by the country operating the incinerator;

f.	all incinerator operators are adequately trained.
