from korea     AU-ATDD-3-BB- AQ-502

ANTARCTIC TREATY               
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING    
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  SEOUL              
                                  May 8-19, 1995     

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA         
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ 

XIX ATCM/WP 35                
May 19, 1995                  
Original: English              

____________________________________________________
                                                      
                 DRAFT FINAL REPORT                   
                 OF THE XIX ATCM                        
                                                      
                 (Submitted by the Secretariat)           
______________________________________________________
DRAFT

Final Report of the
XIXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(1)      Pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, Representatives of the Consultative
         Parties (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador, Finland, France,
         Germany, India, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
         Peru, Poland, the Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of
         Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, and Uruguay) met in Seoul
         from 8 to 19 May, 1995 for the purpose of exchanging information, holding consultations, and
         considering and recommending to their governments measures *for revision in the light of
         XIX ATCMWP-1] in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty.

(2)      The Meeting was also attended by Delegations from Contracting Parties to the
         Antarctic Treaty which are not Consultative Parties (Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
         Czech Republic, Denmark, Greece, Guatemala, Papua New Guinea, Slovak Republic and
         Switzerland).

(3)      A preparatory Meeting with Embassy Representatives was held in Seoul on January 20,
         1995 for the purpose of discussing the provisional agenda.

(4)      The Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
         resources (CCAMLR) and the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
         (SCAR) were invited to attend the Meeting as observers in accordance with Rule 2 of the
         Revised Rules of Procedure 1992.

(5)      Pursuant to paragraph 25 of the Final Report of the XVIIth Antarctic Treaty
         Consultative Meeting, the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic
         Programmes (COMNAP) was also invited to attend the Meeting to present a report on the
         activities of COMNAP on the same basis as Recommendation XIII-2.
(6) Pursuant to Rule 38 of the Revised Rules of Procedure of 1992, several international 
organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica were invited to designate 
experts to attend the XIXth ATCM and to assist in discussions of specific agenda items. The 
following organizations participated in the proceedings: ASOC, IAATO, IHO, IUCN, UNEP, 
WMO.

(7) IMO, IOC, PATA and WTO were also invited, but were not able to take part.

(8) The Meeting was ceremonially opened by Mr. Gong Ro-Myung, Minister of Foreign 
Affairs of the Republic of Korea, on 15 May 1995 during the Ceremonial Plenary.  The 
opening address is reproduced at Annex [ ].

(9) Ambassador Lee Ki-Choo, of the Delegation of the Republic of Korea, was elected 
Chairman of the Meeting. Ambassador Lee expressed his appreciation to the Delegations for 
electing him as Chairman.

(10) In accordance with the decision taken at the XVIIIth ATCM, the Meeting was 
organised to reflect the objectives of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty for improving the way in which the Antarctic Treaty Consultative mechanism 
works. To this end, the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) met during the 
first week of ATCM, while Working Groups I and II met during the second week.

(11) Following the suggestion of the Chairman, the Meeting elected Dr. Pietro Giuliani of 
Italy as Chairman and Mr. Vicente Sanchez of Chile as Vice-Chairman of the TEWG, on the 
understanding that Mr. Sanchez will be Chairman of the TEWG at the XXth ATCM and that 
Dr. Giuliani will be Vice-Chairman.

(12) Ambassador Dietrich Granow of the Federal Republic of Germany was elected 
Chairman of Working Group I, and Dr. Roberto Puceiro of Uruguay was elected Chairman of 
Working Group II.

 
                                                                                  2
(13) In addition to the three working groups, a meeting of legal experts, headed by Professor Ruediger Wolfrum (Federal Republic of Germany), met during the first week of the XIXth ATCM and discussed Liability Annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

(14) The Chairman proposed that Mr. Choi Seung-Hoh and Dr. Lee Seo-Hang be appointed respectively Executive Secretary and Deputy Executive Secretary of the Meeting.  The Delegations adopted this proposal.

(15) In order to save time and to follow the practice of previous Meetings, Delegations did not deliver opening statements. Instead they provided the texts for circulation and inclusion in the Final Report. The texts of the opening statements are reproduced at Annex [ ].

(16) Following the precedent at the XVIIIth ATCM, several Heads of Delegation made brief statements concerning the early entry into force of the Protocol and the early resolution of the issue of the seat of the Secretariat.

(17) The following Agenda was adopted;

1.  Opening of the Meeting

2.  Election of Officers

3.  Opening Addresses

4.  Adoption of Agenda

                  3
5. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

a) under Recommendation XIII-2:

i)     the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
       Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR);

ii)    the Head of the Delegation of Australia in his capacity as 
       Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention on 
       the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

iii)   the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in his capacity as 
       Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention for 
       the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS)

iv)    the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
       (SCAR)

v)     the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America in his 
       capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the 
       Antarctic Treaty

vi)    the Convenor of the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in the 
       United Nations

vii)   the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic 
       Programmes (COMNAP)

b) in relation to Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

c) relevance of developments in the Arctic to the Antarctic

6. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

a) Implementation
b) Liability Annex
c) Relations with other environmental treaties

7. Tourism and non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area
                                                                 4
a) Tourism and non-Governmental Activities
b) Environmental Impact of Tourism
c) Environmental Education and Training

8. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

a) Organisational Aspects (including Secretariat)
b) Public Availability of Documents
c) Examination of Recommendations
d) Exchange of Information

9. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

a) Inspections during 1994/95 and those planned for 1995/96
b) Inspection Checklist

10. Environmental Monitoring and Data Requirements

a) Environmental Monitoring of the Impacts of Human Activities in the Antarctic
b) Data requirements
c) Regulation of the Extraction, Use and Custody of Scientific Samples obtained in the Antarctic Expeditions

11. Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures

a) Implementation of Procedures for IEEs and CEEs
b) Examination of CEEs produced during 1994-95

12. The Antarctic Protected Area System
            5
a)   Revised and new Management Plans for SPAs and SSSIs
b)   Historic Sites and Monuments
c)   Review and Implementation of the System

13.   Specific Environmental Protection Measures

a)   Marine Pollution
         i)   Maritime Safety
         ii)   Prevention of marine pollution
b)   Waste disposal and waste management
c)   Conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna

14.   International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation

15.   Antarctic Meteorology, Telecommunications, and related Services

16.   Data Management and Data Bases

17.   Global Change

a)   Scientific Work of Global Change in the Antarctic
b)   Environmental effects of Global Change in the Antarctic

18.   Preparation of the XXth Consultative Meeting

a)   Date and Place of the XXth ATCM
b)   Invitation of International and non-Governmental organizations
c)   Preparation of the Agenda for the XXth ATCM

19.   Any other business

6
20. Adoption of the Report

21. Closing of the Meeting

(18) In accordance with the decision made at the XVIIIth ATCM and at the Chairman's 
suggestion:

a) discussion of items 1 to 6 (a), and 18 to 21 took place during the plenary session.

b) the remaining items were remitted to three Working Groups:

      i) Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) discussed items 7b, 
          10, 11, 12, 13 and 17b.

     ii) Working Group I (WG I) discussed items 5c, 6 and 8.

    iii) Working Group II (WG II) discussed items 7a and c, 9, 14, 15, 16 and 17a.

Item 5

Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

a) Reports under Recommendation XIII-2

(19) Pursuant to Recommendation XIII-2, the Meeting received reports from the following:

     i) the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
         Resources (CCAMLR);

    ii) the Head of the Delegation of Australia in his capacity as Representative of the 
         Depositary Government for the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
         Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR);

   iii) the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in his capacity as 
         Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention of Antarctic 
         Seals (CCAS);
iv) the President of the Scientific committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);
v) the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty;
vi) the Convener or the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in the United Nations;
vii) the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP).

(20) The report of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) was presented, on behalf of its Chairman, by its Executive Secretary Mr. Esteban de Salas. The report is appended as Annex [ ].

(21) The Head of the Australian Delegation, Mr. Paul O'Sullivan, in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government for the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources(CCAMLR), presented a report. The report is appended as Annex [ ].

(22) The Head of the U.K. Delegation, Dr. Michael Richardson, in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS), presented a report. The report is appended as Annex [ ].

(23) The report of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) was presented, by its President, Professor Antonio C. Rocha Campos. Delegations expressed their gratitude to SCAR for the vital work it has done on behalf of the ATCM. The SCAR report is appended as Annex [ ].

(24) The Head of the U.S. Delegation, Mr. R. Tucker Scully, presented a report in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty. He reported on the current status of the Antarctic Treaty. There have been no new accessions to the Treaty. With regard to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, seven Consultative Parties (Chile, China, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and Uruguay) have ratified the Protocol since the XVIIIth ATCM, bringing the total to 16 out of the 26 Consultative Parties. He noted that 6 out of the 16 Consultative Parties have 
8
explicitly approved Annex V of the Protocol. He also reported on the status of the Recommendations adopted pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. Tables covering the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, the Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and the status of the Recommendation are appended as Annex [ ].

(25) The Head of the Japanese Delegation, Mr. Toshiki Kanamori, in his capacity as Representative of the Convenor of the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in the United Nations, presented a report on developments on the question of Antarctica in the United Nations since Japan assumed the role of the Convenor of the Group. The report is appended as Annex [ ].

(26) The report of the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) was presented by its Chairman, Dr. Anders Karlquist. The report is appended as Annex [ ].

(27) The Meeting expressed its appreciation for the reports which made an important contribution to the understanding of developments affecting the Antarctic Treaty System. The presentations also provided an opportunity for delegates to make general observations on the operation of the Treaty System.

b) Reports in relation to Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

(28) The Meeting also received reports from a number of experts representing international organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica who had been invited to attend and to assist in the discussion of specific agenda items.

(29) The Representative of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), Mr. Cho Se Yun, reported on the recent activities of the IHO's Permanent Working Group (PWG) on Antarctica. The report is appended as Annex [ ].

(30) The report of IHO was welcomed both by the delegations of Argentina and the United 
Kingdom. A [recommendation - * for revision in the light of XIX ATCM/WP.1] appended to the report encouraged Parties to stress nationally that their surveying and charting activities be 
                                                                   9
coordinated through the IHO PWG on Antarctica. This was amended by a proposal by the 
United Kingdom that the IHO PWG continue its work to achieve comprehensive, updated 
coverage of hydrographic charting through the INT Chart Scheme, thus completing the 
process. It-was adopted as Measure  The draft resolution as so amended 
It was adopted as resolution No. (1995) for All text being set 
out at part II of Annex C - (page...). 

(31) The Representative of the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), Dr. Neil A. 
Streten, presented a report to the Meeting on the activities of WMO in relation to Antarctica. 
The report is appended as Annex [   ].

(32) The Representative of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC), Mr. James 
Barnes, presented a report to the meeting on the activities of ASOC in relation to Antarctica. 
The report is appended as Annex [   ].

(33) The Representative of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and 
Natural Resources (IUCN), Professor Bruce Davis, presented a report on the activities of 
IUCN in relation to Antarctica. The report is appended as Annex [   ].

(34) The Representative of United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Ms. 
Philomene Verlaan, presented a report on the activities of UNEP in relation to Antarctica. 
The report is appended as Annex [   ].

c) Relevance of developments in the Arctic to the Antarctic

(35) The Meeting agreed that steps should be initiated to ensure the timely exchange of 
information on Arctic and Antarctic environmental issues in the future. To that end, the 
meeting agreed that the Government of Canada, as host of the next Ministerial Meeting of the 
Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy, should ensure that the Final Report as well as other 
relevant documents of the XIXth ATCM be made available to the Ministerial Meeting, and 
request that relevant documents from the Ministerial Meeting be made available to participants 
at the XXth ATCM.

10
Item 6
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

a) Implementation

(36) The Parties reported on the progress they had made with respect to the ratification process in the respective countries, including the formulation of national legislation to implement the Protocol and its Annexes. Sixteen Consultative Parties have ratified the Protocol and others are expected to ratify it later this year. Many Parties reported that the legislative process was well under way in their countries and expressed the hope that the legislation could be enacted by the time of the next ATCM. Some Parties reported on measures that they had taken to act in accordance with the Provisions of the Protocol even before its entry into force.

(37) The Meeting reaffirmed the importance of making domestic legislation available among the Consultative Parties in order to assist other parties in drafting implementation legislation. The Meeting expressed gratitude to those Parties which have made copies of their legislation available and encouraged others to follow suit.

(38) The Meeting considered a Working Paper submitted by Chile (XIX ATCM/WP 18) which proposed modifying Rule 6 of the Provisional Rules of Procedure of the Committee for Environmental Protection. It was felt that it would be more appropriate to deal with this issue when the rules of procedure for the CEP are adopted following its establishment. It was suggested that Chile present the paper at next year's ATCM or later as appropriate.

(39) Chile presented a Working Paper on the need for operational definitions of terms used in the Protocol (XIX ATCM/WP 19). Chile stressed the need for clear definitions of some terms used in the Protocol in order to assist the drafting of national implementation legislation and to provide for a harmonized application of the Protocol. There was widespread agreement that some terms could be better defined, but that many were either deliberately vague or being discussed by the Group of Experts on Liability.

11
(40) The Meeting had an extensive exchange of views on efforts to implement the Protocol. 
Parties reported on their ratification progress, including preparation of national legislation to 
implement the Protocol and its Annexes. Parties that have not yet ratified the Protocol were 
urged to do so as quickly as possible.

(41) It was decided at ATCM XVIII that agenda items which, under article 12 of the 
Protocol, would be dealt with by the Committee for Environmental Protection, would be dealt 
with at ATCM XIX by a Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) reporting to 
the plenary. The TEWG met from 8-12 May 1995. It considered and provided advice and 
recommendations to the plenary on agenda items assigned to it.

(42) Many delegations expressed their views on the nature, mandate, and functions of the 
TEWG, and on support mechanisms that the TEWG would need to be effective in its role of 
giving advice and recommendations to the ATCM.

(43) The Meeting confirmed that the TEWG is an advisory group constituted by the 
ATCM, pending entry into force of the Protocol, to provide advice and recommendations to 
the plenary on scientific, technical, and environmental issues related to implementation of the 
Protocol.

(44) Most delegations believed that the TEWG should have the basic function of the CEP, 
which will be established when the Protocol enters into force. Most delegations also believed 
that the TEWG should be a standing group and be composed of specialists with the 
appropriate scientific, environmental, and technical competence.

(45) The Meeting recognized that the TEWG could not work effectively unless documents 
to be considered at its meetings were prepared and distributed well in advance of the meetings. 
Parties were urged to prepare and provide working papers for consideration by the TEWG to 
the host of the next ATCM for translation and distribution well in advance of the meeting.

(46) The need for secretarial support for the TEWG was stressed by several delegations. They also 
It was recognized that effective operation of the TEWG could require specialists sub-groups and 
meetings or work by correspondence or other means between ordinary sessions during the 
ATCMs.
(47) The Meeting recognized that effective advisory bodies cannot always operate by 
consensus. It agreed that, in the absence of consensus, the report of the TEWG shall reflect all 
views expressed.

b) Liability Annex

(48) Professor Ruediger Wolfrum of Germany summarized the Meeting of Legal Experts 
on Liability which met during the first week of the ATCM. Based on his "Third Offering," the 
experts had discussed all key issues. Prof. Wolfrum urged Parties to submit suggestions before 
14 July so (that they can be used for inclusion in his "Fourth Offering," which he intented to 
circulate before the end of July. He noted that in future meetings the participation of experts 
with direct scientific, technical and logistic experience of Antarctica is most desirable. The 
Meeting expressed its sincere gratitude to Prof. Wolfrum for his untiring efforts to resolve 
pending issues in the Annex.

(49) In order to continue the work on an Annex on Liability to the Protocol, Germany 
submitted a proposal (XIX ATCM/WP 30). The Meeting took notice of the work of the legal 
experts as reported by the Chairman of the Group. The Meeting extended the mandate of the 
working group contained in Recommendation IV-24, and on the basis of further drafts to be 
elaborated by the Chairman of the Liability Working Group. The Meeting agreed to the 
convening of another meeting of legal experts before the XXth Consultative Meeting and a 
further meeting of legal experts at the XXth Meeting. The Meeting urged that Governments 
arrange for legal experts to be accompanied by experts with direct scientific, technical and 
logistic experience of Antarctica. The results of their meetings will be reported to and 
considered by the XXth Consultative Meeting.

(50) The Meeting discussed a request for the inclusion of representatives from NGOs in the 
Meeting of Legal Experts on Liability. There were differing views on whether the input of 
NGOs was needed at this stage of the discussions.
c) Relations with Other Environmental Treaties

(51) The Meeting considered an expanded version of a Working Paper (XIX ATCM/WP 20) presented at ATCM XVIII by Chile on the relationship between the Protocol and other international agreements. The paper identified an additional number of relevant agreements and examined their scope in the Antarctic Treaty context.

(52) The Meeting noted the importance of examining the potential overlap between the Protocol and other international treaties and thanked Chile for submitting such a detailed report. Parties hoped that Chile will present a revised version of the paper at next year's ATCM, taking into consideration the discussion of this paper.

(53) The Meeting examined a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 11, rev. 1) submitted by the Netherlands concerning nuclear waste disposal. The Paper raised the issue of the relationship of Article V[?] of the Antarctic Treaty to current negotiations on a nuclear waste convention by the IAEA. The Meeting agreed to adopt a resolution [Part II, Annex C] by which Representatives urge their governments to coordinate their positions in any negotiations relating to the disposal of nuclear waste in which they participate.

(54) The Meeting discussed a letter sent to the ATCM by IMO (XIX ATCM/INFO 83) concerning a proposal to make the MARPOL Antarctic Special Area correspond to the area south of the Antarctic Convergence. The Meeting agreed that the matter should be decided by the IMO itself. The Meeting agreed that a response should be sent to the IMO suggesting that IMO may wish to take up the matter with the CCAMLR Commission. A letter will be sent by the Host State to IMO to this effect.

Item 7
Tourism and non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

a) Tourism and non-Governmental Activities

(55) Argentina, Chile, New Zealand and the United Kingdom presented a working paper (ATCM/WP 6) which examined the need for collection of standardised data on tourism and 
14
non-Governmental activities in Antarctica and provided draft formats for advance notification 
and reporting.

(56) A number of delegations welcomed and supported the work put into preparing these 
formats. However, some delegations questioned the need for the level of detail in the current 
drafts, and the subjectivity of some questions. The IAATO delegate commented that the 
reporting burden for tourism should be no greater (or less) than for other activities.

Several delegations stated that the information gathered would be of limited use until 
collated into an accessible database.

The Delegation of Canada pointed out that there may be value in having some 
information about on board waste production and disposal at gateway ports.

The Delegation of Russia expressed concern at the impacts of tourism on science. 
Several other delegations also expressed concern that the current focus on environmental 
impact was over- emphasised compared to the impacts of tourism on scientific activities.

(57) The Meeting agreed that there would be an advantage in standardised reporting of 
information to provide data necessary to:

    meet the exchange of information requirements of the Antarctic Treaty;
    give effect to the provisions of the Guidance for those Organising and Conducting 
    Tourism and Non- governmental Activities in the Antarctic attached to ATCM 
    Recommendation XVIII-1; and
    assess and determine the measures needed to avoid or minimise the environmental 
    impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities and to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
    measures taken.

It was agreed that the information provided for advance notice should be as outlined in 
Attachment A to ATCM Recommendation XVIII-1, and that post-visit reporting should cover 
some additional items to those listed in section C of the Guidance for those Organising and 
Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic attached to ATCM 

15
Recommendation
XVIII-1.

The Meeting agreed that post-visit reporting should include:

1. Name, details and state of registration of each vessel
2. Name of captain or commander of each vessel
3. Name and organisation of observer/Government representative (if present)
4. Actual itinerary
5. Number and nationalities of passengers, staff and crew
6. Places, dates and duration of ship landings, small boat cruises and/or flights, and 
   the number of visitors landed.
7. WMO meteorological report (yes/no)
8. Action taken in the event of an emergency
9. Comments (eg, impacts observed, changes to planned itinerary)

The Meeting adopted Resolution ..... and this is attached as Annex ....

Provision of this information does not absolve the operator from additional 
requirements of national legislation such as Environmental Impact Assessment and reporting 
requirements.

Some delegations noted that there are different information requirements for different 
types of tourism (eg, ship, overflights, adventure) and that the Parties may need to consider 
such requirements at a future ATCM.

(58) Recognizing the major role that has been played by the NSF of the United States of 
America in the survey and coordination of tourism activities in Antarctica through its annual 
meetings with IAATO, the French Delegation suggested that the ATCM ask COMNAP to 
explore ways whereby the NSF initiative might be broadened to help other Treaty Parties to 
give effect to the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty System regarding tourism.

(59) The Delegation of The Netherlands drew the attention of the Meeting to the issue of 
compliance enforcement from gateway ports.  It suggested that the next ATCM considers this 
question as a separate Agenda item and offered to prepare a document on the matter.

16
(60) Under this item Information Papers were submitted by New Zealand (XIX ATCM/INF 6 
Rev.1), United Kingdom (XIX ATCM/INF 13), IAATO (XIX ATCM/INF 28 Rev.1, 68 and 
108), Canada (XIX ATCM/INF 29), Australia (XIX ATCM/INF 33 and 34), ASOC (XIX 
ATCM/INF 38), France (XIX ATCM/INF 42), United States of America (XIX ATCM/INF 
45 and 46), and Argentina and Italy (XIX ATCM/INF 48).

Item 7 (b) The Environmental Impacts of Tourism

(61) The Meeting received information papers regarding the nature, frequency, and scale of 
tourism activities in Antarctica (XIX ATCM/INF 13, 19, 28, 29, 33, 34, 45, 46, 47, and 48), 
and examined the issue of environmental impacts of tourism in relation to the Protocol and 
Recommendations VIII 9 and XVIII 1. The Meeting considered the following six issues:

1. General Data and Information Needs

Existing information generally is insufficient either to predict or to serve as a baseline for 
detecting environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism. Therefore, the Meeting urged Parties 
to support activities toward:

    (a) identifying sites that possibly have been or may be affected by tourism in Antarctica, 
    and control sites that may be used for comparison;

    (b) surveying selected sites and, if possible, determine indicator variables most likely to be 
    sensitive to tourism activities; and

    (c) determining and evaluating the effectiveness of measures taken to minimize the impact 
    of different types, frequencies, timing, and levels of tourism activities.

2. Site Inventories

With respect to the goal specified in paragraph 1(a), the Meeting urged Parties to take 
steps to identify sites affected by tourism, and to ensure the collection of reliable and 
comparable information regarding the nature, frequency, and scale of tourism activities.

A number of delegations commended the work being done by the United States on an 
Antarctic Site Inventory (XIX ATCM/INF 47).  This work contributes to meeting the
                                                                                 17
information goals specified above, and helps provide baseline information to assess the
potential environmental impacts of tourism.

The Meeting considered that the protocols presented by the United States in INF 47 could
be examined by other Parties to determine their application in expanding the site inventory
work more widely in Antarctica, and that the Parties cooperate as fully as possible in the
development of Antarctic site inventories.

3. Cumulative Impacts

To prevent irreversible, detrimental effects upon the Antarctic environment, the Meeting
noted that there is an urgent need to consider not only the environmental impacts associated
with tourist visits, but also the nature, magnitude, and trend of cumulative impacts of all
human activities. In this regard, the Meeting further noted that there is a need to design
protocols and implement programmes for detecting cumulative impacts.

The Meeting also noted the need to elaborate procedures as set out in Annex 1 of the
Protocol so that cumulative impacts may be adequately assessed. This would enable tour
operators to be better informed of how to address cumulative impacts when preparing EIAs of
their activities. The Meeting agreed to ask SCAR to address the issue of monitoring of
cumulative impacts, and to report back to the XX ATCM.

4. Monitoring

The Meeting recognized that baseline assessment and monitoring of selected sites must be
sufficient to distinguish the impacts of tourism from the impacts of other human activities or
from natural environmental variations or change. Therefore, the Meeting agreed to seek
SCAR's advice regarding the design of such baseline assessment and monitoring programs.

SCAR advised the Meeting (XIX ATCM/WP 24) that, subsequent to its workshops
planned for September and October 1995, it should be possible to consider technical advice on
the structure and development of these programs.

The Meeting also recognized that further, directed research may be valuable in determining
appropriate techniques for managing tourism and other activities.
5. Methods for Ensuring Compliance

The Meeting recognised the importance of ensuring the compliance of tourism operators with the Protocol and all other measures designed to minimize potential environmental impacts on the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.

The Meeting agreed that this issue warranted discussion at the next ATCM.

6. Education and Training

The Meeting noted that for the effective management of Antarctic visitor activities, and to help ensure the protection of the Antarctic environment, education and training programs are essential.

c) Environment Education and Training

(62) The Meeting welcomed the Information Papers from Chile (XIX ATCM/INF 19) and from SCAR and the IUCN (XIX ATCM/INF 62), noting the Chilean document made information on the Recommendation XVIII-1 more accessible to Spanish speaking visitors to the Antarctic Peninsula. The four suggestions put forward by SCAR and the IUCN dealt with the need to include education and training on the ATCM agenda; the value of a lay guide to the Protocol; the designation of publicly accessible depositary libraries for the Treaty and other information on Antarctica; and the need for a list of the educational activities undertaken in Treaty countries. Several delegations supported these suggestions and described their present activities in education and training.

(63) The Meeting noted that the representative of the IUCN offered to approach the World Conservation Union to see whether it would be willing to help develop a draft directory of those Antarctic environmental education and training courses currently available.

Item 8
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

a) Organizational aspects (including Secretariat)
(64) The Meeting considered ways of strengthening the functions of the ATCM. The Meeting had a discussion on a Working Paper submitted by Belgium, France, Germany and the United Kingdom (XIX ATCM/WP 12) on the organization of the ATCM. The objective of the paper was to bring greater clarity to the functions of and representations to the Working Groups and to strengthen the authority of the ATCM. Though this aim was in principle agreed on, several Delegations expressed reservations. The sponsors were encouraged to reconsider the paper in the light of the comments made and present a revised paper again at a later stage.

(65) The Meeting (WG I) held a debate on the future establishment of a permanent Secretariat to the Antarctic Treaty. There was agreement that the work of a contact group of Working Group I, chaired by Professor Ruediger Wolfrum, Federal Republic of Germany, should be intensified in order to come to some early conclusions on the organizational aspects of the establishment of such a Secretariat. The Meeting encouraged the group to continue its work taking note of existing papers, including a Working Paper (XIX ATCM/WP 13), as modified by the Chairman during the Meeting. The Meeting decided that the group should meet inter-sessionally in conjunction with the meeting of the Group of Legal Experts on Liability in the last part of 1995.

(66) The Meeting noted that there is still no progress on reaching a consensus on the location of the Secretariat. Further, the Meeting took note that in a sub-group of WG I, convened by Ambassador Jan Arvesen of Norway at the request of the Chairman of Working Group I, no consensus could be reached on any so-called interim solution. However, there was a consensus that parties should explore how to enhance the effectiveness of secretariat functions provided by the Host Government for future ATCMs.

(67) Finally, there was a consensus that early establishment of a permanent Secretariat is needed and that a decision regarding all aspects of its establishment, including the location, must be taken by consensus.

20
b) Public Availability of Documents

(68) The Meeting agreed to make all documents of the XIXth ATCM publicly available without exception.

c) Examination of Recommendations

(69) The Meeting considered a Working Paper submitted by Belgium, Chile, France, Germany and the United Kingdom (XIX ATCM/WP 1 *) on Measures adopted under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. Taking into account the need to increase the efficiency and clarity of the decision-making process within Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, the Meeting adopted Decision 1 (1995), the text of which is contained in Part II, Annex B.

(70) In view of the provisions of Decision 1 (1995) adopted at the present Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, the Meeting decided further to adopt Decision 2 (1995), the text of which is contained in Part II, Annex B.

d) Exchange of Information

(71) The Meeting considered an Information Paper submitted by Argentina and Australia concerning the "International Seminar on the Future of the Antarctic Treaty System" held in Ushuaia in March 1995 (XIX ATCM/INFO 32). A number of Parties expressed their sincere appreciation and requested that the two respective Governments convey their thanks to GARI and the Australian Antarctica Foundation for having organized the seminar. The outcome from the seminar had provided positive input to the ATCM. Chile presented information about its lush summer movements around in latitud 80 Degr[?]s[?] with and the complexity the construction built in 1989 in King George Island.

Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

a) Inspections during 1994-95 and those planned for 1995-96

(72) The Delegation of the United States presented a Draft Report on Antarctic Inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty during the period 9 February - 11 March 1995 (XIX

21
The Argentine Council for 
foreign Relations.
ATCM/INF 96).

The team carried out inspections of eight stations:
Dumont d'Urville (France); Mirniy (Russia); Davis (Australia); Zhongshan (China); Syowa 
(Japan); Neumayer (Germany); Signy (United Kingdom); and Orcadas (Argentina).

No violations of the Antarctic Treaty were observed during the 1995 inspection.
Access to any and all areas of stations visited was readily accorded to the inspection team.
Station leaders and personnel were frank and open in discussion of their station operations 
from research activities to logistic support.

No activities of a military nature, nor any evidence thereof, were observed by the 
inspection team.

The team was also impressed with the quality of the research activities being carried out 
at the stations visited.

Recent advances in communications and computer technologies were being applied at a 
number of the stations visited to enable in-situ processing and real-time reporting of data to 
international data centres.

Proper management and disposal of wastes was a priority concern at all stations visited.
The provisions governing waste management in Annex III of the Madrid Protocol, though not 
yet in force, have already had significant influence upon waste handling practices in Antarctica.

There was a high level of awareness of the measures elaborated under the Antarctic 
Treaty to conserve native fauna and flora, as well as of the nature and location of areas 
afforded special protection under the Treaty.

In the view of the inspection team, fuel storage facilities and fuel transfer practices were 
the components of station activities with the greatest potential for causing significant adverse 
impacts. It was suggested that Parties ask the COMNAP, through their members, to identify 
steps that could be taken to improve fuel storage and handling and that this item be included 
on the Agenda for the next ATCM.

22
The Meeting adopted Resolution ....and this is attached as Annex ...

As guidelines for items to be covered at each station visit, the team used the checklist for permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations, annexed to the Final Report of the XVIII ATCM.

(73) The Meeting noted that the inspections identified the presence of non-native species of animals and plants at several stations and that this issue had been addressed under Agenda item 13 c).

The Report highlighted the commitment and cooperation that the team encountered at all of the stations and among all of the personnel with whom it had contact.

(74) The Delegation of Argentina submitted its Report on Inspections in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty carried out between December 1994 and March 1995. The bases inspected were: King Sejong (Republic of Korea), Rothera (United Kingdom) and Signy (United Kingdom) (XIX ATCM/INF 50). The inspections imposed a considerable economic strain on the government of Argentina, which demonstrated its commitment to seeing that the aims of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol are accomplished.

The results obtained from the inspections were highly satisfactory and it should be mentioned that the base leaders and their personnel cooperated at all times with the team of observers and smoothed their tasks in the traditional spirit of comradeship which characterizes Antarctic activities.

(75) The Meeting stressed the importance of the inspections for the Antarctic Treaty system, on the one hand, and for the bases, on the other. The inspections not only show that the rules to which they are subject are being obeyed, but also reveal any aspects which are in need of improvement. It was noted that inspections can have a very positive influence on the expeditioners at stations who see the Treaty System strongly supports the work expeditioners are undertaking to produce scientific information and improve their operations in line with the requirements of the Treaty and the Protocol.

(76) Some delegations stated that, without prejudice to the freedom of the Parties to carry them out, the inspections should be rationalized so as to avoid frequent repetition at certain bases as far as possible, and to include bases that are remote and seldom if ever inspected.

23
An updated list of the inspections carried out so far according to the Antarctic Treaty is 
included as Annex ..., to help governments plan their inspections more effectively. Parties 
should provide corrections and additions to the Host Governments of the next ATCM so that 
more complete list could be published in the reports of future ATCMs.

(77) An opportunity was provided for Parties to advise on any inspections planned for 1995-
96. The Russian Delegation indicated that Russia was considering an inspection. The Belgian 
Delegation indicated that Belgium would be interested in being contacted by Parties planning 
or considering inspections to explore possibilities for cooperation.

b) Inspection Checklist

(78) The Meeting welcomed and considered the draft checklists submitted by the United 
Kingdom for vessels and for abandoned stations (XIX ATCM/WP 2) and a draft checklist 
submitted by Australia for inspection of waste disposal sites (XIX ATCM/WP 23). This 
followed the United Kingdom's offer at the XVIII ATCM to coordinate the production of 
further checklists which would be of use to Parties in planning and conducting inspections. 
The United Kingdom noted that checklists dealing with inspection of aircraft and refuges have 
still to be developed. The Delegation of Italy offered to prepare a checklist covering field 
camps and refuges for discussion at the XX ATCM.

(79) The Meeting agreed that the main benefit of the checklists was their use as guidelines for 
carrying out inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and in assessing 
implementation of the provisions of the Environmental Protocol. It was not intended that they 
should be used as a mandatory questionnaire.

Some delegations pointed out that certain information required by the checklists was 
available in the annual Exchange of Information. The Swedish Delegation stated that the 
annual Exchange of Information was not available from some Parties at the time of their 1994 
inspection.

(80) The Meeting considered that the consolidation of the individual checklists into an 
inspection manual would be beneficial.  This would be helpful to those undertaking 
inspections. Some delegations noted that a re-ordering of the items in the checklists might be 
useful when preparing an inspection manual.

                                                                                  24
(81) The Delegation of the Netherlands, supported by several other delegations, suggested 
that details of the qualifications of the people carrying out the inspections might also be 
included in the inspection reports themselves.

(82) The Meeting agreed on Checklist B for Vessels, Checklist C for Abandoned Stations and 
Associated Installations and Checklist D for Waste Disposal Sites.

The Meeting adopted Resolution ... which includes Checklist A for Permanent Antarctic 
Stations and Associated Installations approved at the XVIII ATCM and this attached as 
Annex ...

Item 10

Environmental Monitoring and Data Requirements

a) Environmental Monitoring of the Impacts of Human Activities in the 
Antarctic

(83) The Meeting welcomed the SCAR-COMNAP report (XIX ATCM/WP 24) describing 
progress with environmental monitoring initiatives since XVIII ATCM. It was noted that 
COMNAP was unable at present to propose a representative subset of facilities in Antarctica, 
considering that this should await agreement on monitoring protocols.

(84) The Meeting noted advice from SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 24) that it proposed to hold 
two technical workshops in late 1995 and that among other items these workshops would 
address:

    (a) baseline data requirements;

    (b) data management.

(85) The Meeting thanked SCAR for its report on incineration (XIX ATCM/WP 25). The 
meeting agreed that it is important to seek means of reducing pollution caused by the use of 
incineration at Antarctic stations. The SCAR proposals for minimising the use of incineration 
and the reduction of its impact in cases where incineration can not be avoided highlighted the

25
need for two- stage incineration with close temperature control, adequate filtering for 
particulate material and monitoring of flue gases to ensure optimal incinerator performance.
The present lack of appropriate ecotoxicological information made it difficult to determine 
internationally agreed emission limits for specific components.

(86) The Meeting agreed that the Parties should:

        (a) wherever practicable waste which is presently incinerated should be removed from 
Antarctica;

        (b) where it is necessary to continue incineration, Parties should investigate means of 
minimising the impact of emissions;

        (c) incinerators should only be operated by trained personnel.

(87) The Meeting thanked the Korean delegation for useful and welcome information 
papers (XIX ATCM/INF 51 and 53) on environmental monitoring at King Sejong Station.

b) Data Requirements

(88) The Meeting received an information paper (XIX ATCM/INF 81) in which Japan 
noted that it has established a Centre on Antarctic Environmental Monitoring which will also 
have the function of processing, management, storage and distribution of data.

(89) It was agreed that this issue should be taken up again at the XX ATCM when the 
reports of the SCAR technical workshops could be considered.

c) Regulation of the Extraction, Use and Custody of Scientific Samples obtained in the 
Antarctic Expeditions

(90) The Meeting noted the SCAR-COMNAP information paper (XIX ATCM/INF 73) 
which advised that the inclusion of information on collections of scientific samples in the 
Antarctic Data Directory System would assist in the planning and development of Antarctic 
Research programs.
Item 11

Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures

a) Implementation of Procedures of IEEs and CEEs

(91) The Meeting received a number of papers regarding environmental impact assessments procedures (XIX ATCM/WP 3, and XIX ATCM/INF 8, 14, 37, 40, 55 and 63), and noted the statement from ASOC (XIX ATCM/INF 85).

(92) The United Kingdom delegation submitted a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 3) concerning the circulation of information on Environmental Impact Assessments. This paper proposed that a list of completed Initial Environmental Evaluations and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations carried out by each Consultative Party during the preceding calendar year should be transmitted as a separate document to the Host Government of the next ATCM not later than 1 March. The lists would be collated by the Host Government and published as an Annex to the final Report of the ATCM. The Meeting welcomed this initiative which would allow Parties to meet their obligations in Annex I of the Protocol and to make EIA information more accessible. The Meeting agreed that this proposal should come into operation from the end of the XIX ATCM, as an interim arrangement, pending the establishment of a Secretariat.

(93) The Meeting considered a Draft Guide on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of Activities in Antarctica (XIX ATCM/INF 14) submitted by the United Kingdom. A number of delegations welcomed this Guide as a useful contribution. Chile considered that the UK paper could be used as a basis for the TEWG to develop a Guide for EIA for use by those planning activities in Antarctica. Chile commented that such a Guide would help ensure greater consistency in the preparation of EIAs.

(94) An information paper submitted by New Zealand and South Africa (XIX ATCM/INF 63) outlined an approach they would take in respect of any changes required to an activity previously described in a final CEE. This approach (the outcome of which New Zealand and South Africa will report to ATCM XX) is as follows:
(a) review of the actual activity against the CEE;

(b) reporting on the CEE implementation in the annual Exchange of Information, e.g., 
activities completed in the year, any changes from the CEE;

(c) any changes from the original CEE to be treated in the same way as the original 
activity for which the CEE was prepared.

(95) The delegation of South Africa submitted two papers (XIX ATCM/INF 37 and 55) 
describing the development and the implementation of an Environmental Health and Safety 
Management system adopted by the South African Antarctic Programme. South Africa will 
advise on the progress of this to the XX ATCM.

b) Examination of CEEs produced during 1994 95

(96) The Meeting welcomed reports on the  Construction and Operation of a Scientific 
Base at Dome C and Drilling Activity at Dome C, Antarctica (XIX ATCM/INF 8 and 40, 
respectively) from France and Italy, and complimented them on their preparation of the final 
draft CEE for Concordia Base located at Dome C.

(97) Parties, who had forwarded comments on the draft CEE circulated by France, noted 
that these comments had been taken into account in the revisions (XIX ATCM/INF 8 and 40). 
The Meeting noted that it did not have any further points or concerns to raise with regard to 
the CEEs. The Meeting also commended France and Italy for providing a clear example of 
how compliance with Article 3 of Annex I of the Protocol can be met. Some countries noted 
that not all countries in the system can produce studies of this level.

(98) The role of the TEWG in assessing CEEs was discussed. The meeting agreed that the 
TEWG should advise the ATCM on CEEs, according to Item 6 (b) of the Final Report of the 
XVIII ATCM and Article 12 and Annex I of the Protocol.Item 12  The Antarctic Protected 
Area System

28
REVISION OF TEXT OF PARA 101 (Pg. 29)

The Meeting agreed to adopt a numbering scheme based on the use of three digits for the renumbering of existing Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest that will be required when the Environment Protocol enters into force and all SPAs and SSSIs are transformed into Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Annex V, Article 3.3). The existing SPAs would then become ASPAs 101 through 124 1, the existing SSSIs would become ASPAs 125 through 160, and new areas would be numbered starting with 161.

It was agreed, however, that an existing SPA or SSSI would not be designated with a 3 digit figure until a new or revised management plan, in accordance with Annex V, had been adopted.

It was further agreed that a draft Measure to this effect should be prepared for consideration at the XXth ATCM.

 
1  This is based on the assumption that the Plenary ATCM will adopt the area description and the management plan for proposed SPA 24: Pointe-Geologie, Terre Adelie. If the opposite is true, the numbers will become 101 through 123 (SPAs), 124 through 159 (SSSIs), and from 160 upwards for new areas.
Item 12

The Antarctic Protected Area System

a) Revised and New Management Plans for SPAs and SSSIs

(99) The United Kingdom and New Zealand delegations tabled working papers (XIX ATCM/WP 5 and 7, respectively) which set out revised area descriptions and proposed management plans for the following Specially Protected Areas and Site of Special Scientific Interest:

        SPA No. 13    Moe Island, South Orkney Islands;
        SPA No. 15    Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands;
        SSSI No. 11   Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, Ross Island

(100) The French delegation tabled a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 16) which set out an area description and proposed management plan for a proposed Specially Protected Area:

        SPA No. 24    Pointe-Geologie, Terre Adelie

The Meeting adopted the above area descriptions and management plans with minor modifications.

(101) Concerning the numbering of SPAs and SSSIs, the Dutch delegation suggested a new system, based on the use of three digits. The existing SPAs would be given numbers 101 through 123, the existing SSSIs 124 through 159 and new areas would be numbered starting with numbers 160. [The Meeting recommends that this renumbering proposal should be adopted when the Protocol enters into force.]

(102) The Australian delegation submitted a working paper (XIX ATCM/WP 14) which advised Parties that the designations for two SSSIs in Wilkes Land expire on 31 December 1995. Several delegations pointed out that this was a more widespread problem.

29
(103) A total of twelve SSSIs have expiry dates for their management plans of 31 December 
1995. The SSSIs are:

    SSSI No. 1   Cape Royds, Ross Island
    SSSI No. 3   Barwick Valley, Victoria Land
    SSSI No. 8   Western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island
    SSSI No. 9   Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
    SSSI No. 13  Potter Peninsula, King George Island
    SSSI No. 14  Harmony Point, west coast of Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands
    SSSI No. 15  Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
    SSSI No. 16  North-East Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
    SSSI No. 17  Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
    SSSI No. 19  Linnaeus Terrace, Asgaard Range, Victoria Land
    SSSI No. 20  Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
    SSSI No. 21  Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands

(104) The Meeting, on the basis of advice from TEWG, agreed that for all protected areas 
with designations due to expire on or before 31 December 1995, the expiry dates should be 
extended to 31 December 2000.        refer to resdutin

b) Historic Sites and Monuments

(105) The delegations of the United Kingdom, New Zealand/Norway/UK, and Chile 
submitted proposals for new Historic Sites and Monuments (ATCM WP/4 rev.1, ATCM/WP 
8, ATCM WP/21, respectively). The Meeting examined these proposals and agreed to 
add the following historic monuments to the List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by 
the Proposing Government or Governments annexed to Recommendation VII 9:

    No. 61  Port Lockroy (Base A), Goudier Island, Wiencke Island
    No. 62  Argentine Islands (Base F), Winter Island, Argentine Islands
    No. 63  Horseshoe Island (Base Y), Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land
    No. 64  Stonington Island (Base E), Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay, West Graham 
            Land
    No. 65  Message Post, Svend Foyn Island
    No. 66  Prestrud's Cairn, Scott Nunataks, Queen Alexandra Mountains
    No. 67  Rock shelter Granite House , Cape Geology, Granite Harbour
                                                                 30
No. 68 Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay
No. 69 Message Post, Cape Crozier
No. 70 Message Post, Cape Wadworth, Coulman Island
No. 71 Whalers Bay whaling station, Whalers Bay, Deception Island
Relina la adopción > measure

(106) The Meeting also received a proposal from the delegation of New Zealand (XIX 
ATCM/WP 9) to amend the description of Historic Site No. 14. This amendment was 
accepted. Relima la medida.

(107) The delegation of New Zealand proposed guidelines for the designation of historic 
sites and monuments (XIX ATCM/WP 9). These guidelines, based on internationally 
accepted criteria, were endorsed by several delegations. The Meeting, on the basis of advice 
from TEWG, adopted this proposal. y adoptó resolución no..

c) Review and Implementation of the System

(108) SCAR presented a series of papers concerning the general development and 
improvement of the Antarctic Protected Area System (XIX ATCM/WP 26, 27, and 28) in 
response to requests from earlier ATCMs, and a summary of the actions related to SSSI No. 2 
Arrival Heights, Ross Island (XIX ATCM/INF 57). The delegations of New Zealand and the 
USA tabled an information paper concerning SSSI No. 2 (XIX ATCM/INF 86). New 
Zealand tabled a paper describing the use of short summaries of protected area management 
plans by field parties in the Ross Sea area (XIX ATCM/INF 59).

(109) A working paper presented by SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 26) examined the development 
of ecosystem matrices which could be used by the Parties when considering the objectives, 
distribution and location of protected areas. The Meeting welcomed this work, and 
considered that the matrices would be a useful basis for ensuring representative examples of all 
ecosystems types are included in the Antarctic Protected Area System. The Meeting 
encouraged Parties to use the matrices when selecting sites to be proposed as protected areas.

(110) SCAR also introduced a model visit report for recording information for all visits to 
protected areas (XIX ATCM/WP 27). The Representative of SCAR informed the Group that 
the data collected by the use of such reports would facilitate revision of the management plans 
and provide a valuable scientific archive of usage. The Meeting, acting on the advice of 
TEWG, considered that the report format would be valuable in compiling and exchanging 
                                                                                  31
information on visits to protected areas.

(111) A third paper by SCAR (XIX ATCM/WP 28) proposed a model format for 
management plans for protected areas. This used Moe Island (SPA 13) as an example. The 
Meeting recognised that the use of a model format for management plans would help to make 
plans easier to use by those visiting protected areas, and make them more consistent with each 
other. The Meeting agreed that the Moe Island Plan should be used as a model for developing 
management plans for protected areas.

Item 13

Scientific Environmental Protection Measures

a) Marine Pollution

(112) A paper from Chile (XIX ATCM/WP 22) described the organization being established 
for oil spill control in the northern Antarctic Peninsula region.

(113) The Russian delegation made the comment that this is a very good development and 
that they hope that a similar arrangement may be established on King George Island where 
many research stations are located.

b) Waste Disposal and Waste Management

(114) The Meeting examined a working paper by the Netherlands concerning waste disposal 
(XIX ATCM/11). This raised concerns that the prohibition on disposal of nuclear waste in 
Antarctica contained in Article V 1 of the Antarctic Treaty might be affected if negotiations on 
a nuclear waste convention were to lead to a convention to which all CPs become parties. 
Article V 2 of the Antarctic Treaty specifies that the rules established under such a convention 
would apply in Antarctica.

(115) The Meeting examined a paper by the Netherlands (XIX ATCM/WP 15) on the 
application of Best Available Techniques in the Antarctic. It was noted that in determining 
whether a set of procedures, facilities or methods of operation constituted the best available 
techniques, issues including the economic and logistic feasibility of such techniques and time 
limits for installation should be taken into account. On the basis of advice from the TEWG,

the paper was considered either with blc)

32
the Meeting invites COMNAP to consider, in consultation with SCAR, the desirability and 
feasibility of employing the concept of Best Available Techniques for the protection of the 
Antarctic environment, and to recommend appropriate action to the next Consultative 
Meeting. The Meeting agreed that this matter will be included in the agenda of the next 
ATCM.

c) Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna

Introduction and Continued Presence of Non-native Species of Animals and Plants

(116) The Meeting examined a working paper by Australia (XIX ATCM/WP 29) which 
raised concern about the introduction and continued presence of non-native species of animals 
and plants to Antarctica through human activities. The Parties noted that Article 4 of Annex II 
of the Protocol requires that no species of animal or plant not native to the Antarctic area 
shall be introduced onto land or ice shelves, or into water in the Antarctic Treaty area except 
in accordance with a permit.

(117) The Meeting acknowledged concerns about the introduction and continued presence of 
non-native species of animals and plants. Some delegations pointed out that new species may 
become present due to climate change or by natural means and that it is important to be sure 
before removing a species that it has been introduced by human activity. One delegation raised 
concerns about the dispersion of species within Antarctica by natural means and by human 
activity. The meeting agreed that before removing a species from Antarctica it should be 
reasonably established that the species had been introduced by human activity.

(118) The Meeting recommends that Parties:

    (a) examine all their facilities in Antarctica to identify any non-native species of animals 
or plants present which have been introduced by human activity;

    (b) remove any such non-native species of animals or plants found in or associated with 
those facilities unless they are present in accordance with an appropriate permit;

    (c) take action as necessary within their authority to ensure that tourists and non-
government activities do not result in the introduction of non-native species of animals or 
plants into Antarctica. Item 17 Global change 
                                                                                 33
Item 14

International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation

(119) The Meeting received Information Papers submitted by Chile (XIX ATCM/INF 20), 
Peru (XIX ATCM/INF 89), France, (XIX ATCM/INF 43), Belgium (XIX ATCM/INF 60 
Rev. 1), Bulgaria (XIX ATCM/INF 74), Australia (XIX ATCM/INF 80), Belgium and Italy 
(XIX ATCM/INF 93), Finland (XIX ATCM/INF 100), New Zealand (XIX ATCM/INF 101), 
Republic of Korea (XIX ATCM/INF 109) and Brazil (XIX ATCM/INF 117). Most other 
Parties provided oral reports on international cooperation in science and logistics. The reports 
and oral presentations indicated that there is a strong commitment to international cooperation 
reflecting Article II of the Antarctic Treaty and the declaration of Parties to the XVI ATCM 
(1991) that "in the interests of all mankind Antarctica shall continue to be used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes and, in this regard, dedicate themselves to enhancing further the record of 
cooperation in a decade of international Antarctic scientific cooperation, 1991 to 2000."

The Meeting noted that the following factors were important in developing 
international scientific and logistic cooperation:

There are opportunities to reduce costs and environmental impacts through joint use of 
vessels, but such opportunities can be inhibited by requirements to use national vessels and by 
the restricted time of operation in the Antarctic regions.

For major projects, up to five years forward planning is required, supported by long-
term financial commitments such as in the European project for ice coring in Antarctica 
(EPICA).

Exchanges of scientists are a very fruitful form of cooperation.

Access to information over World Wide Web could assist in developing cooperation.

Peer review and assessment of programmes by scientists from other nations is an example 
of how cooperation can improve the quality of the science being undertaken.

Sharing the logistic burdens can be a cost-effective means of maintaining science 
programmes while making better use of the existing logistics infrastructure.

34
16

EXTENSION OF THE EXPIRY DATES FOR
SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

The Representatives

Recalling Recommendation XIII-7 and XIV-4

Noting that:

     i)   experience of the practical effect of the Management plans for these
          sites had shown them to be an effective means of reducing the risks of harmful
          interference in areas of special interest

    ii)   no change to the Management Plans had been proposed by SCAR

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.   The date of the expiry of Site Numbers 1, 3, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16
     ,17, 19, 20, 21, be extended from 31 December 1995 to 31 December 2000.

2.   They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with
     paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VII-3, that the Management Plans are
     observed.
17

The Parties:

Recalling the requests made by ATCM XVII and ATCM XVIII that SCAR 
should assist Parties in reviewing and revising Management Plans to conform with 
the provisions of the Protocol, and consider how a model could be developed to 
facilitate the preparation of new and revised Management Plans.

Recognising that a uniform model for such plans would eliminate repetition 
and would make them easier to use.

Recommend to their Governments;

that the structure of the Management Plan for 
Specially Protected Area No. ....................., 
adopted under ................................
be regarded as a model for the preparation 
for all new and revised Management Plans 
under Annex V for protected areas.
Re c


ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT: CIRCULATION OF INFORMATION

The Representatives,

Recalling Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty and
Articles 3,6 (2) and 17 of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting that numerous recommendations of Consultative Meetings have
established requirements for exchange of information between
Governments;

Noting also that Annex 1 to the Protocol creates further
obligations to exchange information annually, including
information on Initial Environmental Evaluations and Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluations;

Desirous that such information should be easily accessible and in
a comprehensive and uniform format so that the scale and trend of
activities and developments in Antarctica can be readily
monitored;

Recommend that:-

1. The Governments of the Consultative Parties should provide,
through diplomatic channels, a list of the Initial Environmental
Evaluations and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations submitted
to them during the preceding calendar year;

2. The list, as a separate document, should be transmitted to the host
Government of the next ATCM not later than [1 March]

3. The list should, at minimum, contain the following information: A short
description of the development or activity; the type of environmental impact
assessment undertaken (IEE or CEE); the location (name, latitude, and
longtitude) of the activity; the organisation responsible for the EIA; and the
decision taken following consideration of the environmental impact assessment;

mgr/3356.3
2

4. The lists should be collated by the host Government of the 
ATCM and circulated as an information paper to the ATCM and 
thereafter, if the ATCM so agrees, be published as an Annex to the 
final Report of the ATCM.

5. The above procedures should be reviewed following the 
establishment of a permanent Secretariat.

mgr/3356.4
MEASURE 1

REVISED DESCRIPTIONS AND 
PROPOSED MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9 and VIII-3;

Noting that revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Noting also that the format of these revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;

Recommend to their Governments that:

a.  For the Specially Protected Areas listed below:

    (i) the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora be deleted;

    (ii) the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted in Annex B. Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

    The Specially Protected Areas involved are:

    Area No.13  Moe Island, South Orkney Islands; 

    Area No.15  Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands

b.  For the Site of Special Scientific Interest listed below:

    (i) the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest be deleted;

    (ii) the Management Plan of the Site of Special Scientific Interest, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest. The site of Special Scientific Interest involved is:

    SSSI No. 11 Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, Ross Island.

5/12 tewgdrf/measure1
Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 13

MOE ISLAND, SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1. Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-13 (1966, SPA No 13) after a 
proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that Moe Island provided a representative 
sample of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem, that intensive experimental research on the 
neighbouring Signy Island might alter its ecosystem and that Moe Island should be 
specially protected as a control area for future comparison.

These grounds are still relevant. Whilst there is no evidence that research activities at 
Signy Island have significantly altered the ecosystems there, a major change has occurred 
in the low-altitude terrestrial system as a result of the rapidly expanding Antarctic fur seal 
(Arctocephalus gazella) population. Plant communities on nearby Signy Island have been 
physically disrupted by trampling by fur seals and nitrogen enrichment from the seals' 
excreta has resulted in replacement of bryophytes and lichens by the macro-alga Prasiola 
crispa. Low-lying lakes have been significantly affected by enriched run-off from the 
surrounding land. So far Moe Island has not been invaded by fur seals to any great extent 
and its topography makes it less likely that seals will penetrate to the more sensitive areas.

The values to be protected are those associated with the biological composition and 
diversity of a near-pristine example of the maritime Antarctic terrestrial and littoral marine 
ecosystems. In particular, Moe Island contains the greatest continuous expanses of 
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf found in the Antarctic. Moe Island has been 
visited on few occasions and has never been the site of occupation for periods of more 
than a few hours.

2. Aims and Objectives

Management of Moe Island aims to:

•   avoid major changes to the structure and composition of the terrestrial vegetation, 
    in particular the moss turf banks,

•   prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area,

•   permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere, 
    particularly research related to determining the differences between the ecology of 
    an undisturbed island and that of an adjacent occupied and fur seal perturbed 
    island.
3. Management Activities

Ensure that the biological condition of Moe Island is adequately monitored, preferably by non-invasive methods, and that the sign-boards are serviced.

If fur seals were to gain access to the interior of Moe Island it would be necessary to take action to prevent damage to the vulnerable moss banks. This action would most likely consist of the erection of a seal-proof fence at the head of the gully at the northeast of Landing Cove. Any direct management activities in the Area would be subject to an environmental impact assessment before any decision to proceed is taken.

4. Period of Designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IX-13 for an indefinite period.

5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of Moe Island in relation to the South Orkney Islands. Map 2 shows Moe Island in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Moe Island, South Orkney Islands, is a small irregularly-shaped island lying 300 m off the southwestern extremity of Signy Island, from which it is separated by Fyr Channel. It is about 1.8 km from the northeast to southwest and 1 km from northwest to southeast. Its position on Admiralty Chart No 1775, latitude 60°44'S, longitude 45°45'W, does not agree closely with that in Map 2 (lat. 60°44'S, long. 45°41'W).

The island rises precipitously on the northeastern and southeastern sides to Snipe Peak (226 m altitude). There is a subsidiary summit above South Point (102 m altitude) and lower hills on each of three promontories on the western side above Corral Point (92 m), Conroy Point (89 m) and Spaull Point (56 m). Small areas of permanent ice remain on the east- and south-facing slopes with late snow lying on the steeply dipping western slopes. There are no permanent streams or pools.

The rocks are metamorphic quartz-mica schists, with occasional biotite and quartz-rich beds. There is a thin bed of undifferentiated amphibolite on the northeastern coast. Much of the island is overlain with glacial drift and scree. Soils are predominantly immature deposits of fine to coarse clays and sands intermixed with gravels, stones and boulders. They are frequently sorted by freeze-thaw action in high or exposed locations into small-scale circles, polygons, stripes and lobes. There are deep accumulations of peat (up to 2 m thick on western slopes), considerable expanses of the surface of which are bare and eroded.

2
6

The dominant plant communities are Andreaea-Usnea fellfield and banks of 
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf (the largest known example of this community type 
in the Antarctic). These moss banks constitute a major biological value and the reason for 
the designation of the Area. The cryptogamic flora is diverse.

The mites Gamasellus racovitzai and Stereorydeus villosus and the springtail Cryptopygus 
antarcticus are common under stones.

There were five colonies of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) totalling about 
11,000 pairs in 1978-79. A more recent visit (February 1994) noted fewer than 100 pairs 
on the northern side of Landing Cove and more than a thousand on the southern side. 
Numerous other birds breed on the island, notably about 2000 pairs of cape petrels 
(Daption capensis) in 14 colonies (1966) and large numbers of Antarctic prions 
(Pachyptila desolata).

Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) are found 
in the bays on the west side of the island. Increasing numbers of fur seals (Arctocephalus 
gazella), mostly juvenile males, come ashore on the north side of Landing Cove and have 
caused some damage to vegetation in that area. However, it is possible that the nature of 
the terrain will restrict these animals to this small headland where damage may intensify.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

None.

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board is located at the back of the small shingle beach in the northeast corner of 
Landing Cove, beyond the splash zone on top of a flat rock, to which it is bolted. The 
board was erected on 2 February 1994.

There is a cairn and the remains of a survey mast, erected in 1965-66, on Spaull Point. 
This mast is of interest for lichenometric studies and should not be removed. There are 
no other structures on Moe Island.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No 14, Lynch Island, lies about 10 km north-north-east of Moe Island. SPA No 18, 
North Coronation Island, lies about 19 km away on the northern side of Coronation Island. 
SPA No 15, Southern Powell Island, is about 41 km to the east.

7. Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by appropriate 
national authorities, as designated under Article 7 of Annex V of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

3
7

Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:

-   it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served 
    elsewhere

-   the actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural ecological system in the Area

-   any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan

-   the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan

-   the Permit, or an authorized copy, must be carried within the Specially Protected 
    Area

-   a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

There are no restrictions on landing from the sea, which is the preferred method. No 
special access points are specified, but landings are usually most safely made at the 
northeast corner of Landing Cove.

Helicopter landings should be avoided where practicable. Helicopters may land only on 
the col between hill 89 m and the western slope of Snipe Peak. To avoid overflying bird 
colonies approach should preferably be from the south, though an approach from the north 
is permissible.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250 m altitude above the highest point except for 
access to the landing point specified above.

No pedestrian routes are designated but persons on foot should at all times avoid 
disturbances to birds or damage to vegetation and periglacial features. Vehicles are 
prohibited on Moe Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on 
time and place

-   Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere and which 
    will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area

-   Essential management activities, including monitoring

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for 
essential scientific or management activities, as specified in the Permit.

4
7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties should not normally camp in the Area. If this is essential for reasons of safety,
tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to vegetation or
disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be
taken into the Area.

No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, which
may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, shall be
removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit
was granted.

Fuel, food and other materials are not to be depoted in the Area, unless required for
essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All
such materials introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depots
are not permitted.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. [Where animal taking or harmful 
interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for 
Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.]
                                                                                                No
                                                                                                Change

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit,
except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of the Area and
dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for laboratory
examination.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be deposited
in the sea.

7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the
Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area, to carry out biological monitoring and site
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant material
or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain notice boards, or
protective measures.

5
9

7(x) Requirements for reports

The Principal Permit Holder for each issued Permit shall submit a report of activitics 
conducted in the Area using the accepted Visit Report form This report shall be 
submitted to the authority named in the Permit as soon as practicable, but not later than 6 
months after the visit has taken place. Such reports should be stored indefinitely and 
made accessible to interested Parties, SCAR, CCAMLR and COMNAP if requested, to 
provide the documentation of human activities within the Area necessary for good 
management.

dw hwgen\mrc.doc
27.4.95.

* Such reports should, as appropriate
-according to national procedures,
use the Visit Report protected 
area Visit Report form accepted 
by SCAR.

6
10


                      46°00'W         45°35'W         45°00'W         44°35'W
             60°30'S
                         +                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                      Coronation                          
                       Island                             
                                                                      
             60°40'S                                                    
                                                                      
                                  Signy                          
                                   Island                           
                                  SPA No.14                       
                                   Lynch Island                    
                                  SPA No.13                       
                                   Moe Island                     
                                                                      
                                                                      
             60°50'S                        Roberson              
                                              Islands             
                                                                      
                                  SPA No.15                       
                                  Southern Powell                 
                                   Island                         
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                  Powell                            
                                   Island                           
                                  Saddle                            
                                   Island                           
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                  Laurie                            
                                   Island                           
                                                                      
Map 1.  Moe Island Specially Protected Area in relation to the South 
Orkney Islands
11


45°42'W                                                
         N                                                
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
45°41'W                                                
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                 EYR CHANNEL                                                
                                                        
                                 60°44'S                                                
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        

Management Plan 
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.15

SOUTHERN POWELL ISLAND AND ADJACENT ISLANDS,
SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1. Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-15 (1966, SPA No 15) 
after a proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that southern Powell Island 
and the adjacent islands support substantial vegetation and a considerable bird and 
mammal fauna. The Area was representative of the natural ecology of the South 
Orkney Islands, and was rendered more important by the nucleus of an expanding 
colony of Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella).

These grounds are still relevant, though the expansion of the fur seal colony is 
progressing only slowly.

The values to be protected are primarily those associated with the large concentrations 
of breeding birds and seals, and to a lesser extent, the terrestrial vegetation.

2. Aims and Objectives

Management of southern Powell Island and adjacent islands aims to:
•   avoid major changes in the structure and composition of the terrestrial 
    vegetation;
•   prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
•   permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served 
    elsewhere.

3. Management Activities

Because of its use as an anchorage in the past, it is important that the signs which 
identify the Area as a Specially Protected Area and point out that landing without a 
permit is forbidden are maintained.

Visits should be made as necessary to assess the biological composition of the Area, 
in particular the state of the fur seal colony, and to maintain sign boards.

4. Period of designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-15 for an indefinite period.
13

5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of southern Powell Island in relation to the South Orkney 
Islands. Map 2 shows the Area in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates and natural features

The Area, which is centered on latitude 60°42'S and longitude 45°01'W includes all 
of Powell Island, South Orkney Islands, south of the latitude of the southern summit 
of John Peaks (375 m altitude), together with the whole of Fredriksen Island, 
Michelsen Island (a tidal peninsula at the southern tip of Powell Island), Christoffersen 
Island, Grey Island and unnamed adjacent islands. All but the Crutchley Ice Piedmont 
of southern Powell Island are ice-free in summer, though there are patches of semi-
permanent or late-lying snow in places.

The rocks of southern Powell Island, Michelsen Island and Christoffersen Island are 
conglomerates of Cretaceous-Jurassic age. The two promontories to the west of John 
Peaks are Carboniferous greywacke-shales. There are boulders containing plant fossils 
in the glacial deposits around Falkland Harbour. Much of central and southern 
Fredriksen Island is composed of sandstone and dark phyllitic shales.  -  north-east, 
and probably most of the north, of this island is highly sheared cong: :merate with 
laminated mudstone. The Area has only a thick mantle of glacial till, strongly 
influenced by seabird guano.

Michelsen Island is almost devoid of land vegetation, although on the rocks there are 
extensive communities of lichens dominated by nitrophilous crustose species. These 
are also widespread on Fredriksen Island and elsewhere on bird-influenced cliffs and 
rocks near the shore. The most diverse vegetation on Powell Island occurs on the two 
promontories and associated scree west of Falkland Harbour. Here, and on 
Christoffersen Island and the northern part of Fredriksen Island, moss banks with 
underlying peat occur. Wet areas support stands of moss carpet. There are extensive 
areas of the nitrophilous macroalga Prasiola crispa associated with the penguin 
colonies in the area. Snow alga are prominent on the ice piedmont and snow patches 
in late summer.

No information is available on the arthropod fauna, but is probably very similar to that 
at Signy Island. The springtails Cryptopygus antarcticus and Parisotoma octooculata 
and the mites Alaskozetes antarcticus, Stereorydeus villosus and Gamasellus racovitzai 
occur in great numbers beneath stones.

There are few observations on marine biota in the Area, but this is likely to be very 
similar to the well-researched Signy Island area. The relatively enclosed Falkland-
Ellefsen Harbour area and the bay on the east side of the peninsula are highly 
influenced by glacial run-off from the ice piedmont.

2
14

Large numbers of penguins and petrels breed throughout the Area. There are many
thousand pairs of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica), mostly on Fredriksen
Island. Similarly large numbers of Adélie penguins (P. adeliae) occur principally on
the southern Powell-Michielsen Island area. Here there are also several thousand pairs
of gentoo penguins (P. papua) and a very few scattered pairs of macaroni penguins
(Eudyptes chrysolophus) breeding among the gentoos.

Other breeding birds include southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), cape petrels (Daption capensis), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson's storm petrels
(Oceanites oceanicus), blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) Dominican gulls (Larus dominicanus), brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergi), sheathbills (Chionis alba),
and possibly Antarctic prions (Pachyptila desolata) and black-bellied storm petrels
(Fregatta tropica).

Michielsen Island is the longest known breeding site in the Antarctic of fur seals since their near-extermination in the nineteenth century. The number of pups born annually
has increased slowly but fairly steadily from 11 in 1956 to about 60 in 1989. Thirty-
four live pups were recorded in January 1994. Many non-breeding males visit the
Area during the summer. Other seals are frequent on the beaches, mainly elephant
seals (Mirounga leonina) and Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli). Leopard seals
(Hydrurga leptonyx) and crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) are occasionally
seen on ice floes.

6(ii)Restricted zones within the Area

None

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board (erected January 1994) is positioned on southern Powell Island on top
of a small rock outcrop at the back of the shingle beach on the east side of the
southern promontory of the island.

On Michielsen Island the marker board (erected January 1994) is situated on a low-
lying rock about 50 m from the shoreline at the back of a high shingle beach at the
southern tip of the island.

On Christoffersen Island the marker board (erected January 1994) is located on a
small promontory on the northeastern shore of the island at the entrance to Falkland
Harbour. The board is located at the back of the beach just below a small Adélie
penguin rookery.

On Fredriksen Island a marker board (erected January 1994) is located at the northern
end of the pebble/boulder beach on the western side of the island, below a small
chinstrap penguin rookery. The board is at the back of the beach on top of a small
rock outcrop.

3
There are no other structures within the Area, but various mooring chains and rings associated with the use of Ellefsen and Falkland Harbours by floating whale factories in the 1920s are to be found on the shore.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No. 13 Moe Island, and SPA No. 14, Lynch Island, are about 35 km west by south and about 35 km west of the Area respectively. SPA No. 18, North Coronation Island, is about the same distance away on the northern side of Coronation Island.

7.  Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by appropriate national authorities, as designated under Article 7 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
-   it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere;
-   the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in the Area;
-   any management activities are in support of the objectives of this Management Plan;
-   the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan;
-   the Permit must be carried within the Specially Protected Area;
-   a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Anchoring within Falkland Harbour and Ellefsen Harbour is prohibited except in emergency.

No pedestrian routes are designated within the Area, but persons on foot should avoid walking on vegetated areas or disturbing wildlife wherever possible. Vehicles are not allowed in the Area.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250m altitude above the highest point except for purposes of landing (when essential) on the beach on the east side of the southern-most tip of Powell Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place
-   Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere
-   essential management activities, including monitoring.

4
16

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except 
for essential scientific or management activities, as specified in the Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties shall not camp in the Area, except in an emergency for reasons of safety. In 
this case, tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to the 
vegetation or disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall 
be taken into the Area.

No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, 
which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, 
shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which 
the Permit was granted.

Fuel, food or other materials are not to be depoted in the Area, unless required for 
essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. 
All such materials are to be removed when no longer required.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or 
harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica as a minimum 
standard.

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a 
Permit, except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of 
the Area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for 
laboratory examinations.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be 
deposited in the sea.

5
17

7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant 
material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, or to erect or maintain 
notice boards, or to carry out protective measures.

7(x)  Requirements for reports

The principal Permit holder for each issued Permit shall submit a report of activities 
conducted in the Area, being the accepted Visit Repont form This report shall be 
submitted to the appropriate authority or authorities named in the Permit as soon as 
practicable, but not later than six months after the visit has taken place. Such reports 
should be stored indefinitely by the appropriate authority and made accessible to 
interested Parties, SCAR, CCAMLR and COMNAP if requested, to provide the 
documentation of human activities within the Area necessary for good management.

* Such reports should, as appropriate
dwhwgenipowell.doc 
according to national procedures,
27.4.95.                                  use the Protected area Visit
                                          Report form accepted by SCAR.

6
18

Map 1.  Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands Specially
Protected Area in relation to the South Orkney Islands
19


Cape 
Disappointment

Cruchley 
Ice 
Piedmont

John 
Peaks

415

395

Falkland Harbour

CHRISTOFFERSEN 
ISLAND

Elleisen Harbour

MICHELSEN 
ISLAND

SPA signs

FREDRIKSEN 
ISLAND

Southern 
Powell Island 
Specially Protected Area No. 15

GREY 
ISLAND

LEGEND
 Permanent snow/ice
 Ice-free area
 Moraine
 Lake

 Limiting offshore danger line
 Formline (50 m)
 Index formline (250 m)
 Survey station (occupied)
 Survey station (inter[?]ected)
 Spot height (barometric)

60°42'30"S

60°45'S

45°05'W

Approximate scale
0                  1                  2 
                  KILOMETRES

45'W

Map 2. Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands Specially Protected Area
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                        1      20

Management Plan (SSSI)
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 11
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 4*
TRAMWAY RIDGE, MT. EREBUS, ROSS ISLAND

1. Description of values to be protected
The lower end of Tramway Ridge was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI
No. 11) after a proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that the Area supports an unusual ecosystem
of exceptional scientific value to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists. Mt. Erebus (3794 m) is
one of only three known high altitude localities of fumarolic activity and associated vegetation in the
Antarctic. Tramway Ridge is an ice-free area of gently sloping warm ground 1.5 km to the
Northwest of the main crater of Mt. Erebus, located at an elevation of between 3350 m and 3400 m.
The single, as yet unidentified, moss species found in the Area is unusual in that it persists in the
protonematal stage. An unusual variety of a common thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially
noteworthy. The plant communities which have developed on the fumarolic soils within the Area
differ significantly from those found elsewhere in Antarctica. The regional uniqueness of the
communities is of substantial scientific interest and value. The very limited geographical extent of the
ecosystem, its unusual biological features, its exceptional scientific values and the ease with which it
could be disturbed through trampling or alien introductions, are such that the Area requires long-term
special protection.

2. Aims and objectives
Management at Tramway Ridge aims to:
- avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;
- prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
- permit research on the unique vegetation and microbial communities while ensuring they are
protected from over-sampling;
- minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;
- preserve a part of the Area, which is declared a Restricted Zone, as a reference site for future
studies;
- permit visits for management purposes in support of the objectives of the management plan.

3. Management activities
The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
- Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the designated helicopter landing site
whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings near the Area in a given season.
These should be replaced as needed and removed when no longer required.
- Markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no significant threat to the
environment, should be placed to mark the helicopter landing pad.
- A line of flags should be placed to mark the preferred snowmobile route (Map A) between the
USAP Upper and Lower Erebus Huts, which should pass no closer than 200 m to the Area.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                        2                        21

-   Signs illustrating the location, boundaries and clearly stating entry restrictions shall be placed on 
    posts marking the boundaries of the Area.

-   Signs showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
    displayed prominently, and a copy of this Management Plan should be kept available, in all of the 
    research hut facilities located close to the summit of Mt. Erebus.

-   Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall 
    be maintained in good condition.

-   Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the Area 
    continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and 
    maintenance measures are adequate.

-   National Antarctic Programmes operating in the region shall consult together with a view to 
    ensuring these steps are carried out.

4. Period of designation
    Designated under ATCM Recommendation xxx for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs
    Map A: Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, location image-map. Image is rectified by affine 
    transformation and scale is approximate. Photography USGS/DOSLI (SN7842) 11 
    November 1993.

    Map B: Tramway Ridge, protected area orthophotograph. Orthophoto and protected area boundary 
    coordinates are tied to the Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, a local framework, using the 
    WGS72 spheroid. Precise GPS coordinates for the site will differ: these were unavailable 
    at the time of mapping. Photography US Navy (SN6480) 9 February 1980.

    Map C: Tramway Ridge, protected area map. Contours are derived from a digital elevation model 
    generated using a 10 m grid for the orthophotograph in Map B: accuracy ± 2m. Precise 
    area of warm ground is subject to variation seasonally and inter-annually.

    Figure 1: Perspective view of the Tramway Ridge area from an elevation of 6200 m, 5000 m out 
    from the Area at a bearing of 215°SW, showing the protected area boundary, the location of 
    the USAP Erebus huts, and the preferred helicopter landing site and snowmobile route. 
    Image source: Map A.

6. Description of the Area
    6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
    The boundary of the designated Area is defined as a square of 200 m by 200.8 m which encompasses 
    most of the warm ground area of lower Tramway Ridge (167°06'35"E, 77°31'05"S: Map B). The 
    Area is divided into two parts of almost equal size, the northern half being a Restricted Zone. The 
    boundaries of the Area and the Restricted Zone (marked by signposts at each corner) and prominent 
    features are shown on Map B. Several boundary signposts have been offset owing to dangerous 
    ground at the actual corner point.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                        3                        22

The Area is in general on a gentle slope of about 5°, with much of the ice-free ground in the form of terraces which have a typical vertical height of about 0.5 m and steeper sides of up to 30° in slope. The steep sides of the terraces have the maximum development of crusts of vegetation, and it is from these sides that visible steam emissions occur. Visible vegetation covers about 16% of the Area. Low ice hummocks of up to about 1 m high are distributed over the Area where steam has frozen. Surface ground temperatures are up to about 75°C.

The steam-warmed lithosols in the Area provide an unusual habitat of limited extent. The acid reaction of the soils, the constant supply of moisture by condensation of steam and the regular supply of geothermal heat produce conditions which contrast markedly with most Antarctic soils. There is no evidence of the presence of microinvertebrate animals in the soils. The vegetation comprises protonematal moss and diverse microalgae, which has developed on the fumarolic soils and differs significantly from other Antarctic plant communities. The single moss species, which has not yet been identified, is unusual in that it has never been seen to produce leaves but persists in the protonematal stage. The vegetation occurs in zones related to surface temperature. Warmest ground, from about 35 – 60°C, is colonised by dark blue-green and reddish-brown mats of cyanobacteria, whereas cooler surfaces of about 10 – 30°C are dominated by green crusts of coccoid chlorophytes and moss protonema. Bare ground lacking a macroscopically visible vegetation occurs between 0 – 20°C.

The algal flora comprises four cyanobacteria and 11 coccoid chlorophytes. The presence of a thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially noteworthy as it is an unusual variety of the hot spring cyanobacterium Mastigocladus laminosus, which is common elsewhere in the world. Thermophilic bacteria have been isolated at 60°C. These include heterotrophic and a thiosulfate-utilising autotrophic species.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

The northern half of the Area is designated a Restricted Zone in order to preserve part of the Area as a reference site for future comparative studies, while the southern half of the Area (which is essentially similar in biology, features and character) is available for research programmes and sample collection. The south boundary of the Restricted Zone is defined by a line that bisects the Area into two halves (Map B), and is marked at both ends by signposts. This boundary may be identified on the ground approximately as an extension westwards of the south ridge line of lower Tramway Ridge. The other three boundaries of the Restricted Zone are defined by the boundaries of the Area. Access to the Restricted Zone is strictly prohibited until such time it is agreed by management plan review that access should be allowed.

6(iii) Strucnures within and near the Area

Signposts mark the corner points of the boundaries. The USAP Lower and Upper Erebus Huts are located approximately 1 km to the Northeast (3400 m) and Southeast (3612.5 m) respectively.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                  4                                  23

6(iv) Location of other ASPAs within close proximity of the Area
None.

7. Permit conditions
Permits may be issued only by appropriate national authorities as designated under Article 7 of Annex 
V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty Conditions for issuing a
Permit to enter the Area are that:
-   it is issued only for scientific study of the ecosystem, or for a compelling scientific or
management purpose that cannot be served elsewhere;
-   access to the Restricted Zone shall be prohibited;
-   the actions permitted are not likely to jeopardise the natural ecological system or scientific values
of the Area;
-   any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
-   the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
-   any Permit issued shall be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Landing of helicopters within the Area is strictly prohibited. Helicopter overflight of the Area should
be avoided, except for essential scientific or management purposes when helicopters shall in no
instance fly lower than 30 m above the ground surface of the Area. Use of helicopter smoke bombs
is strictly prohibited within 200 m of the Area and is discouraged nearby. For short-duration visits
which do not require camp establishment, access by helicopter should be to a designated landing site,
located outside of the Area and 300 m to the Northwest (Map A and Figure 1). For visits which
require camp establishment, helicopter access should be to the USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Huts,
and thence on foot or by land vehicle to the edge of the Area at Tramway Ridge. Landing of
helicopters at other sites close to the Area is strongly discouraged. Only those persons specifically
authorised by Permit are allowed to enter the Area. No special restrictions apply to the air or land
routes used to move to and from the Area, although those traveling between the Upper and Lower
Erebus Huts should keep to the preferred snowmobile route and stay at least 200 m from the protected
area boundary.

Access into the Area shall be on foot and land vehicles are prohibited. Visitors should avoid
walking on visible vegetation and, as far as practicable, areas of warm ground. Visitors should be
aware that walking in the Area can compact soil, alter temperature gradients (which may change rates
of steam release), and break thin ice crusts which may form over warm ground, with resulting
damage to soil and biota below. The presence of snow or ice surfaces is not a guaranteed indication
of a suitable pathway: therefore every reasonable effort should be made to minimise the effects of
walking activity. Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the
objectives of any permitted activities.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place
-   Scientific research which will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area;
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                  5          24

- Essential management activities, including monitoring.
- Entry to the Restricted Zone is prohibited.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures, except boundary markers and signs, are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be the responsibility of the authority which granted the original Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Camping required for work in the Area should be near the existing USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Hut sites, and is discouraged anywhere within 500 m of the boundaries of the Area (Map A).

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area

To avoid compromising the microbial ecosystem for which this site is protected no living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.

Fuels are not to be brought into the Area. Food shall not be consumed within the Area. Equipment and other materials are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimised.

7(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna

Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where taking of animals or harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit. Material of human origin, not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder, but which is likely to compromise the values of the Area may be removed from any part of the Area, including the Restricted Zone.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                  6     25

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes, including all human wastes, must be removed from the Area. Excretion of human wastes 
is prohibited within the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can 
continue to be met

1. The Permit, or an authorised copy, must be carried within the Antarctic Specially Protected Area.

2. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection 
activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain 
signposts, or protective measures.

3. To help maintain the scientific value derived from the unique communities found at Tramway 
Ridge visitors shall take special precautions against introductions, especially when visiting several 
thermal regions in a season. Of particular concern are microbial or vegetation introductions sourced 
from:
        - thermal areas, both Antarctic and non-Antarctic;
        - soils at any other Antarctic sites, including those near stations;
        - soils from regions outside Antarctica.

To this end, visitors shall take the following measures to minimise the risk of introductions:

        (a) Any sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area shall be sterilised and maintained in 
a sterile condition before being used within the Area. To the maximum extent practicable, 
footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including backpacks or carry-bags) 
shall be thoroughly cleaned or sterilised and maintained in this condition before entering the Area;

        (b) Sterilisation should be by an acceptable method, such as by UV light, autoclave or by 
washing exposed surfaces in 70% ethanol solution in water.

        (c) Sterile protective overclothing shall be worn. The overclothing shall be suitable for working at 
temperatures of -20°C or below and comprise at a minimum sterile overalls to cover arms, legs 
and body and sterile gloves suitable for placing over the top of cold-weather gloves.

7(x) Requirements for reports

The Principal Permit Holder for each issued Permit shall submit a report of activities conducted in the 
Area, being the accepted Visit Report form.* The report shall be submitted to the appropriate authority 
(ies) named in the Permit as soon as practicable, but not later than 6 months after a visit to the Area 
has taken place. Such reports should be stored indefinitely and made accessible to interested parties.

* Such reports should, as appropriate according to national procedures, use the protected 
area Visit Report form accepted by SCAR.
26

Map A - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : 
Site of Special Scientific Interest No.11
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.XX

Location image-map.

Helicopter Pad
Lower Erebus Hut (USAP)

Tramway Ridge

Upper Erebus Hut (USAP)
Mt Erebus
Crater

Photography, 11 November 1993 : rectified using affine transformation.

Approximate scale                  Protected area boundary
0        metres       500         Preferred snowmobile route
                                  Camping discouraged Inside of this area
                                  N
Site of Special Sciè ific Inte?est No. 11

Map B - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX

                                                                                  N


Photography, 9 February 1900                - Protected area boundary
                                             • Survey marks
                                             × Boundary signpost


0                  metros                  100


Orthophoto positional accuracy : +/- 2m
Protected Area boundary origin of coordinates : 
Station EB, Camp Area Plano Datum 1901, WGS72.
DOSLI survey; 37/142


2
28
Map C - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.XX
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 11

                                                                                  N


                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                

29
Figure 1 - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus :
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. (1)
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX

Perspective view from 215°SW

                      Lower Erebus Hut (USAP)

            Mt Erebus
            Summit

Tramway Ridge

Upper Erebus Hut (USAP)

SCI Not[?]
NZ
HELIPAD
NZ AIR
NZ
Preferred snowmobile route
            Helicopter Pad
30

EXTENSION OF THE EXPIRY DATES FOR
SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

The Representatives

Recalling Recommendation XIII-7 and XIV-4

Noting that:

i)     experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans for
       these sites had shown them to be an effective means of reducing
       the risks of harmful interference in areas of special scientific
       interest

ii)    no change to the Management Plans had been proposed by SCAR

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.     The date of expiry of Site Numbers 1, 3, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
       19, 20, 21, be extended from 31 December 1995 to 31 December
       2000.

2.     They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with
       paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VII-3, that the
       Management Plans are observed.
MEASURE 4

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM:
NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

The Representatives,

Recalling the Measures in Recommendations 1-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16,
and XIV-8.

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure, subject to approval in
accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty; that the following historic
monuments be added to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the
Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9 and that thereafter
they be accorded the respect and protection required by the Recommendations recalled above.

61.  Port Lockroy, Base A, on Goudier Island, off Wiencke Island, Antarctic
Peninsula (Lat 64° 49' S, Long 63° 31' W). Of historic importance as an
Operation Tabarin base and for scientific research.

62.  Argentine Islands, Base F (Wordie House), South-west corner of Winter Island,
one of the group known as the Argentine Islands (Lat 65° 15' S, Long 64°
16' W). Of historic interest as an example of an early British scientific base.

63.  Horseshoe Island, Base Y, Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land (Lat 67° 49' S,
Long 67° 18' W). Noteworthy as a relatively unaltered and completely equipped
base of a later period. Blaiklock, the refuge hut nearby, is taken to be an integral
part of the base.

64.  Stonington Island, Base E, Northern end of Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay,
West Graham Land (Long 68° 11' S, 67° 00' W). Of historical importance in
the early period of exploration and later British Antarctic Survey (BAS) history
of the 1960s and 70s.

65.  Message Post, Svend Foyn Island. A pole with a box attached was placed on 16
January 1895 during the whaling expedition of Henryk Bull and Captain Leonard
Kristensen of the ship "Antarctica". It was examined and found intact by the
British Antarctic Expedition of 1898-1900 and then sighted from the beach by the
USS Edisto in 1956 and USC&GS Glacier in 1965 (latitude approximately 71°
52' S, longitude 171° 10' E).

66.  Prestrud's Cairn, at the foot of main bluff Scott Nunataks, Queen Alexandra
Mountains. A small rock cairn at the foot of the main bluff on the north side of

5/12 tewgdrf/measure4
2

the nunataks by Lieutenant K Prestud on 3 December 1911 during the 
Norwegian Antarctic Expedition of 1910-1912 (latitude 77° 12' S, longitude 154° 
30' W).

67.  Rock Shelter "Granite House", Cape Geology, Granite Harbour. This shelter was 
constructed in December 1911 for use as a field kitchen by Taylor's second 
geological excursion during the British Antarctic Expedition of 1910-1913. It was 
enclosed on three sides with granite boulder walls and used as a sledge to form 
a roof tree which supported seal skins anchored by heavy rocks (latitude 77° 
00' E, longitude 162° 32' E). A 1981 inspection of the "house" found it in good 
condition although the sledge had begun to disintegrate. The most recent visit to 
the site in 1990 reported that this deterioration was accelerating.

68.  Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay. An 
emergency depot, consisting of a sledge loaded with supplies and equipment, was 
place on 25 January 1913 by the British Antarctic Expedition at the close of the 
1910-1913 expedition. The depot was established by the crew of the Terra Nova 
to provide security in the event the ship was unable to return and pick them up 
(latitude 74° 56' S, longitude 163° 48' E). In 1994, the sledge and supplies were 
removed in order to stabilise their condition as wind and scoria particles had 
started to cause rapid deterioration.

69.  Message Post, Cape Crozier. Erected on 22 January 1902 by Captain Robert F 
Scott's Discovery Expedition (the National Antarctic Expedition of 1901-1904) 
and consists of a post to which a metal cylinder was attached containing an 
account of the Expedition's movements. It was intended to provide information 
for the expedition relief ships (latitude 77° 27' S, longitude 169° 16' E). The 
message post, although weathered, still stands, its grain blasted into high relief 
by countless storms. The record cylinder no longer exists.

70.  Message Post, Cape Wadworth, Coulman Island. A metal cylinder nailed to a 
red pole 8 metres above sea level placed by Captain R F Scott on 15 January 
1902. He also painted the rocks behind the post red and white to make it more 
conspicuous (latitude 73° 19'S, longitude 169° 47' E).

71.  Whaler's Bay Whaling Station, Whaler's Bay, Deception Island. Established in 
1906 by Captain Adolfo Andresen. Of historical importance as an example of an 
Antarctic whaling station.

5/12 tewgdrf/measure4
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(submitted by New Zealand)

NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS: SUGGESTED GUIDELINES
FOR THE DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8.

Recommend to their Governments that Guidelines for the Designation of Historic Sites
and/or Monuments be approved to provide assistance for parties in determining sites for
the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the proposing Government
or Governments".

Proposed Suggested Guidelines

It is proposed that parties who might wish to nominate particular historic sites and or
monuments for the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the
proposing Government or Governments" consider the suggested guidelines and note that
the proposed sites and or monuments could contain one or more of the following:

* A particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of
Antarctica occured at the place;

* A particular association with a person who played an important role in the
history of science or exploration of Antarctica;

* A particular association with a notable feat of endurance or achievement;

* Representative of, or forms part of, some wide-ranging activity that has been
important in the development of khowledge of Antarctica;

* Particular technical or architectural value in its materials, design or method of
construction;

* The potential, through study, to reveal information or has the potential to
educate people about significant human activities in Antarctica;

* Symbolic or commemorative value for people of many nations.
34

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(submitted by New Zealand)

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS : AMENDMENT

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8.

Recommend to their Governments that an amendment of the text describing Historic
Site Number 14 which is contained in the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and
Described by the proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation
VII-9, be approved and thereby continue to guarantee its full protection and respect as
envisaged by the Recommendations noted above.

Proposed Amendment to Listing:

Site Number 14: Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay, Scott Coast

This listing is currently described as "Remains of rock shelter".

It should be described as "Site of ice cave". The final sentence in this listing should also
be amended to read "the party spent the winter of 1912 in this ice cave".

A copy of the text with the proposed amendment is attached.
The Parties:

Recalling the requests made by ATCM XVII and ATCM XVIII that SCAR 
should assist Parties in reviewing and revising Management Plans to conform with 
the provisions of the Protocol, and consider how a model could be developed 
to facilitate the preparation of new and revised Management Plans.

Recognising that a uniform model for such plans would eliminate repetition 
and would make them easier to use.

Recommend to their Governments;

that the structure of the Management Plan for 
Specially Protected Area No. ................,
adopted under ................................
be regarded as a model for the preparation 
for all new and revised Management Plans 
under Annex V for protected areas.
XIX- : Antarctic Protected Area System : Specially Protected Areas                                  36

Specially Protected Area nr 24 : Pointe-Geologie Archipelago (Jean 
Rostand, Alexis Carrel, Lamarck and Claude Bernard Islands, Bon Docteur 
Nunatak and Marine Emperor Penguin Breeding Colony).

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan for the above area has been approved by the 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that the four above mentionned islands, nunatak and the breeding 
emperor penguin colony is a representative area of biological, geological and 
aesthetic values.

The area contains various terrestrial Species and therefore provides a 
particular interesting scientific ground. Long-term research and monitoring 
programmes on bird colonies and geology are in progress and have been since 
1952.

Recommend to their Governments that the following area is inserted in Annex 
B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the annexed Management Plan:

Specially Protected Area nr 24 .

JEAN ROSTAND, ALEXIS CARREL, LAMARCK AND CLAUDE BERNARD 
ISLANDS, BON DOCTEUR NUNATAK AND BREEDING MARINE 
EMPEROR PENGUIN COLONY (140 to 140° 02' E; 66° 39' 30" to 66° 40' 
30" S) in the heart of Pointe - Geologie Archipelago, coastal area of Adelie 
Land in the vicinity of Astrolabe Glacier.
39

ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. --
POINTE-GEOLOGIE ARCHIPELAGO

JEAN ROSTAND, ALEXIS CARREL, LAMARCK AND CLAUDE BERNARD ISLANDS,
BON DOCTEUR NUNATAK AND MARINE EMPEROR PENGUINS BREEDING COLONY.

1. DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

Four islands and the breeding site of Emperor penguins are proposed for a new Antarctic Specially
Protected Area on the ground that it provides a representative sample of aesthetic, biologic and
geologic values of terrestrial antarctic ecosystems.

One mammal specie, Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) and various bird species are nesting
here : Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) ; South Polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki); Adelie
penguin (pygoscelis adeliae) ; Wilson's storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) ; Southern giant petrel
(Macronectes giganteus) ; Snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea) ; Cape petrel (Daption capensis).

Well-marked hills display assymetrical transverse profiles with gently dipping northern slopes
compared to the steeper southern ones. The terrain is affected by a lot of cracks and fractures
leading to very rough surfaces. The basement rocks mainly consit of sillimanite, cordierite and
garnet-rich gneisses which are intruded by abundant dikes of pink anatexites. The lowest parts of the
islands are covered by morainic boulders (few centimeters to more than a meter across).

Long-term research and monitoring programmes have been continuing a long time already (since
1952 or 1964 according to the species). A data base implemented in 1981 is directed by C.E.B.C.
(Centre d'Etudes biologiques de Chizé).

The Emperor penguins breeding colony is a site of special scientific interest which could further be
included in the Convention on Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources Environmental
Monitoring Programme (CCAMLR/CEMP) in order to achieve the Convention requirements.

.../.
- 2 - >8

            90'W                  SOUTH                   90'E
                                   POLE
                                                 TERRE ADELIE
                                                  (France)
DUMONT D'URVILLE SEA

                         138'                  140'                  142'

                         66'
                            Glac[?] du
                            Pourquoi Pas ?
                         135'
                            Glac[?] du
                            Commandant Charcot
                         67'
                            WILKES
                            LAND
                                                    Pointe Géologie
Glacier du Français      Glacier de l'Astrolabe   Glac[?] de la Zélée
TERRE ADELIE
                                                    GEORGE V
                                                    LAND

Map 1. Location of Terre Adélie and Pointe Géologie Area. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- 3 - 39

Map 2. Pointe Géologie Archipelago showing the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (dotted lines) and avifauna breeding sites. The South polar skuas territories and the Wilson's storm petrels nests are not mapped (see table 1).The additional access of terrestrial vehicles to the continent (Nunatak) is indicated with large arrows.

Colonies of
□ Adélie penguins
 Southern giant petrels
* Snow petrels
△ Cape petrels
▼ landing point
■ building

-66°39'30"
        ↑
-66°40'
Dumont d'Urville
station
Pétrels Is.

C. Bernard Is.

Lamasck Is.

J. Rostand Is.

Emperor Penguins
breeding colony

A. Carrel Is.

Nunatak du
Bon Docteur

Glacier de
l'Astrolabe

0     100   200m
- 4 -
yd

2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of Pointe-Géologie area aims to :
* prevent unnecessary disturbance on the area face to the growing flux of cruising tourist ship.
* permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere.
* avoid major change to the structure and composition of flora and fauna and the association of different species of vertebrates harboured in the area, which therefore constitutes one of the most representative for both faunistic and scientific interest on Adelie coast.
* permit research on ethological, ecological, physiological and biochemical programmes in progress especially those related to demographic monitoring and impact assessment of surrounding human activities comprising tourism. Physiology and biochemistry programmes relating to fasting mecanisms and thermogenesis of emperror penguins could be pursued in compliance with permit provisions.
* permit research in geology with a particular attention to the programmation of visits, especially when thermomechanical means for sampling are required.

3. MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The plan is kept under review to ensure that the values of the area are wholly protected. Any direct management action to the area would be subject to an environmental impact assessment before being undertaken.

Inspection visits are restricted to essential management purposes.

4. PERIOD OF DESIGNATION
    designated
The area is designed under ATCM recommendations as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area for an indefinite period.

5. MAPS

Map 2 shows with dotted lines location of each island and other zones of the area inside Pointe-Géologie Archipelago.

6. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features.

Jean ROSTAND, Alexis CARREL, LAMARCK and Claude BERNARD Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak and Emperor penguins breeding colony are situated in the heart of Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, coastal area of Adélie Land (140° to 140°02'E ; 66°39'30" to 66°40'30"S).

The area consists of the southernmost rock exposure of the Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, between the Petrels Island and the western edge of the Astrolabe glacier. It is a very large ice free ground within Adélie Land.

As a whole, the surface of the outcropping rocks does not exceed 2 square kilometers. The highest points are distributed along NE-SW ridges (Cl. Bernard Island : 47.6 m ; J.B. Lamarck Island : 22.2 m ; J. Rostand Island : 36.39 m ; Carrel Island : 28.24 m and Nunatak : 28.50 m). During the summer, only the southern flanks of the islands are still covered by compressed snow caps.

There are no boundary markers since natural features delimit the wholly protected islands. However, markers could further be set up in Nunatak.

No tracks or roads exist in the area.
- 5 -

Table 1. Annual breeding pairs of seabirds in the French Antarctic Specially Protected Area(SPA). The population breeding within the SPA is given compared to the Pointe Geologie (PG) population (from Thomas 1986).

Islands                  Emperor     Adélie      South       Snow        Cape        Wilson's     Southern giant
                        penguin     penguin     polar skua  petrei      petrel      storm petrel petrel

C. Bernard                  -           3421        5           153         192         178         -
Lamarck                     -           1007        1           38          15          45          -
J. Rostand                  -           4793        3           53          18          35          11
A. Carrel                   -           4075        6           25          -           72          -
Nunatak                     -           1961        1           11          -           41          -
Emperor Penguin             3119        -           -           -           -           -           -
Breeding Colony

Total                       3119        15257       16          280         225         371         11

%SPA/PG                     100         71          67          36          68          31          79

Table 2. Presence of birds on breeding colonies.

                        Emperor     Adélie      South       Snow        Cape        Wilson's     Southern giant
                        penguin     penguin     polar skua  petrel      petrel      storm petrel petrel

first arrival           March       October     October     September   October     November    July
first laying            May         November    November    November    November    December    October
last departure          January     March       March       March       March       March       April

Table 3. Sensibility to human disturbance and status of the Pointe Geologie populations.

                        Emperor     Adélie      South       Snow        Cape        Wilson's     Southern giant
                        penguin     penguin     polar skua  petrel      petrel      storm petrel petrel

sensibility to         High        Medium      Low         Medium      High        High        High
human disturbance

status 1952-1984       decreasing  increasing  stable      ?           ?           ?           decreasing
status 1984-1993        stable      increasing  stable      stable      stable      ?           stable
- 6 -
42

ii) Identification of restricted or prohibited zones.

Access to every part of the area is prohibited unless authorized by a permit.

Location of breeding colonies is shown on the map. The birds are present on colonies from October 
to March, except Emperor penguins which breed in winter (Table 2). Their sensibility to human 
disturbance varies depending on the species (Table 3). The implantation of the Dumont d'Urville 
station has resulted in a drastic decrease of the populations of Emperor penguins and Southern giant 
petrels in Pointe-Géologie Archipelago. Since the last ten years the breeding areas of these birds are 
protected and the populations are now consecutively stable (Table 3).

Anyone, except permit holders, is not allowed to approach or to disturb the Emperor penguins 
colony in any manner when incubating eggs from mid-July to mid-December when the chicks fledge. 
The particularly sensitive Emperor penguins are equally protected beyond the definite limits of their 
breeding area since the colony is not always located at the same place.

The southeastern part of Jean ROSTAND Island is designated as a Restricted Zone in order to 
preserve the remaining breeding colony of Southern giant petrels. All access to the Restricted Zone 
is prohibited during the breeding period from August to February. The access is restricted to one 
ornithologist permit holder in order to monitore the population three times each year. The boundary 
off the Restricted Zone is defined by a 20 meters width buffer zone around the colony and is marked 
on the soil by paintings. The prohibition of access to the Restricted Zone shall be for an indefinite 
period, but shall be subject to reevaluation each time the Management Plan is reviewed.

iii) Location of structures in the area.

Prevost hut and a shelter take place in ROSTAND Island. There are no other building anywhere else 
in the area.

iv) Location in or near the area of other "Antarctic Specially Protected Areas" or "Antarctic 
Specially Managed Areas".

The area nearby is being considered for 
it is likely that this area will be located within an "Antarctic Specially Managed Area" (ASMA) 
including Dumont d'Urville station and other surrounding areas of activities.

7. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED.

i) Access to and movement within the area.

No helicopters, nor terrestrial vehicles are authorized either to access or within the area. No 
overflight all over the area, either by helicopters or other aeroplanes are authorized.

Access to the area is therefore only permitted by foot or by zodiacs (in summer).

However, very rare departures of terrestrial vehicles from Nunatak could be allowed, only when sea 
ice conditions hinder from proceeding otherwise and with a special attention to the presence of birds 
in the area.

Access to and movement within the area shall, in any case, be limited and vigilant in order to avoid 
unnecessary disturbance to birds, especially by crossing their pathways, and to ensure that breeding 
areas or their access are not damaged nor endangered.

.../...
- 7 - $3

ii) Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the area, including restrictions on time and 
place.

* compelling scientific activities which cannot be conducted elsewhere and for necessary 
management activities with regard to the special provisions relating to Emperor penguins and the 
Restricted Zone of Southern Giant Petrels (see § 6.ii).

* visitors granted entry in the area by a permit shall ensure that no disturbance will occur from their 
visits to monitoring programmes.

iii) The installation, modification or removal of structures.

No structures are to be erected in the area or scientific equipements installed except for essential 
scientific or management activities as specified in the permit.

iv) The location of field camps.

Only in case of safety tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage or 
disturbance to fauna.

v) Restriction on materials and organisms which may be brought into the area.

* no living animals or plant materials shall be deliberetely introduced in the area.
* no poultry products including food products containing uncooked dried eggs should be taken into 
the area.
* no chemicals shall be brought into the area, except chemicals which may be introduced for a 
compelling scientific purpose as specified in the permit. Any chemical introduced shall be removed 
from the area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted.
* fuel, food and other materials are not to be depoted in the area, unless required for essential 
purposes connected with the activity for which the permit has been granted. All such materials 
introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depot are not permitted.

vi) The taking of or harmful interference with nature flora and fauna.
taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance 
with a permit. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved, this should be in accordance with SCAR 
Code of conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, 
as a minimum standard.

vii) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit holder.

Collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by a permit holder is prohibited unless 
specified in permit for scientific or management purposes. However, debris of man-made origin may 
be removed from the area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for 
laboratory examination.

viii) The disposal of waste.

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the area.
ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan 
can continue to be met.

Permit may be granted to enter the area to carry out monitoring, other scientific programs and sites inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of biological materials and animals.

Permits shall specify the maximum number of persons allowed entry at any one time.

Visits to the area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the scientific and management objectives.

x) Requirements for reports of visits to the area.

The principal permit holder for each issued permit shall submit a report of activities conducted in the are using the accepted Visit Report form. This report shall be submitted to the appropriate authority as soon as practicable, but not latter than six months after the visit has taken place. Such report should be stored indefinitely by the authority to provide the documentation of human activities within the area necessary for good management.

8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

JOUVENTIN P., STAHL J-C., WEIMERSKIRCH. M. & MOUGIN J-L. 1984.

The seabirds of the French Subantarctic Islands and Adélie Land, their status and conservation. In status and conservation of the world's seabirds. Cambridge. ICPB technical publication N° 2 : 609 - 625.

THOMAS T., 1986. L'effectif des oiseaux nicheurs de Pointe-Géologie (Terre Adélie) et son évolution au cours des trente dernières années. L'Oiseau et la FRO, 56(4) : 349 - 368.

TREHEN P., 1992. Comprehensive Environnmental Evaluation of impact of the construction and operation of a scientific base at Dome C - Concorde base : 60 pp.

SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas report ; Cambridge, UK ; June-July 1992.

- * Such reports should, as appropriate according to national procedures, use the protected area Visit Report form accepted by SCAR.
DRAFT REPORT FOR TEWG

AGENDA ITEM 7b - THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF TOURISM

The TEWG was presented with a number of information papers regarding the nature, frequency, and scale of tourism activities in Antarctica (ATCM XIX/INFO 13, 19, 28, 29, 33, 34, 45, 46, 47, and 48). On this basis, the TEWG examined the issue of environmental impacts of tourism in relation to the Environmental Protocol and Recommendations VIII-9 and XVIII-1, and identified the following five substantive issues as warranting further action.

1. General Data and Information Needs

The TEWG noted that existing information generally is insufficient either to predict or to serve as a baseline for detecting environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism. Therefore, the TEWG recommends that the ATCPs should support activities toward:

(a) identifying sites that possibly have been or may be affected by tourism in Antarctica, and control sites that may be used for comparison;

(b) surveying selected sites and, if possible, determine indicator variables most likely to be sensitive to tourism activities; and

(c) determining and evaluating the effectiveness of measures taken to minimize the impact of different types, frequencies, timing, and levels of tourism activities.

2. Site Inventories

With respect to the goal specified in paragraph 1(a), the TEWG recommends that ATCPs take steps to identify sites affected by tourism, and to ensure the collection of reliable and comparable information regarding the nature, frequency, and scale of tourism activities.

A number of delegates commended the work being done by the United States on an Antarctic Site Inventory (ATCM XIX/INFO 47). This work contributes to meeting the information goals specified above, and helps provide baseline information to assess the potential environmental impacts of tourism.

The TEWG recommends to the ATCM that the protocols presented in INFO 47 be examined to determine their application for expanding the site inventory work more widely in Antarctica, and that the Parties cooperate as fully as possible in the development of an Antarctic site inventory.
3. Cumulative Impacts

To prevent irreversible, detrimental effects upon the Antarctic 
environment, the TEWG noted that there is an urgent need to 
consider not only the environmental impacts associated with 
tourist visits, but also the nature, magnitude, and trend of 
cumulative impacts of all human activities.

In this regard, the TEWG further noted that there is a need to 
design protocols and implement programs for detecting cumulative 
impacts.

There is also the need to elaborate procedures set out in Annex 1 
of the Protocol so that cumulative impacts may be adequately 
assessed. This would enable tour operators to be better informed 
of how to address cumulative impacts when preparing EIAs of their 
activities. The TEWG advises the ATCM to ask SCAR to address the 
issue of monitoring of cumulative impacts.

4. Monitoring

The TEWG recognized that baseline assessment and monitoring of 
selected sites must be sufficient to distinguish the impacts of 
tourism from the impacts of other human activities or from 
natural environmental variations or change. Therefore, the TEWG 
recommends that ATCPs seek SCAR's advice regarding the design of 
such baseline assessment and monitoring programs.

SCAR advised the TEWG (ATCM XIX, WP 24) that, subsequent to its 
workshops planned for September and October 1995, it should be 
possible to consider technical advice on the structure and 
development of these programs.

The TEWG noted that some ATCPs have performed perturbation 
experiments to verify cause-effect relationships and to measure 
possible adverse impacts of tourism. The TEWG also recognized 
that further, directed research may be valuable in determining 
appropriate techniques for managing tourism and other activities.

5. Methods for Ensuring Compliance

The TEWG recognized the importance of ensuring the compliance of 
tourism operators with the Protocol and all other measures 
designed to minimize potential environmental impacts on the 
Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated 
ecosystems.

The TEWG noted that one mechanism that could be considered to 
achieve such compliance is the application of flag state 
jurisdiction, using procedures similar to those already in use by 
CCAMLR. Such procedures call for flag state prosecutions and 
sanctions where there are infringements.

However, recognizing that many of the tourist vessels going to 

2
Antarctica operate under flags of non-Antarctic Treaty states, it 
was noted that enforcement through port state jurisdiction might 
also be used where appropriate.

The TEWG considered that this issue warranted discussion by the 
ATCM.

6. Education and Training

The TEWG noted that for the effective management of Antarctic 
visitor activities, and to help ensure the protection of the 
Antarctic environment, education and training programs are 
essential.

 
                                                                                  3
Item 10 (a) Environmental Monitoring of the Impacts of Human 
Activities in the Antarctic

1   The TEWG welcomed the SCAR-COMNAP report (ATCM WP 24) 
describing progress with environmental monitoring initiatives 
since XVIII ATCM.  It was noted that COMNAP was unable at present 
to propose a representative subset of facilities in Antarctica, 
considering that this should await agreement on monitoring 
protocols.

2   The TEWG noted that arrangements for two technical workshops 
had been finalised and that a preliminary report was expected to 
be made available at the XXth ATCM meeting in 1996.

3   The TEWG thanked SCAR for its report on incineration (ATCM 
WP 25).  The meeting agreed that it is important to seek means of 
reducing pollution caused by the use of incineration at Antarctic 
stations.  The SCAR proposals for minimising the use of 
incineration and the reduction of its impact in cases where 
incineration can not be avoided highlighted the need for two 
stage incineration with close temperature control, adequate 
filtering for particulate material and monitoring of flue gases 
to ensure optimal incinerator performance.  The present lack of 
appropriate ecotoxicological information made it difficult to 
determine internationally agreed emission limits for specific 
components.

4   The TEWG recommends that:

    *   Wherever practicable waste which is presently 
incinerated should be removed from Antarctica

    *   Where it is necessary to continue incineration, 
Parties should investigate means of minimising the impact of 
emissions

    *   Incinerators should only be operated by trained 
personnel.

5   The TEWG thanked the Korean delegation for information 
papers (ATCM INFO 51 and 53) on environmental monitoring at King 
Sejong Station.

10 (b) Data Requirements

The meeting received Information Paper No 81 in which Japan 
described a Centre it is establishing on Antarctic Environmental 
Monitoring which will also have the function of processing, 
management, storage and distribution of data.

The meeting noted advice from SCAR, Working Paper No 24, that it 
proposed to hold two technical workshops in late 1995 and that 
among other items these workshops would address:
- baseline data requirements; and
- data management.

It was agreed that this issue should be taken up at the next 
meeting of TEWG when the reports of the SCAR technical workshops 
could be considered.

10 (c)    Regulation of the Extraction, Use and Custody of 
Scientific Samples obtained in the Antarctic Expeditions.

The meeting noted SCAR-COMNAP Information Paper No 73 which 
advised that the inclusion of information on collections of 
scientific samples in the Antarctic Data Directory System would 
assist in the planning and development of Antarctic Research 
programs.

Item 11   Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures

TEWG considered a number of papers regarding environmental impact 
assessments procedures (ATCM WP 3, and ATCM INFO 8, 14, 37, 40, 55 
and 63). As a result, TEWG identified the following as key issues.

[handwritten text appears here]
11 (a) Implementation of Procedures of IEEs and CEEs

1     The United Kingdom Delegation submitted ATCM WP 3 concerning 
      the circulation of information on Environmental Impact Assessments. This 
      paper proposed that a list of completed Initial Environmental Evaluations 
      and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations carried out by each 
      Consultative Party during the preceding calendar year should be transmitted 
      to the Host Government of the next ATCM. The lists would be collated by 
      the Host Government and published as an Annex to the final Report of the 
      ATCM. The TEWG welcomed this initiative which would allow Parties to 
      meet their obligations in Annex I of the Protocol and to make EIA 
      information more accessible. TEWG recommends to the ATCM that this 
      proposal should come into operation from the end of the XIXth ATCM.

2     The TEWG considered a "Draft Guide on Environmental Impact 
      Assessment (EIA) of Activities in Antarctica" (ATCM INFO 14) submitted by 
      the United Kingdom. A number of delegations welcomed this Guide as a 
      useful contribution. Chile considered that the UK paper could be used as a 
      basis for the TEWG to develop a Guide for EIA for use by those planning 
      activities in Antarctica. Chile commented that such a Guide would help 
      ensure greater consistency in the preparation of EIAs.

3     ACTM INFO 63 submitted by New Zealand and South Africa, outlined 
      an approach they would take in respect of any changes required to an 
      activity previously described in a final CEE. This approach (the outcome of 
      which New Zealand and South Africa will report to ACTM XX) is as follows:
      * Review of the actual activity against the CEE
      * Reporting on the CEE implementation in the annual Exchange of 
      Information, eg - activities completed in the year, any changes from the CEE
      * Any changes from the original CEE to be treated in the same way as 
      the original activity for which the CEE was prepared.

4     The delegation of South Africa submitted two papers (ATCM INFO 37 
      and ATCM INFO 55) describing the development and the implementation of 
      an Environmental Health and Safety Management system adopted by the 
      South African Antarctic Programme. South Africa will advise on the 
      progress of this to the XXth ATCM.

11 (b) Examination of CEEs produced during 1994-95

5     The TEWG welcomed ATCM INFO 8 (Construction and Operation of a 
      Scientific Base at Dome C)and ATCM INFO 40 (Drilling Activity at Dome C, 
      Antarctica) from France and Italy, and complimented them on their 
      preparation of the final draft CEE for  Concordia Base located at Dome C.

6     Parties, who had forwarded comments on the draft CEE circulated by
France, noted that these comments had been taken into account in the revisions (ATCM INFO 8 and 40). TEWG noted that it did not have any further points or concerns to raise with regard to the CEEs. The TEWG commended France and Italy for providing a clear example of how compliance with Article 3 of Annex I of the Protocol can be met.      Some commeni noted 
that

7    The role of the TEWG in assessing CEEs was discussed. The meeting agreed that the TEWG should advise the ATCM on CEEs, according to Item 6(b) of the Final Report of the XVIII ATCM and Article 12 and Annex I of the Protocol.

Agenda Item 12 - The Antarctic Protected Area System

a) Revised and New Management Plans for SPAs and SSSIs

The UK and New Zealand delegations tabled ATCM WP 5 and ATCM WP 7 respectively which set out revised area descriptions and proposed management plans for the following Specially Protected Areas and Site of Special Scientific Interest:

SPA No. 13   Moe Island, South Orkney Islands;
SPA No. 15   Southern Powell Island and adjacent 
             islands, South Orkney Islands;
SSSI No. 11  Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, Ross 
             Island

The French delegation tabled ATCM WP 14 which set out an area description and proposed management plan for a proposed Specially Protected Area:

SPA No. 24   Pointe-Geologie, Terre Adelie.

The TEWG examined the above area descriptions and management plans and advised the XIX ATCM that, with minor modifications, they should be adopted as ....
and ....

The Australian delegation submitted ATCM WP 16 which advised Parties that the designations for two SSSIs in Wilkes Land expire on 31 December 1995. Several delegations pointed out that this was a more widespread problem.

Concerning the numbering of SPAs and SSSIs, the Dutch delegation suggested a new system, based on the use of three digits. The existing SPAs would be given numbers 101 through 123, the existing SSSIs 124 through 159 and new areas would be numbered starting with numbers 160.      As Team studied this momin    proposal has

A total of twelve SSSIs have expiry dates for their
management plans of 31st December 1995. The SSSIs 
are:

    SSSI No. 1   Cape Royds, Ross Island
SSSI No. 3    Barwick Valley, Victoria Land
    SSSI No. 8   Western shore of Admiralty Bay, King 
                  George Island

    SSSI No. 9   Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
    SSSI No. 13  Potter Peninsula, King George Island
    SSSI No. 14  Harmony Point, west coast of Nelson 
                  Island, South Shetland Islands
    SSSI No. 15  Cierva Point and offshore islands, 
                  Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
    SSSI No. 16  North-East Bailey Peninsula, Budd 
                  Coast, Wilkes Land
    SSSI No. 17  Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes 
                  Land
    SSSI No. 19  Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, 
                  Victoria Land
    SSSI No. 20  Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
    SSSI No. 21  Parts of Deception Island, South 
                  Shetland Islands

The TEWG agreed that for all protected areas with 
designations due to expire on or before 31st 
December 1995, the expiry dates should be extended 
to 31st December 2000. The TEWG advised the XIX ATCM 
that this be done and the proposal adopted in the 
form of ...

b)  Historic Sites and Monuments

The delegations of UK, New Zealand/Norway/UK, and 
Chile submitted proposals for new Historic Sites and 
Monuments (ATCM WP 4, ATCM WP 8, ATCM WP 21). The 
TEWG examined these proposals and advised the XIX 
ATCM that the following historic monuments be added 
to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and 
Described by the Proposing Government or 
Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9:

  No 61      Port Lockroy (Base A), Goudier Island, 
              Wiencke Island
  No 62      Argentine Islands (Base F), Winter Island, 
              Argentine Islands
  No 63      Horseshoe Island (Base Y), Marguerite Bay, 
              West Graham Land
  No 64      Stonington Island (Base E), Stonington 
              Island, Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land
  No 65      Message Post, Svend Foyn Island
  No 66      Prestrud's Cairn, Scott Nunataks, Queen 
              Alexandra Mountains
  No 67      Rock shelter "Granite House", Cape 
              Geology, Granite Harbour
  No 68      Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible
No 69    Island, Terra Nova Bay
No 70    Message post, Cape Crozier
         Message post, Cape Wadworth, Coulman 
         Island
No 71   Whalers Bay whaling station, Whalers Bay,
         Deception Island

The TEWG also examined a proposal from the dele/3tion
of New Zealand (ATCM WP9) to amend the descri ption
of Historic Site No. 14, and advised the XIX ATCM
that the ammendment be accepted as ...

The delegation of New Zealand tabled a Working Paper
which proposed guidelines for the designation of
historic sites and monuments (ATCM WP 9). These
guidelines, based on internationally accepted
criteria, were endorsed by several delegations. The
TEWG advised the XIXth ATCM that this proposal
should be adopted as ....

c)   Review and Implementation of the System

SCAR presented a series of papers concerning the
general development and improvement of the Antarctic
Protected Area System (ATCM WP 26, 27, and 28) in
response to requests from earlier ATCMs, and a
summary of the actions agreed at SSSI No. 2 Arrival
Heights, Ross Island (ATCM INFO 57). The delegation
of New Zealand and the USA also tabled an
information paper concerning SSSI No.2 (ATCM INFO
...). New Zealand also tabled a paper describing the
use of short summaries of protected area management
plans by field parties in the Ross Sea area (ATCM
INFO 59).

ATCM WP 26 examined the development by SCAR of
ecosystem matrices which could be used by the
Parties when considering the objectives,
distribution and location of protected areas. The
TEWG welcomed this work, and considered that the
matrices would be a useful basis for ensuring
representative examples of all ecosystems types are
included in the Antarctic Protected Area System. The
TEWG encouraged Parties to use the matrices when
selecting sites to be proposed as protected areas.

ATCM WP 27 introduced a model visit report for
recording information for all visits to protected
areas. The Representative of SCAR informed the Group
that the data collected by the use of such reports
would facilitate revision of the management plans
and provide a valuable scientific archive of usage.
The TEWG considered that the report format would be
valuable in compiling and exchanging information on
visits to protected areas.

ATCM WP 28 proposed a model format for management
plans for protected areas. This used Moe Island (SPA
9
13) as an example. The TEWG considered that the use 
of a model format for management plans would help to 
make them easier to use by those visiting protected 
areas, and make the plans more consistent with each 
other. The TEWG advised the XIX ATCM that this plan 
be used as a model for developing management plans 
for protected areas, and that .... should be 
adopted.

/c?
Agenda item 13a. Marine Pollution

A paper from Chile (19th ATCM, WP 22) described the 
organization being established for oil spill control in 
the northern Antarctic Peninsula region.

The Russian delegation made the comment that this is a 
very good development and that they hope that a similar 
arrangement may be established on King George Island 
where many research stations are located.

Agenda item 13b.

The TEWG examined the working paper 11 by the 
Netherlands. This raised concerns that the prohibition on 
disposal of nuclear waste in Antarctica contained in 
article V.1 of the Antarctic Treaty might be affected if 
negotiations on a nuclear waste convention were to lead 
to a convention to which all CPs become parties. Article 
V.2 of the AT specifies that the rules established under 
such a convention would apply in Antarctica. The TEWG 
advises the ATCM to recommend to the Governments that 
insofar as they will be involved in the negotiations of a 
nuclear waste convention, they should have as a priority 
objective the inclusion of provisions prohibiting the 
transport of nuclear waste to and the disposal of nuclear 
waste within the Antarctic Treaty Area.

The TEWG examined working paper 15 by the Netherlands on 
the concept of Best Available Techniques. The TEWG noted 
that in determining whether a set of procedures, 
facilities or methods of operation constituted the best 
available techniques, issues including the economic 
feasibility of such techniques and time limits for 
installation should be taken into account. With this 
understanding the TEWG recommends to the ATCM that it:

1. invite COMNAP to consider, in consultation with SCAR, 
the desirability and feasibility of employing the concept 
of Best Available Technique for the protection of the 
Antarctic environment, and to recommend appropriate 
action to the next Consultative Meeting;

2. include an examination of this matter in the agenda of 
the next Consultative Meeting.

13 c. Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna

Introduction and Continued Presence of Non-native Species 
of Animals and Plants

The meeting examined Working Paper 29 by Australia 
which raised concern about the introduction and continued 
presence of non-native species of animals and plants to 
Antarctica through human activities. The Parties noted 
that Article 4 of Annex II of the Environmental Protocol 
requires that no species of animal or plant not native to 
the Antarctic area shall be introduced onto land or ice
//
shelves, or into water in the Antarctic Treaty area 
except in accordance with a permit.

The meeting acknowledged concerns about the 
introduction and continued presence of non-native species 
of animals and plants. Some delegations pointed out that 
new species may become present due to climate change or 
by natural means and that it is important to be sure 
before removing a species that they have been introduced 
by human activity. One delegation raised concerns about 
the dispersion of species within Antarctica by natural 
means and by human activity. The meeting agreed that 
before removing a species from Antarctica it should be 
reasonably established that the species had been 
introduced by human activity.

The T WG recommended to the ATCM that it urge Parties to 
Parties were urged to:

  Examine all their facilities in Antarctica 
  to identify any non-native species of 
  animals or plants present which have been 
  introduced by human activity.

  Remove any such non-native species of 
  animals or plants found in or associated 
  with those facilities unless they are 
  present in accordance with an appropriate 
  permit.

  Take action as necessary within their 
  authority to ensure that tourists and non-
  government activities do not result in the 
  introduction of non-native species of 
  animals or plants into Antarctic.

12
17. Global change

The meeting noted the papers by SCAR (ATCM Info 75) and 
ASOC (ATCM Info 56). SCAR reported that lack of 
resources made it impossible to co-ordinate the many 
fields of existing research and stimulate new areas on as 
wide a front as had originally been envisaged.
Accordingly GLOCHANT had been requested to rank the key 
research issues to provide a clearer focus. SCAR had 
appointed a project officer to improve interdisciplinary 
communication and the links developed with the 
International Geosphere-Biosphere Program, the World 
Climate Research Program and the International Arctic 
Science Committee.

Whilst it is not yet clear that atmospheric warming 
observed in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula was 
necessarily continent-wide, the meeting heard of strong 
evidence from glaciology, oceanography, meteorology, 
geology, geophysics and biology indicating significant 
regional changes in the Antarctic climate. It was widely 
recognized that indications of global change were likely 
to be most easily detected in polar regions which could 
therefore be considered as early warning areas for 
impacts on the rest of the world. The potential global 
importance of these for changes in world sea levels, and 
weather patterns was emphasised and attention was drawn 
to the need for coherent and sustained research to 
improve the accuracy of future predictions. Many 
delegation commented on the importance and value of 
continued Antarctic research to an understanding of 
global change, and of the need to ensure that this was 
well understood by governments..

The meeting welcomed the linkages between SCAR and the 
global programmes. Delegates drew the attention of SCAR 
to the value of having good links with the Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Attention should also be paid 
to linking Antarctic marine and terrestrial biological 
research with the global programme BIODIVERSITAS. SCAR 
agreed to consider these suggestions.

N o t e s  r e c o m m e n d s  to  ATCM  the  Party  to  draw 
the  attention  of  the  IPCC  and  Framework  Climate 
Change  Convention  to  the  importance  of  Antarctic 
...  the  study  of  climate  change  and  the  need 
for  good  linkages  with  SCAR  
13
TEWG

REPORT ON THE DEBATE HELD ON
11 MAY 1995 ABOUT THE ROLE OF THE TEWG

Many delegations expressed their views on the nature, mandate and functions of the TEWG, and on the support mechanisms that the TEWG would need to be effective in its role of giving advice to the ATCM.

The following important points were mentioned on a number of occasions:

1.    The TEWG is an advisory group constituted by the ATCM, pending the entry into force of the Protocol, to provide advice and recommendations to the Plenary of the ATCM on scientific and technical aspects regarding the protection of the environment in Antarctica. Most participants to the debate believed that the TEWG should have the basic functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection to be established under the Protocol.

2.    The TEWG should be composed of specialists with appropriate environmental scientific or technical competences.

3.    The need for the TEWG to be a standing group in order to tackle the diversity of issues and emergencies.

4.    Consequently, the need:
      •  for meetings or work by correspondence or other means as required between ordinary sessions which take place during the ATCMs,
      •  for ad hoc specialists subgroups.

5.    The need for secretariat support for the TEWG was stressed. It would be essential to circulate in due time the numerous documents from the TEWG, to ensure the continuity of data collection and the interface, relations, two-way information and coordination with other bodies of the System or with other organizations.

6.    The need to improve the working conditions of the TEWG, in particular the need to:
      •  send documents in advance to the members of the TEWG,
      •  pass in advance to the TEWG items on the agenda for the

14
ATCM, so that the documents can be distributed beforehand 
and the work of the TEWG itself can be organized in 
advance of the regular sessions.

7. Consensus cannot be the only way for an effective advisory body to 
operate. In the absence of consensus, the report of the TEWG shall reflect all 
views expressed.

The TEWG maintains its role as set out in the following 
report and recommends to ATCM that it 
confirm the role it requires TEWG to take.

15-
Norwegian Antarctic Expedition of 1910-1912 (latitude 77° 12' S, longitude 154° 
30' W).

.. Rock Shelter "Granite House", Cape Geology, Granite Harbour. This shelter was 
constructed in December 1911 for use as a field kitchen by Taylor's second 
geological excursion during the British Antarctic Expedition of 1910-1913. It was 
enclosed on three sides with granite boulder walls and used as a sledge to form 
a roof tree which supported seal skins anchored by heavy rocks (latitude 77° 
00' E, longitude 162° 32' E). A 1981 inspection of the "house" found it in good 
condition although the sledge had begun to disintegrate. The most recent visit to 
the site in 1990 reported that this deterioration was accelerating.

.. Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay.  An 
emergency depot, consisting of a sledge loaded with supplies and equipment, was 
place on 25 January 1913 by the British Antarctic Expedition at the close of the 
1910-1913 expedition. The depot was established by the crew of the Terra Nova 
to provide security in the event the ship was unable to return and pick them up 
(latitude 74° 56' S, longitude 163° 48' E). In 1994, the sledge and supplies were 
removed in order to stabilise their condition as wind and scoria particles had 
started to cause rapid deterioration.

.. Message Post, Cape Crozier. Erected on 22 January 1902 by Captain Robert F 
Scott's Discovery Expedition (the National Antarctic Expedition of 1901-1904) 
and consists of a post to which a metal cylinder was attached containing an 
account of the Expedition's movements. It was intended to provide information 
for the expedition relief ships (latitude 77° 27' S, longitude 169° 16' E). The 
message post, although weathered, still stands, its grain blasted into high relief 
by countless storms. The record cylinder no longer exists.

.. Message Post, Cape Wadworth, Coulman Island. A metal cylinder nailed to a 
red pole 8 metres above sea level placed by Captain R F Scott on 15 January 
1902. He also painted the rocks behind the post red and white to make it more 
conspicuous (latitude 73° 19' S, longitude 169° 47' E).

.. Whalers Bay Whaling Station, Whalers Bay, Deception Island. Established in 
1906 by Captain Adolfo Andresen. Of historical importance as an example of an 
Antarctic whaling station. A map of the Site is attached

[Note for the Secretariat:   
1.   Check numbering of the Historic Sites
2.   Check map for Whalers Bay]

5
X1
Measure ... (1995)

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS: AMENDMENT

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

    That an amendment of the description of Historic Site Number 14, which is 
    contained in the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the 
    proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9, be 
    approved.

Amendment to Listing:

Site Number 14: Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay, Scott Coast

This listing is currently described as "Remains of rock shelter".

It should be described as "Site of ice cave". The final sentence in this listing should also 
be amended to read "the party spent the winter of 1912 in this ice cave".



X2
Measure ... (1995)

XIX-_ : Antarctic Protected Area System:
Specially Protected Areas

Specially Protected Area No. 24: Pointe-Geologie Archipelago (Jean Rostand, Alexis Carrel, Lamarck and Claude Bernard Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan for the above area has been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that the Pointe Geologie Archipelago is important as a representative area of considerable biological, geological and aesthetic value; contains a high diversity of animals and plants and is an important area for scientific research; and that long-term research and monitoring programmes on bird colonies and geology have been conducted in the area since 1952.

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of the Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

That the following area shall be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the annexed Management Plan:

    Specially Protected Area No. ....

Jean Rostand, Alexis Carrel, Lamarck and Claude Bernard Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak and Breeding Marine Emperor Penguin Colony (140 to 140° 02' E; 66° 39' 30" to 66° 40' 30" S) in the heart of Pointe-Geologie Archipelago, coastal area of Adelie Land in the vicinity of Astrolabe Glacier.

(necessary [?] not in file 1.)

73
Annex to Measure --- (1995)
ANTARCTICSPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No.--
POINTE-GEOLOGIE ARCHIPELAGO

JEAN ROSTAND, ALEXIS CARREL, LAMARCK AND CLAUDE BERNARD ISLANDS,
BON DOCTEUR NUNATAK AND MARINE EMPEROR PENGUINS BREEDING COLONY.

Management Plan

1. DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

Four islands and the breeding site of Emperor penguins are proposed for a new Antarctic Specially
Protected Area on the ground that it provides a representative sample of aesthetic, biologic and
geologic values of terrestrial antarctic ecosystems.

One mammal specie, Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddelli) and various bird species are nesting
here : Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) ; South Polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki); Adelie
penguin (pygoscelis adeliae) ; Wilson's storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) ; Southern giant petrel
(Macronectes giganteus) ; Snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea) ; Cape petrel (Daption capensis).

Well-marked hills display assymetrical transverse profiles with gently dipping northern slopes
compared to the steeper southern ones. The terrain is affected by a lot of cracks and fractures
leading to very rough surfaces. The basement rocks mainly consist of sillimanite, cordierite and
garnet-rich gneisses which are intruded by abundant dikes of pink anatexites. The lowest parts of the
islands are covered by morainic boulders (few centimeters to more than a meter across).

Long-term research and monitoring programmes have been continuing a long time already (since
1952 or 1964 according to the species). A data base implemented in 1981 is directed by C.E.B.C.
(Centre d'Etudes biologiques de Chizé).

The Emperor penguins breeding colony is a site of special scientific interest which could further be
included in the Convention on Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources Environmental
Monitoring Programme (CCAMLR[CEMP]) in order to achieve the Convention requirements

86
90'W                SOUTH                90'E
                   POLE
                        TERRE ADELIE
                        (France)
180'
DUMONT D'URVILLE SEA
136'                  138'                  120'                  142'
Glacier du
Pourquoi Pas?
66'-                         Glacier du
                         Commandant Charcot
Wilkes
Land
TERRE ADELIE
Pointe Geologie
Glacier cal[?]otte
Glacier de l'Hel[?]
George V
Land
Map 1 Location of Terre Adelie and Pointe Geologie Area[sic]
25
Map 2. Pointe Géologie Archipelago showing the Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(coticec lines) and avifauna breeding sites. The South polar skuas territorics and the
Wilson's storm petrels nests are not mapped (see table 1).The additicnal access of
terrestrial vehicles to the continent (Nunatak) is incicated with large arrows.

Colonies of
□ Adélie penguins
○ Southern giant petrels
* Snow petrels
△ Cape petrels
> landing point
I building

                        66°39'30"
                         ↑
                         N
Dumont d'Urville
station
Pétrels Is.

                        66°40'
C. Bernard Is.

Lama?ck Is.

J. Rostand Is.
Emperor Penguins
breeding colony
A. Carrel Is.

Nuratak du
Bon Docteur

  0     100   2000
2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of Pointe-Géologie area aims to :
* prevent unnecessary disturbance on the area face to the growing flux of cruising tourist ship.
* permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere.
* avoid major change to the structure and composition of flora and fauna and the association of
different species of vertebrates harboured in the area, which therefore constitutes one of the most
representative for both faunistic and scientific interest on Adelie coast.
* permit research on ethological, ecological, physiological and biochemical programmes in progress
especially those related to demographic monitoring and impact assessment of surrounding human
activities comprising tourism. Physiology and biochemistry programmes relating to fasting mecanisms
and thermogenesis of emperor penguins could be pursued in compliance with permit provisions.
* permit research in geology with a particular attention to the programmation of visits, especially
when thermomechanical means for sampling are required.

3. MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The plan is kept under review to ensure that the values of the area are wholly protected. Any direct
management action to the area would be subject to an environmental impact assessment before being
undertaken.

Inspection- visits are restricted to essential management purposes.

4. PERIOD OF DESIGNATION
designated
The area is designea under ATCM recommendations as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area for an
indefinite period.

5. MAPS

Map 2 shows with dotted lines location of each island and other zones of the area inside Pointe-
Géologie Archipelago.

6. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features.

Jean ROSTAND, Alexis CARREL, LAMARCK and Claude BERNARD Islands, Bon Docteur
Nunatak and Emperor penguins breeding colony are situated in the heart of Pointe-Géologie
Archipelago, coastal area of Adelie Land (140 to 140°02'E ; 66°39'30" to 66°40'30"S).

The area consists of the southernmost rock exposure of the Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, between
the Petrels Island and the western edge of the Astrolabe glacier. It is a very large ice free ground
within Adelie Land.

As a whole, the surface of the outcropping rocks does not exceed 2 square kilometers. The highest
points are distibuted along NE-SW ridges (Cl. Bernard Island : 47.6 m ; J. Rostand Island : 36.30 m ; Carrel Island : 28.24 m and Nunatak : 28.50 m). During the
summer, only the southern flanks of the islands are still covered by compressed snow caps.
There are no boundary markers since natural features delimit the wholly protected islands. However.
markers could further be set up in Nunatak.

No tracks or roads exist in the area.
ble 1. Annual breeding pairs of seabirds in the French Specially Protected Ares(SPA). The 
pulation breeding within the SPA is given compared to the Pointe Géologie (PG) popuration (from 
omas 1986).

|                | Emperor  | Adélie   | South    | Snow     | Cape     | Wilson's | Southern giant |
|                | penguin  | penguin  | polar skua| petrel   | petrel   | storm petrel | petrel         |
|lands          |          |          |          |          |          |          |                |
|Bernard         | -        | 3421     | 5        | 153      | 192      | 178      | -              |
|marck          |          | 1007     | 1        | 38       | 15       | 45       | -              |
|Rostand        | -        | 4793     | 3        | 53       | 18       | 35       | 11             |
|Carrel         | -        | 4075     | 6        | 25       | -        | 72       | -              |
|atck           | -        | 1961     | 1        | 11       | -        | 41       | -              |
|mperor Penguin | 3119     | -        | -        | -        | -        | -        | -              |
|Breeding Colony|          |          |          |          |          |          |                |
|otal           | 3119     | 15257    | 16       | 280      | 225      | 371      | 11             |
|                |          |          |          |          |          |          |                |
|SPA/PG         | 100      | 71       | 67       | 36       | 68       | 31       | 79             |
|                |          |          |          |          |          |          |                |

ble 2. Presence of birds on breeding colonies.

|                | Emperor  | Adélie   | South    | Snow     | Cape     | Wilson's | Southern giant |
|                | penguin  | penguin  | polar skua| petrel   | petrel   | storm petrel | petrel         |
|st arrival     | March    | October  | October  | September| October  | November | July           |
|st laying      | May      | November | November | November | November | December | October        |
|st depature    | January  | March    | March    | March    | March    | March    | April          |

ble 3. Sensibility to human disturtance and starus of the Pointe Géologie populations.

|                | Emperor  | Adélie   | South    | Snow     | Cape     | Wilson's | Southern giant |
|                | penguin  | penguin  | polar skua| petrel   | petrel   | storm petrel | petrel         |
|sitivity to     | High     | Medium   | Low      | Medium   | High     | High     | High           |
|man disturbance|          |          |          |          |          |          |                |
|atus 1982-1983 | docreasing| increasing| stable   | ?        | ?        | ?        | decreasing     |
|atus 1984-199? | stable    | increasing| stable   | stable   | stable   | ?        | stable         |

20
ii) Identification of restricted or prohibited zones.

Access to every part of the area is prohibited unless authorized by a permit.

Location of breeding colonies is shown on the map. The birds are present on colonies from October to March, except Emperor penguins which breed in winter (Table 2). Their sensibility to human disturbance varies depending on the species (Table 3). The implantation of the Dumont d'Urville petrels in Pointe-Géologie Archipelago. Since the last ten years the breeding areas of these birds are protected and the populations are now consecutively stable (Table 3).

Anyone, except permit holders, is not allowed to approach or to disturb the Emperor penguins colony in any manner when incubating eggs from mid-July to mid-December when the chicks fledge. The particularily sensitive Emperor penguins are equally protected beyond the definite limits of their breeding area since the colony is not always located at the same place.

The southeastern part of Jean ROSTAND Island is designated as a Restricted Zone in order to preserve the remaining breeding colony of Southern giant petrels. All access to the Restricted Zone is prohibited during the breeding period from August to February. The access is restricted to one ornithologist permit holder in order to monitore the population three times each year. The boundary off the Restricted Zone is defined by a 20 meters width buffer zone around the colony and is marked on the soil by paintings. The prohibition of access to the Restricted Zone shall be for an indefinite period, but shall be subject to reevaluation each time the Management Plan is reviewed.

iii) Location of structures in the area.

Prevost hut and a shelter take place in ROSTAND Island. There are no other building anywhere else in the area.

iv) Location in or near the area of other "Antarctic Specially Protected Areas" or "Antarctic Specially Managed Areas".
The area nearby is being considered for
it is likely that this area will be located within an "Antarctic Specially Managed Area" (ASMA)
including Dumont d'Urville station and other surrounding areas of activities.

7. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED.

i) Access to and movement within the area.

No helicopters, nor terrestrial vehicles are authorized either to access or within the area. No overflight all over the area, either by helicopters or other aeroplanes are authorized.

Access to the area is therefore only permited by foot or by zodiacs (in summer).

However, very rare departures of terrestrial vehicles from Nuna?ak could be allowed, only when sea ice conditions hinder from proceeding otherwise and with a special attention to the presence of birds in the area.

Access to and movement within the area shall, in any case, be limited and vigilant in order to avoid unecessary disturbance to birds, especially by crossing their pathways, and to ensure that breeding areas or their access are not damaged nor endangered.
ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the area, including restrictions on time and 
place.

* compelling scientific activities which cannot be conducted elsewhere and for necessary 
management activities with regard to the special provisions relating to Emperor penguins and the 
Restricted Zone of Southern Giant Petrels (see § 6.ii).

* visitors granted entry in the area by a permit shall ensure that no disturbance will occur from their 
visits to monitoring programmes.

iii) The installation, modification or removal of structures.

No structures are to be erected in the area or scientific equipements installed except for essential 
scientific or management activities as specified in the permit.

iv) The location of field camps.

Only in case of safety tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage or 
disturbance to fauna.

v) Restriction on materials and organisms which may be brought into the area.

* no living animals or plant materials shall be deliberetely introduced in the area.
* no poultry products including food products containing uncooked dried eggs should be taken into 
the area.
* no chemicals shall be brought into the area, except chemicals which may be introduced for a 
compelling scientific purpose as specified in the permit. Any chemical introduced shall be removed 
from the area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted.
* fuel, food and other materials are not to be depoted in the area, unless required for essential 
purposes connected with the activity for which the permit has been granted. All such materials 
introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depot are not permitted.

vi) The taking of or harmful interference with nature flora and fauna.

Where animal taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance 
with a Code of conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard 
with a permit.

vii) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit holder.

Collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by a permit holder is prohibited unless 
specified in permit for scientific or management purposes. However, debris of man-made origin may 
be removed from the area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for 
laboratory examination.

viii) The disposal of waste.

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the area.
ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan 
can continue to be met.

Permit may be granted to enter the area to carry out monitoring, other scientific programs and sites 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of biological materials and 
animals.

Permits shall specify the maximum number of persons allowed entry at any one time.

Visits to the area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the scientific and management 
objectives.

x) Requirements for reports of visits to the area.

1

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, 
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their 
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in 
a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of 
the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.

 
91
Part II, Annex B

Decision 1:

1. Measures

(a) A text which contains provisions intended to be legally binding once it has been approved by all the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties will be expressed as a "Measure recommended for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty," and referred to as a "Measure."

(b) Measures will be numbered consecutively, followed by the year of adoption.

2. Decisions

(a) A decision taken at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on an internal organizational matter will be operative at adoption or at such other time as may be specified, and will be referred to as a "Decision."

(b) Decisions will be numbered consecutively, followed by the year of adoption.

3. Resolutions

(a) A hortatory text adopted at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will be contained in a Resolution.

(b) Resolutions will be numbered consecutively, followed by the year of adoption.

4. Final Reports of ATCMs

(a) Part II, Annex A of the Final Report of each Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will contain the full text of Measures adopted at the Meeting.

p2
(b) Part II, Annex B of the Final Report of each Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will contain the full text of any Decisions adopted at that Meeting.

(c) Part II, Annex C of the Final Report of each Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will contain the full text of any Resolutions adopted at that Meeting.

5. Nothing in this Decision affects in any way anything done by previous Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.

6. This Decision will be operative at adoption.

83
Part II, Annex B (   )

Decision 2

Rules of Procedure: amendment

Rule 24 of the Rules of Procedure, as amended at the XVIIth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting, shall be replaced by the following.

"Measures, Decisions, and Resolutions and Final Report

24. Without prejudice to Rule 21, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions,
as referred to in Decision 1 (1995), shall be adopted by the
Representatives of all Consultative Parties present and will thereafter
be subject to the provisions of Decision 1 (1995)."

AG
PART II, ANNEX C ( )

RESOLUTION

The Representatives,

Recalling the provisions of Article V of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recalling Recommendation VIII-12;

Aware that Article 4.6 of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal prohibits the export of hazardous wastes or other wastes for disposal within the area south of 60° South latitude, whether or not such wastes are subject to transboundary movement;

Aware also that, according to Article 1.3 of the Basel Convention, wastes which, as a result of being radioactive, are subject to other international control systems, applying specifically to radioactive materials, are excluded from the scope of this Convention;

Noting that in September 1994 the International Atomic Energy Agency's General Conference adopted a resolution inviting the Board of Governors and the Director General to commence preparations for a convention on the safety of radioactive waste management;

Urge their Governments to:

coordinate their positions in any negotiations relating to the disposal of nuclear waste in which they participate, with the objective of the inclusion of provisions prohibiting the transfer of nuclear waste to and the disposal of nuclear waste in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Resolution .... (1995)      XIX - R...

REPORTING OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES

The representatives:

-   Considering that there would be an advantage in standardised 
    reporting of information on tourism and non-governmental 
    activities;

-   Noting that Attachment A to ATCM Recommendation XVIII-1 
    outlines the requirements for advance notice of tourism and 
    non-governmental activities but does not outline 
    requirements for post-activity reports;

-   Acknowledging that there are obligations of national 
    legislation such as environmental impact assessment and 
    reporting that they must be met by tourist and non-
    governmental operators.

Recommends that:

Tourist and non-governmental operators when reporting on visits 
to Antarctica should provide the following information to the 
relevant national authorities:

1.  Name, details and state of registration of each vessel

2.  Name of captain or commander of each vessel

3.  Name and organisation of observer/Government 
    representative (if present)

4.  Actual itinerary

5.  Number and nationalities of passengers, staff and crew

6.  Places, dates and duration of ship landings, small boat 
    cruises and/or flights, and the number of visitors 
    landed

7.  WMO meteorological report (yes/no)

8.  Action taken in the event of an emergency

9.  comments (eg, impacts observed, changes to planned 
    itinerary)

26
Resolution .... (1995)

XIX - R...

FUEL STORAGE AND HANDLING

The representatives,

-   Noting advice in inspection reports that fuel storage 
    facilities and fuel transfer practices were the components 
    of station activities with the greatest potential for 
    causing significant adverse impacts;

-   Recalling that pending its entry into force the parties have 
    committed themselves to implement the Protocol on 
    Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to the 
    extent practicable; and,

-   Acknowledging that Article 3 of the Protocol on 
    Environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty provides 
    that activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be 
    planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the 
    Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
    ecosystems.

Recommend that:

The Consultative Parties ask COMNAP, through their members, to 
identify steps that could be taken to improve fuel storage and 
handling and that this item be included on the Agenda for the 
next ATCM.

92
(Resolution 1995)    XIX - R...

ANTARCTIC INSPECTION CHECKLISTS

The representatives:

-   Considering that inspection checklists are useful as 
    guidelines for those planning and conducting inspections 
    under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and in assessing 
    implementation of the provisions of the Environmental 
    Protocol pending its entry into force;

-   Noting that inspection checklists are not mandatory and are 
    not to be used as a questionnaire;

Recommend that:

The Consultative Parties should encourage the use of the 
checklists attached:

    Checklist A     Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated 
                    Installations
    Checklist B     Vessels within the Antarctic Treaty Area
    Checklist C     Abandoned Antarctic Stations and Associated 
                    Installations
    Checklist D     Waste Disposal Sites

Jf8
[Note:	Secretariat to number resolutions in the order of agenda 
items]	

			EXTENSION OF THE EXPIRY DATES 
FOR SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

Resolution ... (1995)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

*	Recalling Recommendation VIII-3 and XII-5

Noting that:

i)	experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans for these sites 
has	had shown them to be an effective means of reducing the risks of harmful 
interference in areas of special interest;

Recommend that:

1.	The date of the expiry of Site Numbers ..... be extended from 31 
December 1995 to 31 December 2000.

2.	The Governments of the Consultative Parties should use their best 
endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of 
Recommendation VII-3, that the Management Plans are observed.

JP
Resolution ... (1995)

UNIFORM MODEL FOR MANAGEMENT PLANS

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling the requests made by ATCM XVII and ATCM XVIII that SCAR should assist Parties in reviewing and revising Management Plans to conform with the provisions of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and consider how a model could be developed to facilitate the preparation of new and revised Management Plans;

Recognising that a uniform model for such plans would eliminate repetition and would make them easier to use;

Recommend that:

The structure of the Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 13, adopted under ...... be regarded as a model for the preparation for all new and revised Management Plans for protected areas for the purposes of Annex V.

Measure 1.         

go
Cooperation in emergencies, eg, to save lives.

(120) COMNAP advised the Meeting that it can facilitate improved planning processes for 
major projects involving more than one nation.

(121) SCAR advised the Meeting of the following new programmes it is coordinating:
    - Antarctic Pack Ice Seals Programme - a five year programme, requiring expensive ship 
      time and helicopter support, to define the demands which pack ice seals place on food sources 
      and thus their significance in the Antarctic marine ecosystem.

    - Coastal Shelf Ecosystem and Sea Ice Zone Programme - a ten year programme to 
      synthesise the work of Treaty nations to provide a comprehensive understanding of the role of 
      this region of the Antarctic ecosystem. A detailed science programme for this has now been 
      published.

    - Vostok Sub-Glacial Lake - this lake may contain water which has not been exposed to 
      the atmosphere for around half a million years. Scientists will examine the competing priorities 
      from those interested in the ice core, the chemical properties of the lake and the sediments at 
      the bottom of the lake; each of which may give important new insights into the history of 
      Antarctica.

(122) A number of Parties proposed that under this Agenda item the Meeting should move 
from reporting on scientific and logistic cooperation (which most Parties considered is 
adequately covered in reports through the Antarctic Treaty Annual Exchange of Information, 
SCAR and COMNAP systems) to working on the principles for enhanced cooperation and 
future opportunities for cooperation. The Meeting agreed that this item should be re-oriented 
along these lines in the future.

Item 15

Antarctic Meteorology, Telecommunications, and Related Services

(123) Under this item information papers were presented by Chile (XIX ATCM/INF 18 and 
66), by Peru (XIX ATCM/INF 90 and 91) and by the WMO (XIX ATCM/INF 65). The 
papers by Chile described the equipment, observations and meteorological analyses performed

35
by the Presidente Eduardo Frei Antarctic Meteorological Centre and the Capit n Arturo Prat 
Antarctic Naval Base. The Peruvian papers provided information on new technology for the 
processing of radar observations of the atmosphere and the results of observations of specific 
upper atmosphere phenomena.

(124) The paper by the WMO outlined current Antarctic meteorological activities in 
observations, telecommunications, services, research, and information exchange.  Support 
from ATCM Parties was sought for the further development of Automatic Weather Station 
networks, particularly in West Antarctica, an improved International Programme for Antarctic 
Buoys, greater use of modern telecommunications equipment, and an assessment of the 
meteorological services provided in Antarctica. The representative of IAATO offered further 
supporting observations from tourist ships.

(125) The Meeting agreed that this item could in future be dealt with under more general 
Agenda items covering Antarctic infrastructures, operations and technology, and Antarctic 
science.

Item 16

Data Management and Data Bases

(126) The Meeting welcomed the report by SCAR and COMNAP (XIX ATCM/INF 61) on 
progress with implementing the Antarctic Master Directory. A demonstration of the software 
was made at SCAR XXIII and it is expected to conclude negotiations to implement the 
directory during 1995.

Item 17

Global Change

a) Scientific work on global change in the Antarctic

(127) The Meeting noted Information Papers submitted by ASOC (XIX ATCM/INF 56), 

36
SCAR (XIX ATCM/INF 75) and Australia (XIX ATCM/INF 107) with advice on scientific 
work on global change and its significance.

b) Environmental Effects of Global Change in the Antarctic

(128) The Meeting noted the papers by SCAR (XIX ATCM/INF 75) and ASOC (XIX 
ATCM/INF 56). SCAR reported that lack of resources made it impossible to coordinate the 
many fields of existing research and stimulate new areas on as wide a front as had originally 
been envisaged. Accordingly, GLOCHANT had been requested to rank the key research 
issues to provide a clearer focus. SCAR had appointed a project officer to improve 
interdisciplinary communication and the links developed with the International Geosphere-
Biosphere Program, the World Climate Research Program and the International Arctic Science 
Committee.

(129) Whilst it is not yet clear that atmospheric warming observed in the area of the 
Antarctic Peninsula was necessarily continent-wide, the Meeting heard of strong evidence 
from glaciology, oceanography, meteorology, geology, geophysics and biology indicating 
significant regional changes in the Antarctic climate. It was widely recognized that indications 
of global change were likely to be most easily detected in polar regions which could therefore 
be considered as early warning areas for impacts on the rest of the world. The potential 
importance of changes detected in the polar regions for increasing sea levels and changing 
weather patterns was emphasised, and attention was drawn to the need for coherent and 
sustained research to improve the accuracy of future predictions. Many delegations 
commented on the importance and value of continued Antarctic research to an understanding 
of global change, and of the need to ensure that this was well understood by governments.

(130) The Meeting welcomed the linkages between SCAR and the global programmes. 
Delegates drew the attention of SCAR to the value of having good links with the Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Attention should also be paid to linking Antarctic marine and terrestrial biological research 
with the global programme BIODIVERSITAS. SCAR agreed to consider these suggestions. 
The Meeting recommends that Parties draw the attention of the IPCC and the framework 
Climate Change Convention to the importance of Antarctica in the study of climate change 
and the need for good linkages with SCAR. The Meeting also agreed that global change be 
considered in the next ATCM.

                                                                 37
Item 18

Preparation of the XXth Consultative Meeting

(131)     In keeping with the precedent created at the XIXth ATCM it was agreed that on 
the first Monday the plenary meeting would be limited to the election of the Chairman of the 
Meeting, adoption of the agenda, allocation of the agenda items to Working Groups, 
timetable, appointment of Chairmen of Working Groups. The TEWG and group of legal 
experts would meet in the first week of the XXth ATCM. The ceremonial plenary would be 
held on the second Monday to be followed by the meetings of Working Group I and Working 
Group II.

a) Date and Place of the XXth Consultative Meeting

(132)     The Meeting very much welcomed the invitation of the Netherlands to host the XXth 
Consultative Meeting. The provisional timing for the Meeting is the last week of April and 
first week of May 1996. The exact date and venue will be communicated through the 
diplomatic channels.

(133)     The Meeting also welcomed the invitation of Belgium to host the informal 
meeting of legal experts on liability together with a meeting of the contact group on secretariat 
from 27 to 30 November 1995 in Brussels.

b) Invitation to International and Non-Governmental Organisations

(134)     The Meeting decided that the following International and non-Governmental 
Organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica shall be invited to designate 
an expert: UNEP, ASOC, IHO, IMO, IOC, IUCN, WMO, WTO, IAATO, PATAJ to attend 
the forthcoming meeting in order to assist it in its substantive work.

(135)     With reference to Rule 41 of the revised Rules of Procedure of 1992, it was 
decided that these experts could attend the Meeting during the discussion of all items on the 
                                                  38
preliminary Agenda of the XXth Consultative Meeting except for the following:

4. Adoption of Agenda

7. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:

a) Organisational Aspects (including Secretariat)

21. Preparation of the XXIst Consultative Meeting

c) Preparation of the Agenda of the XXth Consultative Meeting

(136) The Meeting approved the Preliminary Agenda of the XXth Consultative Meeting, appended at Part III, Annex [ ].

(137) The Meeting suggested the following allocation of Agenda Items.

1. Plenary : 1, 2, 3, 4, 5a, b, 21, 22, 23, 24
2. TEWG : 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20
3. WG I : 5c, 6, 7 &(4)
4. WG II : 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
                  &(3), &(4)

(138) New Zealand presented a Working Paper (XIX ATCM/WP 10, Rev. 2) on the development of a trial procedure for pre-sessional document circulation for ATCM XX with the aim of providing a more timely and orderly pre-sessional submission and circulation of documentation to and by the Host Government for ATCM XX. The Meeting agreed to adopt a procedure to improve the effectiveness of the discussions of the Meeting. This procedure is without prejudice to the procedure for the handling of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations. The intention of this procedure is for Papers for ATCM XX be circulated where possible pre-sessionally to Consultative Parties, Non-Consultative Parties, and also to Observers and Invited Experts. This procedure is contained in the Guidelines for a pre-sessional document submission and circulation procedures for ATCM XX, which are

39
appended at Part II, Annex D.

(139)     It was suggested that the following matters, which arose during its discussions, 
be given further consideration by the ATCM:

      i)      the desirability of the translation of all Information Papers into working 
              languages of the ATCM, or to the provision of an Executive Summary for 
              Information Papers of more than 10 pages.

     ii)      the difficulties in preparing papers for the ATCM when the Antarctic 
              season ends in March and ATCMs are held in April/May. In this context, a 
              number of Delegations suggested that from 1997 the regular ATCM could 
              take place in June.

Item 19

Any Other Business

Item 20

Adoption of the Report

(140)     The Final Report and the Measures, Decisions and Resolutions contained therein 
were adopted by consensus on 19 May 1995.

 
40
Item 21

Closing of the Meeting

(141)     The Meeting expressed its warm thanks to the Government of the Republic of Korea, the Chairman of the Meeting, the Chairmen of the Transitional Environmental Working Group, Working Group I and Working Group II; also the Executive Secretary and his staff. It ended on 19 May 1995.

 
41
Measures, decisions and resolutions adopted at the XIXth ATCM
--------------------------------------------------------

( Numbers will be given in order of Agenda)

I Measures(5): Part II Annex A
- Revised descriptions and management plans for SPA
- Revised descriptions and management for SSSI
- Antarctic protected area system: New historic sites and monuments
- Historic sites and monuments: Amendment
- Antarctic protected area system: Specially Protected Area

II Decisions(2): Part II Annex B
- Decision 1
- Decision 2

III Resolutions(8): Part II Annex C
- (Resolution adopted by WG I on the disposal of nuclear waste)
- Reporting of tourism and non-governmental activities
- Fuel storage and handling
- Antarctic inspection checklists
- Extension of the expiry dates for sites of SSSI
- Uniform model for management plans
- Environmental impact assement: Circulation of information
- New historic sites and monuments: Suggested guidelines for the
desigantion of historic sites

IV Guideline(1): Part II Annex D
- Guideline for pre-sessional document circulation and document handling 
at ATCM XX
part II Annex A

MEASURE 1 (1995)

REVISED DESCRIPTIONS AND
MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9 and VIII-3;

Noting that revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Noting also that the format of these revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

    For the Specially Protected Areas listed below:

    (i)     the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora shall be deleted;

    (ii)    the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, shall be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

The Specially Protected Areas concerned are:

    Area No. 13   Moe Island, South Orkney Islands (Annex A);

    Area No. 15   Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South 
                  Orkney Islands (Annex B);

42
Annex A to Measure 1 (1995)

Management Plan

for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 13

MOE ISLAND, SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1. Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-13 (1966, SPA No 13) after a
proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that Moe Island provided a representative
sample of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem, that intensive experimental research on the
neighbouring Signy Island might alter its ecosystem and that Moe Island should be
specially protected as a control area for future comparison.

These grounds are still relevant. Whilst there is no evidence that research activities at
Signy Island have significantly altered the ecosystems there, a major change has occurred
in the low-altitude terrestrial system as a result of the rapidly expanding Antarctic fur seal
(Arctocephalus gazella) population. Plant communities on nearby Signy Island have been
physically disrupted by trampling by fur seals and nitrogen enrichment from the seals'
excreta has resulted in replacement of bryophytes and lichens by the macro-alga Prasiola
crispa. Low-lying lakes have been significantly affected by enriched run-off from the
surrounding land. So far Moe Island has not been invaded by fur seals to any great extent
and its topography makes it less likely that seals will penetrate to the more sensitive areas.

The values to be protected are those associated with the biological composition and
diversity of a near-pristine example of the maritime Antarctic terrestrial and littoral marine
ecosystems. In particular, Moe Island contains the greatest continuous expanses of
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf found in the Antarctic. Moe Island has been
visited on few occasions and has never been the site of occupation for periods of more
than a few hours.

2. Aims and Objectives

Management of Moe Island aims to:

-   avoid major changes to the structure and composition of the terrestrial vegetation,
    in particular the moss turf banks,

-   prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area,

-   permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere,
    particularly research related to determining the differences between the ecology of
    an undisturbed island and that of an adjacent occupied and fur seal perturbed
    island.

43
3. Management Activities

Ensure that the biological condition of Moe Island is adequately monitored, preferably by 
non-invasive methods, and that the sign-boards are serviced.

If fur seals were to gain access to the interior of Moe Island it would be necessary to take 
action to prevent damage to the vulnerable moss banks. This action would most likely 
consist of the erection of a seal-proof fence at the head of the gully at the northeast of 
Landing Cove. Any direct management activities in the Area would be subject to an 
environmental impact assessment before any decision to proceed is taken.

4. Period of Designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation VIII-3 for an indefinite period.

5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of Moe Island in relation to the South Orkney Islands.  Map 2 
shows Moe Island in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Moe Island, South Orkney Islands, is a small irregularly-shaped island lying 300 m off the 
southwestern extremity of Signy Island, from which it is separated by Fyr Channel. It is 
about 1.8 km from the northeast to southwest and 1 km from northwest to southeast.  Its 
position on Admiralty Chart No 1775, latitude 60°44'S, longitude 45°45'W, does not 
agree closely with that in Map 2 (lat 60°44'S, long. 45°41'W).

The island rises precipitously on the northeastern and southeastern sides to Snipe Peak 
(226 m altitude). There is a subsidiary summit above South Point (102 m altitude) and 
lower hills on each of three promontories on the western side above Corral Point (92 m). 
Conroy Point (89 m) and Spaull Point (56 m). Small areas of permanent ice remain on 
the east- and south-facing slopes with late snow lying on the steeply dipping western 
slopes. There are no permanent streams or pools.

The rocks are metamorphic quartz-mica schists, with occasional biotite and quartz-rich 
beds. There is a thin bed of undifferentiated amphibolite on the northeastern coast. Much 
of the island is overlain with glacial drift and scree. Soils are predominantly immature 
deposits of fine to coarse clays and sands intermixed with gravels, stones and boulders. 
They are frequently sorted by freeze-thaw action in high or exposed locations into 
small-scale circles, polygons, stripes and lobes. There are deep accumulations of peat (up 
to 2 m thick on western slopes), considerable expanses of the surface of which are bare 
and eroded.

                        46
The dominant plant communities are Andreaea-Usnea fellfield and banks of 
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf (the largest known example of this community type 
in the Antarctic). These moss banks constitute a major biological value and the reason for 
the designation of the Area. The cryptogamic flora is diverse.

The mites Gamasellus racovitza and Stereotydeus villosus and the springtail Cryptopygus 
antarcticus are common under stones.

There were five colonies of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) totalling about 
11,000 pairs in 1978-79. A more recent visit (February 1994) noted fewer than 100 pairs 
on the northern side of Landing Cove and more than a thousand on the southern side. 
Numerous other birds breed on the island, notably about 2000 pairs of cape petrels 
(Daption capensis) in 14 colonies (1966) and large numbers of Antarctic prions 
(Pachyptila desolata).

Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) are found 
in the bays on the west side of the island. Increasing numbers of fur seals (Arctocephalus 
gazella), mostly juvenile males, come ashore on the north side of Landing Cove and have 
caused some damage to vegetation in that area. However, it is possible that the nature of 
the terrain will restrict these animals to this small headland where damage may intensify.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

None.

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board is located at the back of the small shingle beach in the northeast corner of 
Landing Cove, beyond the splash zone on top of a flat rock, to which it is bolted. The 
board was erected on 2 February 1994.

There is a cairn and the remains of a survey mast, erected in 1965-66, on Spauil Point. 
This mast is of interest for lichenometric studies and should not be removed. There are 
no other structures on Moe Island.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No 14. Lynch Island, lies about 10 km north-north-east of Moe Island. SPA No 18. 
North Coronation Island, lies about 19 km away on the northern side of Coronation Island. 
SPA No 15. Southern Powell Island, is about 41 km to the east.

7.    Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by appropriate 
....................................................desig?ed under Article V of the ............ 
............................................................................................................................to the .................. 
............................................................................................................................ 
45
Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:

-   it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere

-   the actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural ecological system in the Area

-   any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan

-   the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan

-   the Permit, or an authorized copy, must be carried within the Specially Protected Area

-   a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

There are no restrictions on landing from the sea, which is the preferred method. No special access points are specified, but landings are usually most safely made at the northeast corner of Landing Cove.

Helicopter landings should be avoided where practicable. Helicopters may land only on the col between hill 89 m and the western slope of Snipe Peak. To avoid overflying bird colonies approach should preferably be from the south, though an approach from the north is permissible.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250 m altitude above the highest point except for access to the landing point specified above.

No pedestrian routes are designated but persons on foot should at all times avoid disturbances to birds or damage to vegetation and periglacial features. Vehicles are prohibited on Moe Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place

-   Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere and which will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area

-   Essential management activities, including monitoring

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for essential scientific or management activities, as specified in the Permit.

46
7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties should not normally camp in the Area. If this is essential for reasons of safety, tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to vegetation or disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be taken into the Area.

No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.

Fuel, food and other materials are not to be depoted in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depots are not permitted.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit, except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of the Area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for laboratory examination.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be deposited in the sea.

7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain notice boards, or protective measures.

48
7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.

KP
Map 1.  Moe Island Specially Protected Area in relation to the South 
Orkney Islands

                         67
45°42'W                                  45°41'W

         N
         
         
60°44'S
         
         
Landing area for
small boats
         
Conroy Point                  Landing
                                Cove
         
Corral
Point
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         

Annex B to Measure 1 (1995)

Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.15

SOUTHERN POWELL ISLAND AND ADJACENT ISLANDS,
SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1.  Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-15 (1966, SPA No 15)
after a proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that southern Powell Island
and the adjacent islands support substantial vegetation and a considerable bird and
mammal fauna. The Area was representative of the natural ecology of the South
Orkney Islands, and was rendered more important by the nucleus of an expanding
colony of Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella).

These grounds are still relevant, though the expansion of the fur seal colony is
progressing only slowly.

The values to be protected are primarily those associated with the large concentrations
of breeding birds and seals, and to a lesser extent, the terrestrial vegetation.

2.  Aims and Objectives

Management of southern Powell Island and adjacent islands aims to:

-   avoid major changes in the structure and composition of the terrestrial
    vegetation;
-   prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
-   permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served
    elsewhere.

3.  Management Activities

Because of its use as an anchorage in the past. it is important that the signs which
identify the Area as a Specially Protected Area and point out that landing without a
permit is forbidden are maintained.

Visits should be made as necessary to assess the biological composition of the Area,
in particular the state of the fur seal colony, and to maintain sign boards.

4.  Period of designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-15 for an indefinite period.

fr
5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of southern Powell Island in relation to the South Orkney Islands. Map 2 shows the Area in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates and natural features

The Area, which is centred on latitude 60°42'S and longitude 45°01'W includes all of Powell Island, South Orkney Islands, south of the latitude summit of John Peaks (375 m altitude), together with the whole of Fredriksen Island, Michelsen Island (a tidal peninsula at the southern tip of Powell Island), Christoffersen Island, Grey Island and unnamed adjacent islands. All but the Crutchley Ice Piedmont of southern Powell Island are ice-free in summer, though there are patches of semi-permanent or late-lying snow in places.

The rocks of southern Powell Island, Michelsen Island and Christoffersen Island are conglomerates of Cretaceous-Jurassic age. The two promontories to the west of John Peaks are Carboniferous greywacke-shales. There are boulders containing plant fossils in the glacial deposits around Falkland Harbour. Much of central and southern Fredriksen Island is composed of sandstone and dark phylitic shales. The north-east, and probably most of the north, of this island is highly sheared conglomerate with laminated mudstone. The Area has only a thick mantle of glacial till, strongly influenced by seabird guano.

Michelsen Island is almost devoid of land vegetation, although on the rocks there are extensive communities of lichens dominated by nitrophilous crustose species. These are also widespread on Fredriksen Island and elsewhere on bird-influenced cliffs and rocks near the shore. The most diverse vegetation on Powell Island occurs on the two promontories and associated scree west of Falkland Harbour. Here, and on Christoffersen Island and the northern part of Fredriksen Island, moss banks with underlying peat occur. Wet areas support stands of moss carpet. There are extensive areas of the nitrophilous macroalga Prasiola crispa associated with the penguin colonies in the area. Snow alga are prominent on the ice piedmont and snow patches in late summer.

No information is available on the arthropod fauna, but is probably very similar to that at Signy Island. The springtails Cryptopygus antarcticus and Parisotoma octooculata and the mites Alaskozetes antarcticus, Stereorydeus villosus and Gamasellus racovitzai occur in great numbers beneath stones.

There are few observations on marine biota in the Area, but this is likely to be very similar to the well-researched Signy Island area. The relatively enclosed Falkland-Eielsen Harbour area and the fjord on the east side of the peninsula are highly influenced by glacial run-off from the ice piedmont.

12
Large numbers of penguins and petrels breed throughout the Area. There are many 
thousand pairs of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica), mostly on Fredriksen 
Island. Similarly large numbers of Adélie penguins (P. adeliae) occur principally on 
the southern Powell-Michielsen Island area. Here there are also several thousand pairs 
of gentoo penguins (P. papua) and a very few scattered pairs of macaroni penguins 
(Eudyptes chrysolophus) breeding among the gentoos.

Other breeding birds include southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), cape 
petrels (Daption capensis), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson's storm petrels 
(Oceanites oceanicus), blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) Dominican gulls 
(Larus dominicanus), brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergi), sheathbills (Chionis alba), 
and possibly Antarctic prions (Pachyptila desolata) and black-bellied storm petrels 
(Fregatta tropica).

Michelsen Island is the longest known breeding site in the Antarctic of fur seals since 
their near-extermination in the nineteenth century. The number of pups born annually 
has increased slowly but fairly steadily from 11 in 1956 to about 60 in 1989. Thirty-
four live pups were recorded in January 1994. Many non-breeding males visit the 
Area during the summer. Other seals are frequent on the beaches, mainly elephant 
seals (Mirounga leonina) and Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli). Leopard seals 
(Hydrurga leptonyx) and crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) are occasionally 
seen on ice floes.

6(ii)Restricted zones within the Area

None

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board (erected January 1994) is positioned on southern Powell Island on top 
of a small rock outcrop at the back of the shingle beach on the east side of the 
southern promontory of the island.

On Michielsen Island the marker board (erected January 1994) is situated on a low-
lying rock about 50 m from the shoreline at the back of a high shingle beach at the 
southern tip of the island.

On Christoffersen Island the marker board (erected January 1994) is located on a 
small promontory on the northeastern shore of the island at the entrance to Falkland 
Harbour. The board is located at the back of the beach just below a small Adélie 
penguin rookery.

On Fredriksen Island a marker board (erected January 1994) is located at the northern 
end of the pebble/boulder beach on the western side of the island, below a small 
chinstrap penguin rookery. The board is at the back of the beach on top of a small 
rock outcrop.

53
There are no other structures within the Area, but various mooring chains and rings associated with the use of Ellefsen and Falkland Harbours by floating whale factories in the 1920s are to be found on the shore.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No. 13 Moe Island, and SPA No. 14, Lynch Island, are about 35 km west by south and about 35 km west of the Area respectively. SPA No. 18, North Coronation Island, is about the same distance away on the northern side of Coronation Island.

7. Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by appropriate national authorities. as designated under Article 7 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
-   it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere;
-   the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in the Area;
-   any management activities are in support of the objectives of this Management Plan;
-   the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan;
-   the Permit must be carried within the Specially Protected Area;
-   a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Anchoring within Falkland Harbour and Ellefsen Harbour is prohibited except in emergency.

No pedestrian routes are designated within the Area, but persons on foot should avoid walking on vegetated areas or disturbing wildlife wherever possible. Vehicles are not allowed in the Area.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250m altitude above the highest point except for purposes of landing (when essential) on the beach on the east side of the southern-most tip of Powell Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place
-   Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere
-   essential management activities, including monitoring.

54
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except 
for essential scientific or management activities, as specified in the Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties shall not camp in the Area, except in an emergency for reasons of safety. In 
this case, tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to the 
vegetation or disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall 
be taken into the Area.

No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, 
which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, 
shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which 
the Permit was granted.

Fuel, food or other materials are not to be depoted in the Area, unless required for 
essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. 
All such materials are to be removed when no longer required.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or 
harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica as a minimum 
standard.

No 
change

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a 
Permit, except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of 
the Area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for 
laboratory examinations.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be 
deposited in the sea.

ts
7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant 
material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, or to erect or maintain 
notice boards, or to carry out protective measures.

7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, 
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their 
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in 
a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of 
the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.

 
56
Map 1.  Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands Specially
Protected Area in relation to the South Orkney Islancs

52
LEGEND
 Permanent snow/ice
 Ice-free area
 Moraine
 Lake
 Limiting offshore danger line
 Formline (50 m)
 index formline (250 ft)
 Survey station (occupied)
 Survey station (intersected)
 Spot height (barometric)

Map 2. Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands Specially Protected Area


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0                1                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KILOMETRES
49
Measure ... (1995)

Revised Description and Management plan for sites
of special scientific Interest

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with
paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

For the Site of Special Scientific Interest mentioned below:

(i)    the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8
       Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest, be deleted;

(ii)   the Management Plan of the Site of Special Scientific Interest, annexed to
       this Recommendation, be inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8
       Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

The Site of Special Scientific Interest concerned is:

SSSI No. ... Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, Ross Island.

1/2
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19

Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 11
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 
TRAMWAY RIDGE, MT. EREBUS, ROSS ISLAND

1. Description of values to be protected
The lower end of Tramway Ridge was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI
No. 11) after a proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that the Area supports an unusual ecosystem
of exceptional scientific value to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists. Mt. Erebus (3794 m) is
one of only three known high altitude localities of fumarolic activity and associated vegetation in the
Antarctic. Tramway Ridge is an ice-free area of gently sloping warm ground 1.5 km to the
Northwest of the main crater of Mt. Erebus, located at an elevation of between 3350 m and 3400 m.
The single, as yet unidentified, moss species found in the Area is unusual in that it persists in the
protonematal stage. An unusual variety of a common thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially
noteworthy. The plant communities which have developed on the fumarolic soils within the Area
differ significantly from those found elsewhere in Antarctica. The regional uniqueness of the
communities is of substantial scientific interest and value. The very limited geographical extent of the
ecosystem, its unusual biological features, its exceptional scientific values and the ease with which it
could be disturbed through trampling or alien introductions, are such that the Area requires long-term
special protection.

2. Aims and objectives
Management at Tramway Ridge aims to:
- avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;
- prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
- permit research on the unique vegetation and microbial communities while ensuring they are
protected from over-sampling;
- minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;
- preserve a part of the Area, which is declared a Restricted Zone, as a reference site for future
studies;
- permit visits for management purposes in support of the objectives of the management plan.

3. Management activities
The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
- Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the designated helicopter landing site
whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings near the Area in a given season.
These should be replaced as needed and removed when no longer required.
- Markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no significant threat to the
environment, should be placed to mark the helicopter landing pad.
- A line of flags should be placed to mark the preferred snowmobile route (Map A) between the
USAP Upper and Lower Erebus Huts, which should pass no closer than 200 m to the Area.

60
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19

- Signs illustrating the location, boundaries and clearly stating entry restrictions shall be placed on posts marking the boundaries of the Area.
- Signs showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be displayed prominently, and a copy of this Management Plan should be kept available, in all of the research hut facilities located close to the summit of Mt. Erebus.
- Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be maintained in good condition.
- Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate.
- National Antarctic Programmes operating in the region shall consult together with a view to ensuring these steps are carried out.

4. Period of designation
Designated under ATCM Recommendation for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs
Map A: Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, location image-map. Image is rectified by affine transformation and scale is approximate. Photography USGS/DOSLI (SN7842) 11 November 1993.

Map B: Tramway Ridge, protected area orthophotograph. Orthophoto and protected area boundary coordinates are tied to the Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, a local framework, using the WGS72 spheroid. Precise GPS coordinates for the site will differ: these were unavailable at the time of mapping. Photography US Navy (SN6480) 9 February 1980.

Map C: Tramway Ridge, protected area map. Contours are derived from a digital elevation model generated using a 10 m grid for the orthophotograph in Map B: accuracy ± 2m. Precise area of warm ground is subject to variation seasonally and inter-annually.

Figure 1: Perspective view of the Tramway Ridge area from an elevation of 6200 m, 5000 m out from the Area at a bearing of 215°SW, showing the protected area boundary, the location of the USAP Erebus huts, and the preferred helicopter landing site and snowmobile route. Image source: Map A.

6. Description of the Area
6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
The boundary of the designated Area is defined as a square of 200 m by 200.8 m which encompasses most of the warm ground area of lower Tramway Ridge (167°06'35"E, 77°31'05"S: Map B). The Area is divided into two parts of almost equal size, the northern half being a Restricted Zone. The boundaries of the Area and the Restricted Zone (marked by signposts at each corner) and prominent features are shown on Map B. Several boundary signposts have been offset owing to dangerous ground at the actual corner point.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19

The Area is in general on a gentle slope of about 5°, with much of the ice-free ground in the form of terraces which have a typical vertical height of about 0.5 m and steeper sides of up to 30° in slope. The steep sides of the terraces have the maximum development of crusts of vegetation, and it is from these sides that visible steam emissions occur. Visible vegetation covers about 16% of the Area. Low ice hummocks of up to about 1 m high are distributed over the Area where steam has frozen. Surface ground temperatures are up to about 75°C.

The steam-warmed lithosols in the Area provide an unusual habitat of limited extent. The acid reaction of the soils, the constant supply of moisture by condensation of steam and the regular supply of geothermal heat produce conditions which contrast markedly with most Antarctic soils. There is no evidence of the presence of microinvertebrate animals in the soils. The vegetation comprises protonematal moss and diverse microalgae, which has developed on the fumarolic soils and differs significantly from other Antarctic plant communities. The single moss species, which has not yet been identified, is unusual in that it has never been seen to produce leaves but persists in the protonematal stage. The vegetation occurs in zones related to surface temperature. Warmest ground, from about 35 - 60°C, is colonised by dark blue-green and reddish-brown mats of cyanobacteria, whereas cooler surfaces of about 10 - 30°C are dominated by green crusts of coccoid chlorophytes and moss protonema. Bare ground lacking a macroscopically visible vegetation occurs between 0 - 20°C.

The algal flora comprises four cyanobacteria and 11 coccoid chlorophytes. The presence of a thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially noteworthy as it is an unusual variety of the hot spring cyanobacterium Mastigocladus laminosus, which is common elsewhere in the world. Thermophilic bacteria have been isolated at 60°C. These include heterotrophic and a thiosulfate-utilising autotrophic species.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

The northern half of the Area is designated a Restricted Zone in order to preserve part of the Area as a reference site for future comparative studies, while the southern half of the Area (which is essentially similar in biology, features and character) is available for research programmes and sample collection. The south boundary of the Restricted Zone is defined by a line that bisects the Area into two halves (Map B), and is marked at both ends by signposts. This boundary may be identified on the ground approximately as an extension westwards of the south ridge line of lower Tramway Ridge. The other three boundaries of the Restricted Zone are defined by the boundaries of the Area. Access to the Restricted Zone is strictly prohibited until such time it is agreed by management plan review that access should be allowed.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area

Signposts mark the corner points of the boundaries. The USAP Lower and Upper Erebus Huts are located approximately 1 km to the Northeast (3400 m) and Southeast (3612.5 m) respectively.

62
6(iv) Location of other ASPAs within close proximity of the Area
None.

7. Permit conditions
Permits may be issued only by appropriate national authorities as designated under Article 7 of Annex 
V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty7 Conditions for issuing a 
Permit to enter the Area are that:
- it is issued only for scientific study of the ecosystem, or for a compelling scientific or 
management purpose that cannot be served elsewhere;
- access to the Restricted Zone shall be prohibited;
- the actions permitted are not likely to jeopardise the natural ecological system or scientific values 
of the Area;
- any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
- the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
- any Permit issued shall be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Landing of helicopters within the Area is strictly prohibited. Helicopter overflight of the Area should 
be avoided, except for essential scientific or management purposes when helicopters shall in no 
instance fly lower than 30 m above the ground surface of the Area. Use of helicopter smoke bombs 
is strictly prohibited within 200 m of the Area and is discouraged nearby. For short-duration visits 
which do not require camp establishment, access by helicopter should be to a designated landing site, 
located outside of the Area and 300 m to the Northwest (Map A and Figure 1). For visits which 
require camp establishment, helicopter access should be to the USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Huts, 
and thence on foot or by land vehicle to the edge of the Area at Tramway Ridge. Landing of 
helicopters at other sites close to the Area is strongly discouraged. Only those persons specifically 
authorised by Permit are allowed to enter the Area. No special restrictions apply to the air or land 
routes used to move to and from the Area, although those traveling between the Upper and Lower 
Erebus Huts should keep to the preferred snowmobile route and stay at least 200 m from the protected 
area boundary.

Access into the Area shall be on foot and land vehicles are prohibited. Visitors should avoid 
walking on visible vegetation and, as far as practicable, areas of warm ground. Visitors should be 
aware that walking in the Area can compact soil, alter temperature gradients (which may change rates 
of steam release), and break thin ice crusts which may form over warm ground, with resulting 
damage to soil and biota below. The presence of snow or ice surfaces is not a guaranteed indication 
of a suitable pathway: therefore every reasonable effort should be made to minimise the effects of 
walking activity. Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the 
objectives of any permitted activities.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place
- Scientific research which will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area;
63
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19

- Essential management activities, including monitoring.
- Entry to the Restricted Zone is prohibited.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures, except boundary markers and signs, are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be the responsibility of the authority which granted the original Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Camping required for work in the Area should be near the existing USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Hut sites, and is discouraged anywhere within 500 m of the boundaries of the Area (Map A).

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area
To avoid compromising the microbial ecosystem for which this site is protected no living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.

Fuels are not to be brought into the Area. Food shall not be consumed within the Area. Equipment and other materials are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimised.

7(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where taking of animals or harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit. Material of human origin, not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder, but which is likely to compromise the values of the Area may be removed from any part of the Area, including the Restricted Zone.

62
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes, including all human wastes, must be removed from the Area. Excretion of human wastes
is prohibited within the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can
continue to be met

1. The Permit, or an authorised copy, must be carried within the Antarctic Specially Protected Area.
2. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection
activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain
signposts, or protective measures.
3. To help maintain the scientific value derived from the unique communities found at Tramway
Ridge visitors shall take special precautions against introductions, especially when visiting several
thermal regions in a season. Of particular concern are microbial or vegetation introductions sourced
from:
      - thermal areas, both Antarctic and non-Antarctic;
      - soils at any other Antarctic sites, including those near stations;
      - soils from regions outside Antarctica.

To this end, visitors shall take the following measures to minimise the risk of introductions:
(a) Any sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area shall be sterilised and maintained in
a sterile condition before being used within the Area. To the maximum extent practicable,
footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including backpacks or carry-bags)
shall be thoroughly cleaned or sterilised and maintained in this condition before entering the Area;
(b) Sterilisation should be by an acceptable method, such as by UV light, autoclave or by
washing exposed surfaces in 70%-ethanol solution in water.
(c) Sterile protective overclothing shall be worn. The overclothing shall be suitable for working at
temperatures of -20°C or below and comprise at a minimum sterile overalls to cover arms, legs
and body and sterile gloves suitable for placing over the top of cold-weather gloves.

7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information,
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management
plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in
a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of
the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.

65
Map A - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus 
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 11
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. **

Location image-map.

                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      

Site of Special Scien[?]ific Interest No.11
Map B - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.XX

 
Photography, 9 February 1900
 
 
0                metres              100
—    Protected area boundary
•    Survey marks
X    Boundary signpost

Orthophoto positional accuracy : +/- 2m
Protected Area boundary origin of coordinates :
Station E8, Camp Area Plano Datum 1961, WGS72.
DOSLI survey; 37/142
Map C - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.XX
                                                
                                 Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 11

                                                
                                 Contour Interval : 2m                  ? of warm ground subject to change.
Figure 1 - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : 
Site A Speciat scientific Interest No. (1)
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX

Perspective view from 215°SW

                      Helicopter Pad 
                      Tramway Ridge
                      Preferred snowmobile route
Lower Erebus Hut (USAP)
Upper Erebus Hut (USAP)
Mt. Erebus Summit
MEASURE ... (1995)

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM:
NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling the Measures adopted in Recommendations 1-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7,
XIII-16, and XIV-8;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with
paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty; that the following historic monuments be
added to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing
Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9.

.. Port Lockroy, Base A, on Goudier Island, off Wiencke Island, Antarctic
Peninsula (Lat 64° 49' S, Long 63° 31' W). Of historic importance as an
Operation Tabarin base and for scientific research.

.. Argentine Islands, Base F (Wordie House), South-west corner of Winter Island,
one of the group known as the Argentine Islands (Lat 65° 15' S, Long 64°
16' W). Of historic interest as an example of an early British scientific base.

.. Horseshoe Island, Base Y, Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land (Lat 67° 49' S,
Long 67° 18' W). Noteworthy as a relatively unaltered and completely equipped
base of a late period. Blaiklock, the refuge hut nearby, is taken to be an integral
part of the base.

.. Stonington Island, Base E, Northern end of Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay,
West Graham Land (Long 68° 11' S, 67° 00' W). Of historical importance in
the early period of exploration and later British Antarctic Survey (BAS) history
of the 1960s and 70s.

.. Message Post, Svend Foyn Island. A pole with a box attached was placed on 16
January 1895 during the whaling expedition of Henryk Bull and Captain Leonard
Kristensen of the ship "Antarctica". It was examined and found intact by the
British Antarctic Expedition of 1898-1900 and then sighted from the beach by the
USS Edisto in 1956 and USCGS Glacier in 1965 (latitude approximately 71°
52' S, longitude 171° 10' E).

.. Prestrud's Cairn, at the foot of main bluff Scott Nunataks, Queen Alexandra
Mountains. A small rock cairn at the foot of the main bluff on the north side of
the nunataks by Lieutenant K Prestrud on 3 December 1911 during the

yo
