KOREA
AU-ATADD-3-BB-AQ-474

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  SEOUL
                                  May 8-19, 1995

                                  XIX ATCM/WP 7
                                  May 8, 1995
                                  English
                                  Original: English

THE ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM
REVISED MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR SPAs AND SSSIs

Agenda Item 12 a

(Submitted by New Zealand)
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                                    1

Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. ??
TRAMWAY RIDGE, MT. EREBUS, ROSS ISLAND

1. Description of values to be protected
The lower end of Tramway Ridge was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI
No. 11) after a proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that the Area supports an unusual ecosystem
of exceptional scientific value to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists. Mt. Erebus (3794 m) is
one of only three known high altitude localities of fumarolic activity and associated vegetation in the
Antarctic. Tramway Ridge is an ice-free area of gently sloping warm ground 1.5 km to the
Northwest of the main crater of Mt. Erebus, located at an elevation of between 3350 m and 3400 m.
The single, as yet unidentified, moss species found in the Area is unusual in that it persists in the
protonematal stage. An unusual variety of a common thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially
noteworthy. The plant communities which have developed on the fumarolic soils within the Area
differ significantly from those found elsewhere in Antarctica. The regional uniqueness of the
communities is of substantial scientific interest and value. The very limited geographical extent of the
ecosystem, its unusual biological features, its exceptional scientific values and the ease with which it
could be disturbed through trampling or alien introductions, are such that the Area requires long-term
special protection.

2. Aims and objectives
Management at Tramway Ridge aims to:
- avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;
- prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
- permit research on the unique vegetation and microbial communities while ensuring they are
protected from over-sampling;
- minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;
- preserve a part of the Area, which is declared a Restricted Zone, as a reference site for future
studies;
- permit visits for management purposes in support of the objectives of the management plan.

3. Management activities
The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
- Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the designated helicopter landing site
whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings near the Area in a given season.
These should be replaced as needed and removed when no longer required.
- Markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no significant threat to the
environment, should be placed to mark the helicopter landing pad.
- A line of flags should be placed to mark the preferred snowmobile route (Map A) between the
USAP Upper and Lower Erebus Huts, which should pass no closer than 200 m to the Area.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                        2

-   Signs illustrating the location, boundaries and clearly stating entry restrictions shall be placed on 
    posts marking the boundaries of the Area.

-   Signs showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
    displayed prominently, and a copy of this Management Plan should be kept available, in all of the 
    research hut facilities located close to the summit of Mt. Erebus.

-   Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall 
    be maintained in good condition.

-   Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the Area 
    continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and 
    maintenance measures are adequate.

-   National Antarctic Programmes operating in the region shall consult together with a view to 
    ensuring these steps are carried out.

4. Period of designation
Designated under ATCM Recommendation **-** for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs
Map A: Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, location image-map. Image is rectified by affine 
transformation and scale is approximate. Photography USGS/DOSLI (SN7842) 11 
November 1993.

Map B: Tramway Ridge, protected area orthophotograph. Orthophoto and protected area boundary 
coordinates are tied to the Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, a local framework, using the 
WGS72 spheroid. Precise GPS coordinates for the site will differ: these were unavailable 
at the time of mapping. Photography US Navy (SN6480) 9 February 1980.

Map C: Tramway Ridge, protected area map. Contours are derived from a digital elevation model 
generated using a 10 m grid for the orthophotograph in Map B: accuracy ± 2m. Precise 
area of warm ground is subject to variation seasonally and inter-annually.

Figure 1: Perspective view of the Tramway Ridge area from an elevation of 6200 m, 5000 m out 
from the Area at a bearing of 215°SW, showing the protected area boundary, the location of 
the USAP Erebus huts, and the preferred helicopter landing site and snowmobile route. 
Image source: Map A.

6. Description of the Area
6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
The boundary of the designated Area is defined as a square of 200 m by 200.8 m which encompasses 
most of the warm ground area of lower Tramway Ridge (167°06'35"E, 77°31'05"S: Map B). The 
Area is divided into two parts of almost equal size, the northern half being a Restricted Zone. The 
boundaries of the Area and the Restricted Zone (marked by signposts at each corner) and prominent 
features are shown on Map B. Several boundary signposts have been offset owing to dangerous 
ground at the actual corner point.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                        3

The Area is in general on a gentle slope of about 5°, with much of the ice-free ground in the 
form of terraces which have a typical vertical height of about 0.5 m and steeper sides of up to 30° in 
slope. The steep sides of the terraces have the maximum development of crusts of vegetation, and it 
is from these sides that visible steam emissions occur. Visible vegetation covers about 16% of the 
Area. Low ice hummocks of up to about 1 m high are distributed over the Area where steam has 
frozen. Surface ground temperatures are up to about 75°C.

The steam-warmed lithosols in the Area provide an unusual habitat of limited extent. The acid 
reaction of the soils, the constant supply of moisture by condensation of steam and the regular supply 
of geothermal heat produce conditions which contrast markedly with most Antarctic soils. There is 
no evidence of the presence of microinvertebrate animals in the soils. The vegetation comprises 
protonematal moss and diverse microalgae, which has developed on the fumarolic soils and differs 
significantly from other Antarctic plant communities. The single moss species, which has not yet 
been identified, is unusual in that it has never been seen to produce leaves but persists in the 
protonematal stage. The vegetation occurs in zones related to surface temperature. Warmest ground, 
from about 35 - 60°C, is colonised by dark blue-green and reddish-brown mats of cyanobacteria, 
whereas cooler surfaces of about 10 - 30°C are dominated by green crusts of coccoid chlorophytes 
and moss protonema. Bare ground lacking a macroscopically visible vegetation occurs between 0 - 
20°C.

The algal flora comprises four cyanobacteria and 11 coccoid chlorophytes. The presence of a 
thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially noteworthy as it is an unusual variety of the hot spring 
cyanobacterium Mastigocladus laminosus, which is common elsewhere in the world. Thermophilic 
bacteria have been isolated at 60°C. These include heterotrophic and a thiosulfate-utilising autotrophic 
species.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

The northern half of the Area is designated a Restricted Zone in order to preserve part of the Area as a 
reference site for future comparative studies, while the southern half of the Area (which is essentially 
similar in biology, features and character) is available for research programmes and sample collection. 
The south boundary of the Restricted Zone is defined by a line that bisects the Area into two halves 
(Map B), and is marked at both ends by signposts. This boundary may be identified on the ground 
approximately as an extension westwards of the south ridge line of lower Tramway Ridge. The other 
three boundaries of the Restricted Zone are defined by the boundaries of the Area. Access to the 
Restricted Zone is strictly prohibited until such time it is agreed by management plan review that 
access should be allowed.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area

Signposts mark the corner points of the boundaries. The USAP Lower and Upper Erebus Huts are 
located approximately 1 km to the Northeast (3400 m) and Southeast (3612.5 m) respectively.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                                                 4

6(iv) Location of other ASPAs within close proximity of the Area
None.

7. Permit conditions
Permits may be issued only by appropriate national authorities as designated under Article 7 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
- it is issued only for scientific study of the ecosystem, or for a compelling scientific or management purpose that cannot be served elsewhere;
- access to the Restricted Zone shall be prohibited;
- the actions permitted are not likely to jeopardise the natural ecological system or scientific values of the Area;
- any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
- the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
- any Permit issued shall be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Landing of helicopters within the Area is strictly prohibited. Helicopter overflight of the Area should be avoided, except for essential scientific or management purposes, when helicopters shall in no instance fly lower than 30 m above the ground surface of the Area. Use of helicopter smoke bombs is strictly prohibited within 200 m of the Area and is discouraged nearby. For short-duration visits which do not require camp establishment, access by helicopter should be to a designated landing site, located outside of the Area and 300 m to the Northwest (Map A and Figure 1). For visits which require camp establishment, helicopter access should be to the USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Huts, and thence on foot or by land vehicle to the edge of the Area at Tramway Ridge. Landing of helicopters at other sites close to the Area is strongly discouraged. Only those persons specifically authorised by Permit are allowed to enter the Area. No special restrictions apply to the air or land routes used to move to and from the Area, although those traveling between the Upper and Lower Erebus Huts should keep to the preferred snowmobile route and stay at least 200 m from the protected area boundary.

Access into the Area shall be on foot and land vehicles are prohibited. Visitors should avoid walking on visible vegetation and, as far as practicable, areas of warm ground. Visitors should be aware that walking in the Area can compact soil, alter temperature gradients (which may change rates of steam release), and break thin ice crusts which may form over warm ground, with resulting damage to soil and biota below. The presence of snow or ice surfaces is not a guaranteed indication of a suitable pathway: therefore every reasonable effort should be made to minimise the effects of walking activity. Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place
- Scientific research which will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area;
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                  5

- Essential management activities, including monitoring.
- Entry to the Restricted Zone is prohibited.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures, except boundary markers and signs, are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be the responsibility of the authority which granted the original Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Camping required for work in the Area should be near the existing USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Hut sites, and is discouraged anywhere within 500 m of the boundaries of the Area (Map A).

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area

To avoid compromising the microbial ecosystem for which this site is protected no living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.

Fuels are not to be brought into the Area. Food shall not be consumed within the Area. Equipment and other materials are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimised.

7(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna

Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where taking of animals or harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit. Material of human origin, not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder, but which is likely to compromise the values of the Area may be removed from any part of the Area, including the Restricted Zone.
XIX ATCM Seoul May 8-19                                  6

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All wastes, including all human wastes, must be removed from the Area. Excretion of human wastes 
is prohibited within the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can 
continue to be met

1. The Permit, or an authorised copy, must be carried within the Antarctic Specially Protected Area.
2. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection 
activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain 
signposts, or protective measures.
3. To help maintain the scientific value derived from the unique communities found at Tramway 
Ridge visitors shall take special precautions against introductions, especially when visiting several 
thermal regions in a season. Of particular concern are microbial or vegetation introductions sourced 
from:
        - thermal areas, both Antarctic and non-Antarctic;
        - soils at any other Antarctic sites, including those near stations;
        - soils from regions outside Antarctica.

To this end, visitors shall take the following measures to minimise the risk of introductions:

        (a) Any sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area shall be sterilised and maintained in 
a sterile condition before being used within the Area. To the maximum extent practicable, 
footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including backpacks or carry-bags) 
shall be thoroughly cleaned or sterilised and maintained in this condition before entering the Area;
        (b) Sterilisation should be by an acceptable method, such as by UV light, autoclave or by 
washing exposed surfaces in 70% ethanol solution in water.
        (c) Sterile protective overclothing shall be worn. The overclothing shall be suitable for working at 
temperatures of -20°C or below and comprise at a minimum sterile overalls to cover arms, legs 
and body and sterile gloves suitable for placing over the top of cold-weather gloves.

7(x) Requirements for reports

The Principal Permit Holder for each issued Permit shall submit a report of activities conducted in the 
Area using the accepted Visit Report form., The report shall be submitted to the appropriate authority 
(ies) named in the Permit as soon as practicable, but not later than 6 months after a visit to the Area 
has taken place. Such reports should be stored indefinitely and made accessible to interested parties.
Map A - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus :
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX
Location image-map.

Helicopter Pad
ASPA No. XX
Tramway Ridge
Lower Erebus Hut (USAP)

Upper Erebus Hut (USAP)
Mt Erebus
Crater

Photography, 11 November 1993 : rectified using affine transformation.

Approximate scale
0         metres         500
______________         ______________
          Protected area boundary
----------         Preferred snowmobile route
- - - - - -         Camping discouraged inside of this area
                  N
Map B - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX

 
                                                                                  N


0        metres       100
Photography, 9 February 1980                      Protected area boundary         Orthophoto positional accuracy : +/- 2m
                                                 • Survey marks                  Protected Area boundary origin of coordinates :
                                                 × Boundary signpost             Station E8, Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, WGS72.
                                                                                 DOSLI survey: 37/142
Map C - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.XX

                                                                 N

                    Restricted Zone         
                    (Entry Prohibited)

                    Warm Ground         
                    (Entry by Permit)

Contour Interval : 2m                    Area of warm ground subject to change.
                                         Man 'C' is digitally derived from orthophoto In 'an 'D'
Figure 1 - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus :
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX
Perspective view from 215°SW

              Helicopter Pad
              Lower Erebus Hut (USAP)
              Tramway Ridge
              ASPA No. XX
              Upper Erebus Hut (USAP)
              Mt Erebus Summit
              Preferred snowmobile route
