AU-ATADD 3-BB-AQ-487

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  SEOUL
                                  May 8-19, 1995

                                  XIX ATCM/WP 20
                                  May10, 1995
                                  Original: English

RELATION BETWEEN THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENT
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND OTHER
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS OF A GLOBAL SCOPE

                                  Agenda Item 6 c

                                  (Submitted by Chile)
R:OTAGIN GENEVE          04-05-95  19:50        41227344194+02 549 1656         # 3


RELATION BETWEEN THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND OTHER 
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS OF A GLOBAL AND REGIONAL 
SCOPE.

1. Conservation of the Antarctic environment, including 
its dependent and associated ecosystems, is a matter 
of global relevance. The Antarctic continent and the 
surrounding Southern Ocean play a major role in 
determining the physical and biological conditions 
of the atmosphere and ocean masses and in the 
regulation of climate conditions. The preservation 
of the Antarctic ecosystem balance is fundamental for 
the survival of the food chain that connects marine 
species of all seas. Moreover, the carrying out of 
scientific research activities aimed at improving 
knowledge on processes of global and regional 
importance relies upon the near pristine nature and 
the unique character of the Antarctic ecosystem.

2. The Antarctic continent holds valuable records of 
past atmospheres and climates which are now being 
revealed through the analysis of ice cores. This 
knowledge of the past is essential to our understand-
ing of the risky future we are setting for ourselves 
as we tamper with global equilibriums. Recent 
developments concerning the Antarctic ice shelves 
highlight the importance of its interaction with 
oceanic and atmospheric phenomena and the need to 
continue this baseline recording of the state of a 
part of the planet which is yet uncontaminated or 
contaminated to a lesser degree by anthropogenic 
activities.

3. Antarctica has already pioneered many important 
steps in international cooperation because its 
value for scientific purposes has long been recognised 
The International Geophysical Year 1957-58; the 
International Year of the Quiet Sun; and the various 
global scientific programmes undertaken; as well as 
the five strategic areas of interdisciplinary 
research identified by the Scientific Committe on 
Antarctic Research (SCAR) and mentioned in Recom-
mendation XV-14; and the Decade for Antarctic 
International Scientific Cooperation (1991-2000) 
proclaimed by the Antarctic Treaty Parties at the 
XVI ATCM (Bonn, 1991).

3. Principle 24 of the Stockholm Declaration on the 
Human Environment maintains that international 
matters concerning the protection and the improvement 
of the environment should be handled in a cooperative 
spirit by all countries, big or small, on an equal
footing. Cooperation through multilateral or bilateral 
arrangements or other appropriate means is essential 
to effectively control, prevent, reduce and eliminate 
adverse environmental effects resulting from activ-
ities conducted in all spheres, in such a way that 
due account is taken of the sovereignty and interests 
of all States. The Rio Declaration on Environment 
and Development reiterates that nations shall 
cooperate to conserve, protect and restore the health 
and integrity of the Earth's ecosystems. Based upon 
these assumptions, an understanding was reached at 
the united Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development (UNCED), held in Rio de Janeiro from 
June 3-14, 1992, to include in the Rio action 
Programme (Agenda 21) paragraph 17.04 which reads:

" In recognition of the value of Antarctica as an 
area for the conduct of scientific research, in 
particular research essential to understanding 
the global environment, States carrying out such 
research activities in Antarctica should, as 
provided for in Article III of the Antarctic 
Treaty, continue to:
a) ensure that data and information resulting 
from such research activities in Antarctica is 
freely available to the international community;
b) enhance access of the international scientific 
community and specialized agencies of the United 
Nations to such data and information, including 
the encouragement of periodic seminars and sim-
posia."

4. In order to further implement this pattern of 
international cooperation for the protection of 
the global environment through the study, care 
and surveillance of the Antarctic environment 
and its dependent and associated ecosystems, a 
survey of international agreements that have some 
application or relevance to the area and activities 
under the Antarctic and the Protocol for 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
should be undertaken. The above-mentioned survey 
shall be focused on international agreements 
which are basically of a global nature and might 
presently have application in Antarctica. Never-
theless, regional compacts which have a particular 
significance in their respective fields and may 
be considered indicative of a trend in inter-
national environmental law are also given some 
consideration in the context of their relevance.

5. Throughout this survey, the question of whether 
the Antarctic coverage of such international 
agreements is satisfactory, and whether the rules 
contained therein are consistent with the rules, 
regulations and standards contained in the Madrid 
Protocol shall be given some prominence. Moreover, 
major developments in the field of international
: OTAGIN GENEVE        04-05-95  19:52    41227344194-402 549 1656        # 5
			5/23

environmental law create a common outlook, as a 
sign of the increased recognition of the global 
and multidimensional character of environmental 
challenges and potential responses. In the context 
of this examination, the following aspects merit 
specific attention:

a)	compatibility of the Madrid Protocol with the 
concept of a "common concern of humanity"
(not identical with the "world heritage") as 
embodied in the various declarations and 
international instruments adopted during UNCED;

b)	liability for damage to the environment, either 
confirmed, detailed or actually being negotiated 
within the framework of the new instruments;

c)	scope and jurisdiction of the various agreements 
in areas which are subject to the Antarctic 
Treaty System;

d)	Implementation mechanisms and their relationship 
to the functions of the Committee for Environ-
mental Protection;

e)	Participation of scientific, technical and non-
governmental organizations in those mechanisms.

The Madrid Protocol for Environmental Protection

6.	The Preamble of the Madrid Protocol affirms that 
the development of a comprehensive regime for the 
protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent 
and associated ecosystems is in the interests of 
mankind as a whole. The Protocol is the first inter-
national instrument adopting the "comprehensive 
protection approach", particularly in the design-
ation of the areas south of 60ø South Latitude as 
a natural reserve devoted to peace and science. 
The Protocol can also be considered as an important 
step towards the prevention of global environmental 
risks and a firm commitment to plan and conduct 
human activities so as to avoid adverse effects on 
climate and weather patterns, on atmospheric or 
marine environments and on the distribution, 
abundance or productivity of species or populations 
of species of fauna and flora can be considered as 
a significant example of the precautionary approach. 
Last but not least, the Protocol gives a broader 
meaning, through Article 6, to the rule being 
developed in customary international law that binds 
all States to cooperate in the protection of the 
environment. Kish (1994) writes: "The resulting 
Antarctic treaty system is a triumph of conservation 
in applying the concept of the common concern of 
humanity to preserve the continent from destructive 
human intervention".
OTAGIN GENEVE        04-05-95   19:53        41227344194->022 549 1656           # 6
~1.

7.      The 1982 Law of the Sea Convention

The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law 
of the Sea constitutes a framework for inter-
national environmental law regarding the oceans,
by virtue of the Convention being considered as 
customary international law. It is stated that 
"States have the obligation to protect and 
preserve the marine environment" (article 192).
This general duty goes along with the right of 
States to "...exploit their natural resources 
pursuant to their environmental policies..."
but these policies shall in turn be aimed at the 
protection and preservation of the marine 
environment (Article 193). Furthermore, States 
have a duty to cooperate on a global basis and 
as appropriate on a regional basis to protect 
the marine environment (Article 87) from a 
variety of sources of potential harm: land-based 
pollution, seabed activities, dumping, vessels 
and the atmosphere (Articoles 207-212. As regards 
ice-covered areas, coastal States have the right 
to establish and enforce regulations to prevent 
marine pollution from vessels within the Exclusive 
Economic Zone, provided that such regulations 
are non-discriminatory in nature and have due 
regard to navigation (Article 234).

8.      Of particular interest and relevance, within the 
complex web of relations between the Law of the 
Sea and the Antarctic Treaty System, is the new 
Agreement for the Implementation of Part XI of 
the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of 
the Sea. States Parties to the Agreement commit 
themselves to apply Part XI (the International 
Seabed Area and its resources) in conformity with 
the provisions of the Agreement which streamline 
the institutional framework contained in Part XI 
and adapt its policies to the prevailing market-
oriented trends. The Agreement contains an Annex 
with the substantive provisions, including the 
duties of the International Authority to protect 
the marine environment. It is worth-mentioning 
that the work already performed towards that end 
has greatly benefited from the normative contents 
of both the Convention for the Regulation of 
Antarctic Mineral Activities (CRAMRA) and the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty (PEPAT). The decision to entrust 
the GATT/WTO with authority on dispute settlement 
concerning issues on subsidies and restrictive 
economic practices being applied to the seabed 
resources was inspired, as well, by the paragraph 
included in the Final Act of the IV SATCP on the 
same subject. However, the critical question in 
terms of the harmonisation of policies regarding 
the development of seabed resources remains the 
fact that in the International Area such resources 
will be regulated and in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area their development is indefinitely prohibited. ?
OTAGIN GENEVE        04-05-95   19:55    41227344194+02   549 1656        # 7 
                                                  1/23

9. If this fact contains the seeds of potential conflict 
on the scope and authority of the UN Law of the 
Sea Convention (UNCLOS) vis a vis the Antarctic:Treaty 
System remains to be seen. In principie, the 
existence of two different regimes applying to the 
seabed is a viable solution as long as there is no 
problem of territorial application of those regimes. 
Rather than focusing on the question of the definition 
of the Area as lying beyond the recognized EEZ`s 
and the recognition by Part XI of the rights and 
interests of coastal States (which tend to highlight 
an article IV situation) the more coherent solution 
is to be found in the path of the following two 
assumptions:

a) Mineral activities were regulated by CRAMRA 
without encroachment on the deep seabed. It 
is reasonable to consider that, although the 
Madrid Protocol applies to the whole of the 
area south of 60ø South Latitude, the indefinite 
prohibition also affects mining activities within 
the area where they were previously regulated by 
CRAMRA, that is, without encroachment on the 
deep seabed.

b) However, the Consultative Parties have asserted 
their authority, in order to protect the Antarctic 
environment, over the whole area of application 
of the Antarctic Treaty. They have even displayed 
their disposition to cooperate, for the protection 
of dependent and associated ecosystems, in areas 
adjacent to the Antarctic Treaty Area. Therefore, 
consultations, including a system of prior 
notification, with respect to resource deposits 
which lie in areas which might be considered 
deep seabed but are situated within the 60ø South 
Latitude segment and thus belong to the Antarctic 
Treaty System in environmental terms, are in order.

10. Also of great importance to the Antarctic Treaty 
System is the Draft Agreement for the implementation 
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention 
on the Law of The Sea relating to the Conservation 
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks. The text of this Agreement, 
probably Convention, is being discussed at a special 
UN Conference. The draft Agreement enhances the 
duty of all States to cooperate by establishing 
conservation and management measures for straddling 
fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks in a 
manner consistent with the relevant provisions of 
UNCLOS. It contains references to the so-called 
precautionary approach, to the biological unity of 
the species to be protected and to the concept of 
dependent and associated ecosystems, the latter being 
drawn from both the Convention on the Conservation 
of Antarctic Marine Living resources (CCAMLR) and the 
Protocol for Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty. The CCAMLR Secretariat, as well as the 
Scientific Committee of the CCAMLR have provided 
background documentation to this negotiation.
:OTAGIN GENEVE        04-05-95  19:56      41227344194+002 549 1656       # 8
                                                 0/23

11. Other aspects of the Law of the Sea realm will
emerge in the consideration of specific global
agreements concerning pollution, dumping at sea
and transport of dangerous substances. Paragraph
17.22 of Agenda 21 recalls the provisions contained
in Part XII of UNCLOS and registers the commitment
of States to prevent, reduce, and control the
degradation of the marine environment so as to
maintain and improve its life-support and
productive capacity.

The Convention on Biological Diversity

12. The trend towards an ecosystem approach, pioneered
in the CCAMLR, led to efforts aimed at producing
a comprehensive agreement to protect biological
diversity on a global level. The result is the
Convention on Biological Diversity, which entered
into force on December 29, 1993, and constitutes
the most general resource management treaty
applicable to Antarctic resource management. The
Convention aims at the conservation and sustainable
use of biological diversity through the protection
of the genetic pool of all species. The Parties
undertake to establish measures to integrate
sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity
into existing national legislations. The Convention
addresses as well the issue of access to genetic
resources, sharing of benefits derived from the
use of genetic material, and access to technology,
including biotechnology.

13. In this Convention, biodiversity is recognized for
the first time as a common concern of humanity;
in fact, negotiators rejected proposals to label
it as the common heritage of mankind because of
concern for national sovereignity, a concern
reflected in Article 3 which repeats verbatim
Principle 21 of the Stockholm Declaration. Under
its Article 4, its application is considered either
on a territorial basis or on the basis of juris-
diction or control on processes and activities
related to biological diversity. The Convention
is global with regard to membership and geographical
scope; but the obligation to preserve biological
diversity in Antarctica clearly rests with the
Madrid Protocol, given the fact that the Convention
(Article 22.1) provides that its provisions shall
not affect "the rights and obligations of any Party
deriving from any existing international agrement,
except when the exercise of those rights and
obligations would cause a serious damage or threat
to biological diversity". Paragraph 2 of the same
Article 22 underlines the supremacy of UNCLOS in
matters concerning the marine environment. However,
sections concerning biotechnology incorporate new
dimensions and enhance some key principles
for terms of access, participation in research,
benefit sharing and technology transfer, as well
as the matters upon which Chile has drawn the
attention of the ATCM (Regulation of the extraction,
use and custody of scientific samples obtained by
Antarctic expeditions).

The Convention for the Protection of the Ozone
Layer.

14.  The Convention, opened for signature in Vienna in
1985, entered into force in 1988. It is global in
scope and aimed at protecting the environment from
activities which alter the stratospheric ozone.
Although the research and systematic observations
undertaken to advance scientific knowledge of the
ozone layer were fundamentally the responsibility
of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, the
Preamble of the Convention fails to provide explicit
recognition to that end and mentions by name only
the World Plan of action on the Ozone Layer of the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). The
Convention is only a framework for general
obligations, but the more specific commitments
included in Articles 3, 4 and 5, include aspects
of scientific cooperation already in operation
within the Antarctic Treaty System. A mandate to
the Conference of the Parties to seek the services
of competent international bodies and scientific
committees might be considered applicable to SCAR.
Through its Article 8, provision was made for the
Conference of the Parties to adopt Protocols which
would give effect to the general obligations
contained in Article 2 of the Convention.

The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete
the Ozone Layer.

15.  The Vienna Convention was completed by the Montreal
Protocol on September 16, 1987. The Montreal Proto-
col, in force since 1989, is geared to implement
measures to reduce and eliminate emissions that
deplete the ozone layer. A number of substances
are listed as harmful to the ozone layer, and the
Parties undertake to reduce production of certain
substances, cooperate on research and periodically
review control measures. Moreover, scientific
findings increased awareness of the need to reduce
production and consumption of all of the eight
substances mentioned in the Protocol and initiate
a major revision of the Agreement, which started
in Helsinki (1989) continued in London (1990) and
was completed in Copenhagen (1992) where the Protocol
was made effectively operational. A financial
mechanism, an interim international fund and a
schedule of control measures are designed to cap
the international treaty system developed from the
Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol. The
:OTAGIN GENEVE              04-05-95    19:58    41227344194+02 549 1656         #10
                                                   19/25

Antarctic Treaty Parties have reiterated their 
interest in both the Convention and the amended 
Protocol, in particular in the Declaration on the 
Ozone Layer and Climate Change adopted by the 
XVII ATCM (Paris, 1989). Since then, sustained 
progress has been made in the adoption of more 
stringent measures, but such progress has not 
halted the constant depletion of the ozone layer 
over Antarctica.

The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change

16. The Declaration by the Antarctic Treaty Parties 
on the Ozone Layer and Climate Change took note 
of the work undertaken by UNEP and WMO on climate 
change and the UN General Assembly adopted its 
resolution entitled "Protection of the Global 
Climate for Present and Future Generations of 
Mankind", which provided the impetus to negotiate 
and adopt, on May 9, 1992, the UN Framework 
Convention. Although the Convention has a general 
title, its specific content deals with greenhouse 
warming. The Convention defines climate change as 
a modification of the climate which is attributed 
directly or indirectly to human activity that alters 
the composition of the global atmosphere, and which 
differs from natural climate variability observed 
over comparable time periods. The Convention takes 
a gradualist approach towards the ambitious goal 
of stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations in 
the atmosphere at levels that will not dangerously 
upset the global climate system. In this regard, 
precautionary measures must be taken to anticipate, 
prevent, or minimize the causes of climate change 
and mitigate its adverse effects.

17. The Convention has a global scope with regard to 
both membership and geographical coverage; but 
the Contracting Parties do not have the same 
obligations and the new principle of common, but 
differentiated responsibilities, commits developed 
country Parties to take the lead in combating 
climate change. Similar to the Vienna Convention, 
it contains the provision for further elaboration 
in the form of specific protocols and for coop-
eration with other international bodies and 
agreements in order to become effective. The 
first meeting of the Conference of the Parties 
(Berlin, 1995) established a multilateral 
consultative process regarding questions of 
implementation of the Convention, including the 
adoption of a Protocol with specific timetables 
and tarjets for limiting greenhouse gases emissions. 
Any body or agency, whether national or inter-
national, governmental or non-governmental, which 
is qualified in matters covered by the Convention, 
may be represented at a session of the Conference 
of the Parties. On the other hand, it is useful to
recall that, under the Madrid Protocol, regular 
and effective monitoring should take place to 
facilitate early detection of unforeseen possible 
effects of activities carried on both within and 
outside the Antarctic Treaty Area on the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary 
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal

18.  The Convention, adopted on March 20, 1989, entered 
into force on May 5, 1992. Its primary goal is the 
protection "by strict control, of human health and 
the environment against the adverse effects which may 
result from the generation and management of 
hazardous and other wastes". To this end, the Basel 
Convention recognizes the need for countries to 
reduce or minimize at the source the quantity and 
hazardousness of wastes being generated; to ensure 
adequate disposal and environmentally sound manage-
ment of those wastes; to take steps necessary to 
prevent pollution from wastes generated; and to 
reduce the transboundary movement of hazardous 
wastes and not allow for such movement where it 
will countervene the goals of the Convention.

19.  Waste disposal and waste management are treated in 
all their aspects in Annex III of the Madrid Protocol 
In addition to the general obligation of the 
Parties to reduce as much as possible the amount of 
wastes produced or disposed of in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area, the Annex includes provisions on waste 
disposal by removal from the area, by incineration, 
by disposal on land and in the sea. It also provides 
for waste management planning and recommends sound 
management practices. Throughout the range of 
recommended measures, consistency between the Madrid 
Protocol and the Basel Convention prevails.

20.  However, the Basel Convention contemplates some 
prohibitions (Trade with Non-Parties, Exports that 
may not be handled in an environmentally sound 
manner, Shipments from OECD to Non-OECD Countries, 
and Exports to Parties that have banned such imports) 
and a specific "agreement" by the Parties "not to 
allow the export of hazardous wastes or other wastes 
for disposal within the area south of 60ø South 
Latitude, whether or not such wastes are subject 
to transboundary movement". The latter part of the 
sentence matches the constructive ambiguity of 
Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty, but the net 
effect of this "agreement" is that it lacks means 
to enforce its compliance and no liability arises 
from its transgression. Although the undertaking not 
to export hazardous wastes or other wastes to the 
Antarctic Treaty Area is stated under the heading 
"General Obligations", it is an exception to the
approach followed throughout the Convention which 
is entirely geared to "transboundary movement",
requiring that at least two States become involved
in order to trigger the mechanisms of the Basel
Convention.

21. Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty does not prohibit the
introduction of waste into the Antarctic Treaty
Area. It contains (Article 7) a prohibition to
introduce polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), non-
sterile soil, polystyrene beads, chips or similar
forms of packaging, or pesticides (other than those
required for scientific, medical or hygiene purposes)
onto land or ice shelves or into water in the
Antarctic Treaty Area. And disposal of radioactive
material is prohibited by article V of the Antarctic
Treaty. In fact, when Annex III of the Madrid
Protocol was drafted, the assumption was made that
the Basel Convention would cover this aspect and
the Antarctic treaty Parties welcomed the prohibition
established under Article 4.6 of the Basel Convention
(Paragraphs 23-25, Provisional Report, XI Special
Consultative Antarctic Treaty Meeting, Vina del Mar,
1990).

The Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution
by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter.

22. The London Convention is aimed at the prevention or
control of dumping of substances that are harmful
to human beings and marine species. The Parties are
committed to prevent marine pollution by dumping of
substances listed in Annex I to the Convention,
while substances mentioned in Annex II may be
dumped subject to a permit being given. The Parties
convene regularly in Consultative Meetings to
discuss expanding the scope of the Convention to
improve its effectiveness in protecting the marine
environment from harmful dumping activities. The
Parties have the right to pass resolutions, most of
which are not binding within the context of the
Convention but to which, nevertheless they adhere.
Resolutions that amend the Annexes have binding
effect and at the most recent Consultative Meeting
(London, November 1993) the representatives passed
three amendments to the Convention that prohibit
marine dumping of radioactive and industrial wastes
and incineration at sea.

23. The drafters of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the sea (UNCLOS) required all its ratifying
parties to implement national laws and legal measures
that are not less effective than global rules and
standards. The UN Office of Legal Affairs has stated
that the rules and standards set forth in the London
Convention qualify as global and as such will be
:OTAGIN GENEVE                            04-05-95   20:02   41227344194+02 549 1656   #13
1/2·


imposed on al UNCLOS members. Therefore, in addition 
to the 70 or more parties to the London Convention, 
a substantial number of countries which have 
ratified UNCLOS will also be bound by its provisions. 
The London Convention is global and applies, 
therefore, to the Antarctic Treaty Area. Annex III 
of the Madrid Protocol contains a pledge to phase 
up waste disposal by incineration by the 1998/99 
season but the context indicates reference is made 
only to open burning on land. No agreement could be 
reached on proposals to include in Annex IV, on 
Prevention of Marine pollution, a prohibition of 
the dumping of radioactive and industrial wastes, 
but the records of the debates indicate that the 
negotiators of the Madrid Protocol accepted the 
authority of the London Convention in this domain.

International Convention for the Prevention 
Pollution from Ships as modified by the Protocol 
of 1978.

24.  The purpose of the Convention is to prevent the 
pollution of the marine environment by the discharge 
of harmful substances or effluents containing such 
substances from ships and other vessels (e.g. oil 
rigs). The 1978 Protocol to the Convention states 
that a vessel requires an International Oil 
Pollution Certificate in order to be deemed sea-
worthy. Under the MARPOL 73 Convention and the 
78 Protocol, the Antarctic Treaty Area was declared 
a Special Area. As in the case of the ban on export 
of waste to the Antarctic Treaty Area by the Basel 
Convention, Antarctic Treaty Parties welcomed the 
designation of the Antarctic Treaty Area as a Special 
area by MARPOL. Annex IV, Prevention of Marine 
Pollution, to the Madrid Protocol further expanded 
and refined the relationship between MARPOL and the 
Antarctic Treaty system of environmental protection. 
Articles 13 and 14, in particular, contain specific 
references to the intimate relationship existing 
between the MARPOL system and the new environmental 
protection regime established in Annex IV to the 
Madrid Protocol.

The International Convention on Oil Pollution 
Preparedness, Response, and Cooperation.

25.  Signed in London, November 30, 1990, by 29 states, 
it is the first global convention to regulate this 
major aspect of marine pollution. The main obligation 
of the Parties to the Convention is to take, in-
dividually or jointly, all appropriate measures to 
prepare for and respond to an oil pollution incident.
:R:OTAGIN GENEVE                    04-05-95  20:03         41227344194+02 549 1656           #14
                                                                                                   14/23

The Convention provides for measures in two stages:
setting up national and regional systems. This means
designating competent authorities and operational
contact points, elaborating contingency plans and
providing adequate oil spill combating equipment;
as well as training personnel and establishing
detailed plans and communications capabilities.
Upon the request of any Party affected or likely to
be affected, the parties will cooperate according to
their capabilities and the availability of relevant
resources, by providing advisory services, technical
support, and equipment, for the purpose of responding
to the incident. An annex to the Convention regulates
the reimbursement of costs of assistance. The 1990
Convention provides for the creation by I.M.O. of a
section entrusted with specific competences concern-
ing oil pollution preparedness, response and co-
operation.

26. It is useful to recall, in this context, the relevant
provision of the Madrid Protocol which is article
15 (Emergency response Action) intended to respond
to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty
Area. Each Party agrees to provide for prompt and
effective action and to establish contingency plans
for response to incidents with potential adverse
effects on the Antarctic environment or dependent
and associated ecosystems. In the implementation
of such contingency plans and other cooperative
procedures, the Parties shall draw upon the advice
of the appropriate international organisations. In
terms of UNCLOS standards, such organisation is,
in most cases concerned and always in case of oil-
spill emergencies, the International Maritime
Organisation (I.M.O.).

The International Convention for the Regulation of
Whaling.

27. The above mentioned Convention established in 1946
International Whaling Commission (IWC) with the
explicit purpose of providing "...proper conservation
of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly
development of the whaling industry..." (Preamble).
The IWC is open to any country regardless of its
economic interest in the resource, is global in scope
and definitely covers all large whale species; as to
small cetaceans, it is a matter of dispute within
the Commission if they are covered, and exactly
which species the International Convention for the
Regulation of Whaling covers. UNCLOS refers to
marine mammals in its articles 65 and 120 offer some
general guidance on this matter; and some regional
agreements have recently been made with an ecosystem
approach, such as the Acreement on the Conservation
of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic and North Sea
(New York, March 17, 1992) based upon recognition
that "small cetaceans are and should remain an 
integral part of the marine ecosystem".

28.  Although the 1946 Convention is global, Antarctic 
whaling has been and continues to be the core 
activity regulated by its provisions; and even 
after the entry into force of the Convention, 
specific arrangements have been implemented for 
the Antarctic region within its framework: i.e. 
the Arrangement for the Regulation of Antarctic 
Pelagic Whaling (London, 6 June 1962: Japan, the 
Netherlands, Norway, USSR, UK) . Since 1982, a 
"moratorium" (0 Quotas in the annexed Schedule to 
the Convention - not a ban) has been in force and 
a Southern Ocean Sanctuary was approved by the IWC 
at its last session (Mexico, 1994). Pursuant to 
that decision, existing cooperation between the 
Scientific Committee of the IWC and the Scientific 
Committee of the Convention for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) 
should be enhanced.

29. The relationship of the International Whaling 
Convention with the Antarctic Treaty System is 
a complex one. The records of the diplomatic 
conference that adopted the CCAMLR demonstrate 
that the encompassing concept of "all other species 
of living organisms" included whales under articles 
I and II of the CCAMLR. However, article VI of the 
CCAMLR and Article 7 of Annex II to the Madrid 
Protocol state the intent not to derogate from the 
rights and obligations of Contracting Parties under 
the International Convention for the Regulation 
of Whaling and the Convention for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Seals (CCAS). While the original 
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora expressly excepted whales from the 
class Mammalia indigenous to the Antarctic or 
occurring through natural agents of dispersal, 
Annex II of the Madrid Protocol (Article l.a.) 
does not contain any exclusions. Beyond the intri-
cacies of the legal web, the requirement for a 
harmonized system of Antarctic environmental 
protection and the overlap of areas of application 
between the Antarctic Specially Protected or 
Specially Managed Areas covered by the Madrid 
Protocol in its Annex V, the CCAMLR and now the 
new Southern Ocean Sanctuary, require close co-
operation and consultation between the IWC and 
the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole.

The Convention for the Protection of Birds

30. The Convention, adopted in Paris, 18 October 1950, 
replaced the old Convention Internationale pour 
la Protection des Oiseaux Utiles a l'Agriculture 
(Paris, 1902). The new denomination and the terms 
of article I ("la protection ces oiseaux vivant a 
l'état sauvage") give the Paris Convention a global 
scope, while the actual management provisions are 
incompatible with those of Annex II of the Madrid 
Protocol.
:AR: OTAGIN GENEVE                    04-05-95   20:05         41227344194 ->02 549 1656         #16
                                               90/23

 
Convention on the International Trade in Endangered
Species

31 The Convention, adopted in Washington on 3rd March,
1973, includes all species threatened with extinction
which are or may be affected by trade. Trade in specimens
of these species, which are included in Appendix I to
the Convention, must be subject to particularly strict
regulation in order not to endanger further their
survival and must only be authorized in exceptional
circumstances. On the other hand, Appendix II includes
species which although not necessarily now threatened
may become so and other species which must be subject
to regulation in order to maintain trade under effective
control. Finally, there is an Appendix III, intended to
include all species which any Party identifies as being
subject to regulation within its jurisdiction, and as
needing the cooperation of other parties in the control
of trade. The Convention (CITES) is global in scope and
therefore applicable to Antarctica. However, its Article
XIV fully recognizes the right of Parties to adopt
stricter domestic measures for trade, taking, possession
or transport of specimens of species or the complete
prohibition thereof; and the obligations derived from
treaties already in force. Article 3 of Annex II to the
Madrid Protocol establishes in general prohibition for
taking or harmful interference, except for compelling
scientific purposes, which rules out any possibility of
allowing trade in Antarctic specimens.

Convention on the conservation of Migratory Species of
Wild Animals.

32. The Convention, adopted in Bonn on 23rd June, 1979, is
in many ways complementary to the CITES Convention. It
defines migratory species, their conservation status
and its qualifications (favourable/unfavourable) and
concepts such as endangered, range, habitat, Range-State
and taking. In another aspect, the Bonn Convention is
a framework agreement, inviting its Parties to conclude
further specific agreements covering the conservation
and management of migratory species included in Appendix
II (while those included in Appendix I benefit from
immediate protection). Since many of the Antarctic
species may qualify as migratory, this global Convention
is of certain interest to the Antarctic Treaty System;
in the context of marine species, it recognizes, as
CITES does, the supremacy of UNCLOS; and its Article
XII contains the recognition of rights and obligations
under existing treaties, as well as the right of the
Parties to adopt stricter measures.

Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural
and Natural Heritage.

33. The Convention was adopted at the General Conference
of UNESCO in Paris at its seventeenth session (1972).
R: OTAGIN GENEVE                    04-05-95   20:06    41227344194+02 549 1656         #17
                                                          17/22

Its ambitious aim is to establish an effective system
of collective protection of the cultural and natural
heritage of outstanding universal value, organized on
a permanent basis and in accordance with modern
scientific methods. The Preamble considers that parts
of the cultural and natural heritage are of outstanding
interest and therefore need to be preserved as part of
the world heritage of mankind as a whole. However, the
substantive provisions (articles 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7)
contain the explicit recognition of State sovereignty
and a subsidiary role for international cooperation in
the preservation of natural and cultural heritage. Quite
often, the suggestion has been made for some formal
linkage between the Convention on the World Cultural
and Natural Heritage and the Antarctic Treaty System,
i.a. through a special protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.
Such a linkage is unnecessary, since the criteria
outlined in the Convention are compatible but less
detailed that those contained in Annex V to the Madrid
Protocol. However, under the Convention, it is for each
State Party to identify and delineate the different
properties situated on its territory; while the decision
to establish a Protected or Managed Area rests, after
due consultation with the Committee for Environmental
Protection, SCAR and if appropriate, CCAMLR, with the
Antarctic Treaty Meeting which makes not only the
designation but also the delineation of the site and
approves the management plan. Exchanges of information
between the Committee for Environmental Protection and
the World Heritage Committee, as well as with entities
such as the Rome Centre for the Restoration of Cultural
Property, ICOMOS and IUCN, in matters of their respective
competence may serve a useful purpose.

Regional Conventions and problems of Coordination

35. The survey of relevant global environmental conventions
is incomplete, but it already demonstrates the complexity
of the web of relations existing between the Antarctic
Treaty System, and more specifically the Protocol for
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In many
cases, a global convention, although theoretically
applicable to the Antarctic Treaty Area is of little
practical interest because of the conditions prevailing
in Antarctica; in others, the general provisions of
those treaties may be used as supplemental
interpretation; in most cases, whenever explicit
recognition of rights and obligations under a previous
treaty is not made, the principles of lex specialis or
lex posterior come into play.

36. The fact that the protection of the environment is a
world problem does not mean that regional conventions
are less useful and effective than the global ones. Such
regional conventions, instruments or declarations,
covering restricted areas, concerned with vulnerable
ecosystems and habitats, or species, address specific
problems in a more effective manner and should also be
taken into account by the Antarctic Treaty System.
R:OTAGIN GENEVE                                  04-05-95  20:08    41227344194->02 549 1656         #18
                                                   70/23

A few examples can appropriately illustrate this point:

a) While the regulation of whaling has been conducted 
on a global scale (Geneva Convention of 1931, London 
Convention of 1937 and Washington Convention 1946) 
and the regional attempts in the context of the 
Permanent Commission for the South Pacific (CPPS) or 
the North Atlantic (Iceland, Norway and the Faroes) 
are relatively unsuccessful manifestations of 
disidence; the protection of seals has been under-
taken on a regional basis, since the 1893 Behring 
Strait Arbitration. One recent example is the treaty 
for the Conservation of Seals in the Wadden Sea, 
concluded in Bonn, October 16, 1990 by Denmark, 
Germany and the Netherlands. The convention considers 
seals as irreplaceable in and of themselves, and very 
important indicators of the conditions of the sea. 
Such agreement, adopted in the context of the Bonn 
Convention on the Migratory Species of Wild Animals, 
contains standards and procedures worth considering 
in any future attempt to modernize the London 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Ceals.

b) reference has been made to the instruments designed 
to implement both Part XI of UNCLOS and its provisions 
conservation conservation of certain fish stocks. 
However, certain regional agreements establish a 
precedent of a broader scope, as the entry into force 
of the Wellington Convention for the Prohibition 
of Fishing with Long Driftñets in the South Pacific 
(s. 1989 in force 1991) was taken into account by 
UNG Resolution 46/215 of December 20, 1991. The 
CCAMLR Commission adopted a Declaration prohibiting 
the expansion of drifnet fishing into the high seas 
areas of the Convention.

c) A number of treaties relate to atmospheric pollution 
but they are all regional in scope. Among these are 
protocols for reduction of emissions of sulphur 
(Helsinki, 1985; Sofia, 1987; Geneva, 1991). More 
pertinent is the Convention on Long-Range Trans-
boundary Air Pollution (ULTRAP) which encompasses 
North America and Europe, and entered into force in 
1983: its objective is to protect the environment 
against air-borne pollution and to reduce and prevent 
polluting emissions. Also important is the Convention 
on Environmental Impact Assessment on a Transboundary 
Context (Espoo, 1991) and it is interesting to 
compare is provisions with those contained in Annex I 
to the Madrid Protocol.

d) The Rovaniemi process and other undertakings related 
to building an environmental regime in the Arctic 
also have, mutatis mutandis, some relevance for the 
Antarctic Treaty System. The Arctic is a very 
vulnerable environment, its environmental challenges 
are enormous and the north polar region also plays a 
crucial role in the global climate. The Declaration 
on the Protection of the Arctic Environment is quite
illustrative of the kinds of problems which affect the Arctic environment. Concern with fragile ecosystems, environmental impact assessment, monitoring and ways to implement measures to reduce the adverse effects of pollutants are some key elements where exchange of information on Arctic/Antarctic developments may prove useful.

Scope and restrictiveness in the Antarctic Context.

37. The number of international environmental agreements applicable or relevant to Antarctica is considerable. That is not to say, nevertheless, that the scope of these agreements is sufficient or appropriate for so-called "Antarctic conditions": environmental standards are not responsive to those conditions, either because they are set too low, and control with implementation is too lax. Of the various environmental problems described, a few stand out as not well covered or adequately treated by existing agreements:

a) Atmospheric as well as marine and land-based pollution with heavy metals and persistent organic contaminants.

b) Nuclear waste material, particularly with regard to transportation, where the existing standards are too lax and absolutely inappropriate to the ecologically vulnerable Antarctic context.

c) Liability for damage to the environment, in itself a very problematic proposition is certainly one of the most important legal voids in the environmental protection regime of the Antarctic.

Liability for Damage to the Antarctic Environment

38. The present survey did not mention a certain number of conventions concerned with nuclear security (Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, 1986; Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, 1986; and the Nuclear Security Convention, 1994) all of them done in Vienna within the framework of the International Agency for Atomic Energy (IAEE). Given the fact that nuclear activities are strongly curtailed in the Antarctic Treaty Area and that there are no nuclear reactors operating in Antarctica, these Conventions are no longer relevant to our study. However, the issue of liability for accidents occured during maritime transport of radioactive materials is an outstanding issue of concern for the international community as a whole and for Antarctica in particular.

39. The Assembly of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) approved the Code for the Safe Carriage of Irradiated Nuclear Fuel, Plutonium and High-Level Radio-active Wastes in Flasks on Board Ships (INF Code)
without considering any credible or effective liability 
and compensation scheme for any damage caused during 
these transports. The Legal Committee of IMO has been 
divided over whether and to what extent liability for 
damage caused during the transport of radioactive 
materials should be included in a draft International 
Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in 
connection with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious 
Substances by Sea (HNS). The existing law governing 
liability for nuclear damage is incomplete, since it 
does not provide compensation for environmental damage 
(Paris & Vienna Conventions) and efforts to amend the 
latter in the Standing Committee on Nuclear Liability 
of the International Atomic Agency have not made progress 
This matter is of urgent concern given the programme 
for continuing the shipment of high-level waste from 
France to Japan, and the fact that the most recent 
shipment through sub-Antarctic waters by the Pacific 
Pintail, as well as further planned shipments put 
coastal States at risk given the continuing absence of 
an adequate liability and compensation regime for them 
as well as for such transports.

60. As was already mentioned in paragraphs 20 & 21, Parties 
to the Basel Convention have agreed not to allow the 
export of hazardous waste or other waste for disposal 
within the area south of 60ø S. Latitude. For the 
purpose of the Basel Convention, export of hazardous 
waste or other waste for disposal in Antarctica, is not 
deemed to constitute illegal traffic if it is not done 
by means of a transboundary movement; and the Liability 
Protocol envisaged by Article 12 of the Basel Convention 
is intended to provide for liability only in cases of 
damage resulting from a transboundary movement. If we 
search for a solution under article 16 of the Madrid 
Protocol, it is difficult to decide if the obligation 
to conduct all activities in Antarctica with due regard 
(article 3.2) can generate liability by non compliance, 
or if such liability arises only for those activities 
for which advance notice is required (article 3.4).

61  A lacunae seems to exist, on a first examination, that 
would allow for the possibility of wastes, including 
hazardous wastes, to be brought into the Antarctic 
Treaty Area with the potential adverse effect on the 
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems, but without sufficient ground to develop 
rules for liability and compensation. In fact, this is 
probably a conceptual misunderstanding since it is 
highly unlikely that export of hazardous or other 
wastes to areas south of 60ø S. would be done subject 
to transboundary movement involving more than one State. 
The most likely scenario is for a State seeking to 
dispose of hazardous wastes and other wastes in an area 
to undertake this action by himself. It would not be 
export but merely disposal, that is, dumping of waste 
in Antarctica which would then be prohibited by the 
London Convention (provided that it is dumping at sea).
:OTAGIN GENEVE    04-05-95 20:11    41227344194+02 549 1656    #21

In such scenario, liability rules would have to be 
developed within the framework of the process of 
amendment to the London Convention and/or of its 
Annexes already initiated by the Contracting Parties, 
or otherwise in the form of a Protocol on Liability 
to be negotiated under the 1972 London Convention.

42. Pollution damage is often caused by oil that has leaked 
or been discharged from ships. Accidents such as those 
of the Exxon Valdez or the Bahia Paraiso have highlighted 
the vulnerable nature of the marine environment in the 
polar regions, providing the political pressure for 
States to adopt new regimes for compensation or to 
improve the existing treaties on Civil Liability for 
Oil Pollution Damage (Brussels, 1969) its Protocol 
(London, 1976) the Amendment Protocol (London, 1984) 
the International Convention on the Establishment of 
an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution 
Damage (Brussels, 1971) its Protocol (London, 1976) and 
Amendment Protocol (London, 1984). Many States are not 
yet Parties to these Conventions and Protocols and, 
although tanker and oil companies have established 
liability schemes of their own (Tovalop & Cristal) these 
remain unsufficient. In the light of that it is quite 
regrettable that prospects for entry into force of the 
Protocols to the Civil Liability Convention and to the 
Fund do not appear to be brilliant, and that Antarctic 
Treaty Parties have failed to take any initiative to 
encourage their entry into force.

Land-based sources of marine pollution

43. Part XII of UNCLOS applies only insofar as it can be 
considered as corresponding to customary law or insofar 
as States, acting individualy or jointly, through 
appropriate international organizations, follow its 
provisions. Entry into force of the Convention on the 
Law of the Sea will not, by itself, close all existing 
gaps. For instance, provisions on combating land-based 
sources of pollution are to be found only in Protocols 
to the Barcelona, Kuwait and Lima Conventions concluded 
under the sponsorship of UNEP and in the Paris Convention 
for the Prevention of Marine Pollution from Land-Based 
Sources. In compliance with Agenda 21, States have 
initiated the preparation of a Global Agreement which 
should be adopted, after two preparatory meetings held 
in Montreal and in Reyjavik, at the end of 1995 in 
Washington, D.C.

44. The adoption of such global instrument will undoubtedly 
highlight the need to focus on increasing marine 
pollution in the Southern Ocean. There is, on one side, 
a need to identify particularly sensitive areas and 
further develop regional pollution assessment and control 
measures. The coastline of Antarctica is unusual in the 
dynamic interplay between land, ice and water. It will 
be essential to develop comprehensive coastal zone 
planning to reconcile, as far as possible, competing 
uses and environmental protection of those areas.
In this conte:t, liability rules would also have to 
developed within the framework of the process of 
amending the 1972 London Dumping Convention already 
undertaken by its Contracting Parties, or in the form 
of a Liability Protocol to be negotiated under the 
Madrid Protocol or any other agreed procedure.

Implementation mechanisms and the Committee for 
Environmental Protection

45. Most of the international environmental protection 
agreements included in this survey contain institutional 
or other mechanisms intended to cope with the task of 
cooperating or relating to other instruments, agencies 
or institutions. In order to enable the Antarctic Treaty 
System to cope effectively with demands for international 
cooperation on a truly global scale, some of the functions 
entrusted to the Committee for Environmental Protection 
should be implemented by the Working Group established 
to that end. In addition, some thought should be given 
to the application of some of the following procedures:

      a) Extending invitations to the officials or the 
         Secretariats of the relevant Conventions and 
         Agreements to attend the Consultative Meetings 
         and, if appropriate, present Reports under Recom-
         mendation XIII-2.

      b) Consider nominating Antarctic Treaty observers, in 
         the same informal and cost-effective manner of the 
         CCAMLR observers to international meetings, to some 
         of the most important global environmental conferences.

46. Within this context, particular attention should be 
given to UNEP, in the light of the current General 
Assembly Resolution on the Question of Antarctica. 
It is appropriate to recall that the Executive Director 
of UNEP is expected to report regularly on the state of 
the global environment, including Antarctica. A US NOAA 
baseline Station at the South Pole is part of UNEP's 
Global Environmental Monitoring System. UNEP is very 
closely involved with the Vienna Convention/Montr?al 
Protocol treaty system to protect the ozone layer. Under 
the Global Plan of Action for Marine Mammals, whale, seal 
and dolphin populations in the Southern Ocean are jointly 
monitored by FAO and UNEP. A correlation with UNEP's 
system of Regional Seas could be useful and SCAR's 
contribution to global change research could also achieve 
better integration into global data networks through 
UNEP and other parts of the United Nations system.

47. Among those other parts of the UN system, attention should 
be given to the Commission for Sustainable Development 
(CSD) a functional commission of the ECOSOC entrusted 
with the task of monitoring progress in the implementation 
of Agenda 21 at the national, regional and international 
levels. The CSD seeks the integration of environmental 
and developmental goals throughout the UN system,
:OTAGIN GENEVE              04-05-95  20:14    41227344194+02 549 1656      #23   -1~3

coordinates intergovernmental decision-making on the 
environment and development, and makes recommendations on 
any new arrangement required to promote sustainable 
development. During the long-standing controversy on 
the Question of Antarctica at the UN, Malaysia suggested 
that the Antarctic Treaty Meetings report to the CSD. 
In fact, a copy of the Final Report of every ATCM is 
forwarded to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
who can decide, if he so wishes, to pass it to the CSD 
or may other UN Agency. However, thorough analysis of 
this matter should include an objective reflection of 
the fact that, in the absence of direct reporting to the 
CSD by the Antarctic Treaty System, such reporting will 
be done now by UNEP.

Participation of Non-Governmental Organizations

48. The Rio Declaration reflects and confirms the importance 
of the right of those who may be affected to have a say 
in their environmental future and Principle 10 enhances 
the significance of public awareness of environmental 
issues. The preamble to section III of Agenda 21 calls 
public participation "one of the fundamental prerequisites 
for the achievement of sustainable development". According 
to Agenda 21, the CSD is requested to encourage equitable 
representation of NGO's from developed and developing 
countries. The various multilateral instruments included 
in this survey have also contributed to establish a more 
open process for NGO participation. In this context, 
Articles 11 and 12 of the Madrid Protocol, establishing 
the Committee for Environmental Protection and defining 
its functions, require invitation to and consultation 
with relevant scientific, environmental and technical 
organizations. One important decision concerns the issue 
of such invitations and the practice of such consultations 
by the Working Party, given the broad scope and general 
interest existing in its programme of work.
