 
 
1
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-17  
Agenda Item 4a 
United States 
Original: English 
 
 
Team Report 
 
OF 
 
THE INSPECTION CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC 
TREATY AND ARTICLE XIV OF THE PROTOCOL UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE UNITED 
STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE 
 
February 2 to February 16, 2001 
 
 
The United States has regularly exercised its right of inspection, and in 2001 sent its 
eleventh U.S. Antarctic Treaty Inspection Team, coinciding with the 40th anniversary of 
the entry into force of the Treaty.  This was also the first U.S. inspection since the entry 
into force of the Madrid Protocol in 1998. The last U.S. inspection had been conducted in 
1995.  The Antarctic Treaty has been signed by 44 countries, 27 of which were 
conducting research on the continent, thus entitling them to the status of Consultative 
Party with the right to name inspectors. 
 
The 2001 U.S. Inspection Team consisted of ten U.S. nationals designated by the 
U.S. Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs in accordance with Article VII of the 
Treaty and Article XIV of the Protocol .  The members of the team, whose names were 
communicated to all Parties to the Treaty by diplomatic note of December 28, 2000, 
were:  Mr. Raymond Arnaudo, Department of State; Ms. Katherine Biggs, Environmental 
Protection Agency; Mr. Evan T. Bloom, Department of State; LCDR Douglas A. 
Boerman (US Navy), Department of State; CDR George Dupree, United States Coast 
Guard; Mr. Bernard Link,  Department of State; Mr. David Lopez, Environmental 
Protection Agency; Dr. Polly Penhale, National Science Foundation; Mr. Alexander 
Sutherland, National Science Foundation; Mr. Peter B. Ward, U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service. 
 
Mr. Arnaudo served as the leader of the Inspection Team.  Evan Bloom and Douglas 
Boerman were the deputy team leaders.  Team members were provided with letters of 
appointment and identification cards for the inspection. The Inspection Team arrived in 
the Antarctic Treaty area on February 5, having departed Punta Arenas on February 1, 
2001 on the National Science Foundation vessel Laurence M. Gould.  The team inspected 
the following eleven sites: Arctowski (Poland), Ferraz (Brazil), Vernadsky (Ukraine), 
Juan Carlos I (Spain), St. Kliment Ohridsky (Bulgaria), Frei and Escudero (Chile), 
Artigas (Uruguay), Jubany (Argentina), Great Wall (China), Bellingshausen (Russia), and 
King Sejong (Republic of Korea).  The team departed the Treaty area on February 13, 
 
 
2
2001.  Due to the ship’s schedule it was necessary to plan on conducting two inspections 
on most of the days available.  The itinerary and route of the inspection are shown in 
Annex A.   
 
 
Summary of Findings 
 
The Inspection Team was welcomed and treated cordially at each of the eleven 
stations visited.  All areas were open to inspection upon request.  The team found a high 
degree of environmental awareness and understanding of the obligations of the Treaty 
and the Protocol.   
 
Arms or Military Activities 
 
No arms violations, storage or disposal of hazardous or radioactive materials, or 
activities with military implications were observed.  All stations observed appeared to be 
in compliance with the provisions of the Treaty reserving Antarctica exclusively for 
peaceful purposes.  
Science 
 
The level of science interdisciplinary and  extremely high and included various 
cooperative projects between countries. Most stations supported a multi-disciplinary 
research program with an emphasis on research in the local area and on oceanographic 
research cruises in the Antarctic Peninsula region. Collectively, research was conducted 
in the fields of atmospheric sciences, geology and geophysics, biological and ecosystem 
studies, oceanography, meteorology, archaeology, cartography, chemistry and physics. 
There was an emphasis on environmental monitoring at some of the stations, with studies 
including measurements of air quality, water quality, trace metal concentrations in 
terrestrial and marine organisms, and impact of humans on populations of birds or 
mammals. 
 
All stations reported a high degree of cooperation with scientists from other 
Antarctic Treaty parties and joint programs were in evidence at most stations.  Several 
stations related this to the high degree of intense concentration fostered by the isolation of 
the posts, but also, significantly, the cooperative climate of Antarctica.  All stations had 
contacts with other stations and scientists of other Treaty countries. 
 
Scientists at the stations often provided educational lectures to all assigned personnel 
on topics such as conservation, protection of flora and fauna under the Antarctic Treaty 
and the Protocol, and recommendations for avoiding interference with wildlife. 
 
 
3
 
Inspection procedures 
 
All station managers and personnel were receptive and gracious to the Inspection 
Team.  Most station managers acknowledged the usefulness of the inspection process, 
especially as a tool to improve their station operations.  In this context, several managers 
requested a copy of the final inspection report noting that they had not seen previous 
reports.  Station managers and personnel often view the inspection process as an 
opportunity to assess their station management plan and to use the information to identify 
any areas that could use improvement.   Electronic distribution of inspection reports 
would ensure broader distribution.   
 
Three countries had completed a checklist prior to the Inspection Team’s arrival, 
which was extremely helpful to the team.  It was also of great value to station personnel 
in that it provided a means of self-assessment to determine whether the station was in 
compliance with the provisions of the Treaty and Protocol.  The team noted, however, the 
value of the inspection itself as a means of verifying the reported information. 
Awareness and knowledge of obligations 
 
The awareness of the need for environmental protection was extremely high and 
station operations and personnel reflected a strong commitment to environmental 
protection. 
 
All station personnel interviewed had a significant level of awareness about the 
Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol.  All countries provided training and 
instruction to staff members typically initiated in the home country prior to departure.  
Training often included instruction on the Antarctic Treaty and Protocol, protection of 
native plants and animals, and waste management.  Medical screening for tours in 
isolated posts was also a usual requirement. 
 
Station personnel appeared to be quite knowledgeable of steps to be taken to protect 
the environment in response to an emergency.  They also appeared to be aware of the 
need to limit construction activities to minimize any potential environmental impact.  
However, station personnel were not always fully aware of the Protocol mandated 
reporting requirements in the aftermath of emergency situations, such as spills, fire, and 
shipwrecks, as stated in Article 15 or for environmental impact assessments in Article 8 
and Annex I.  It was possible that officials within the home government were assigned 
responsibility for the reporting requirements, but some station personnel were unaware of 
the requirements for such reporting. 
Waste management 
 
Most stations had adequate and efficient sewage treatment systems.  Those that did 
not acknowledged the need for upgrade and indicated near-term plans for installation of 
 
 
4
appropriate systems.  Almost all stations had some system in place for monitoring sewage 
and gray water effluent.   Several stations were also conducting environmental 
monitoring, including monitoring for heavy metals in biological communities and air and 
water quality sampling, to determine any impacts the station may be having on the 
environment with the intent of factoring this information into the station’s management 
and operations.  
 
Most stations used on-station incinerators to manage food and paper wastes.  The 
team found no evidence of open burning, landfilling or disposal of garbage into the ice. 
Emergency response 
 
All stations indicated that they would cooperate with other stations in the event of 
emergencies situations, including response to oil spills or medical evacuation.  The 
Argentine and Chilean ships patrolling the Peninsula area in the vicinity of King George 
Island were capable of providing spill assistance to any of the area stations.  Medical 
evacuation could have been accomplished by helicopter or possibly by tour ship.  Stations 
also had plans in place to share medical doctors, if necessary, and one station had a 
cooperative arrangement to provide medical support to a neighboring station.  
 
Most stations, however, had little or no actual training or planning for emergency 
response, and some indicated a lack of familiarity with the obligation under the Protocol 
to take response action.  Most stations left the preparations, including training or drills, in 
the hands of one or a few of the staff.  When the team inquired about emergency 
preparations, it was often informed that this responsibility fell to a certain individual or 
team of individuals.   
 
While some stations had pollution control booms and skimmers, and absorbent 
materials for fuel and oil spills, not all stations had the necessary equipment on hand to 
respond to an emergency which included a significant fuel release.  Although stations 
seemed more prepared to handle a fire emergency than a fuel or chemical release, fires 
still posed a potentially significant problem.  In the event of a large fire, personnel could 
be endangered and environmental harm could result from burning and release of fuel and 
toxic/hazardous chemicals.  The team noted that not all stations had smoke detectors. 
 
Ample fuel spill and chemical containment materials should be available at each 
station.  Stations often relied on the re-supply ship to provide absorbent materials in the 
event of a release during re-fueling.  However, often there were no materials on station to 
manage any significant release from the storage tanks or generator supply tanks.  Not all 
stations had spill prevention and containment plans. 
Fuel storage 
 
The Inspection Team found oil, gas and other hydrocarbon materials were generally 
well stored and protected.  There were no signs of major leaks or spills, although at most 
stations, there was evidence that a small amount of spillage or leakage was common. 
 
 
5
Because a major leak or spill of oil or fuel represented arguably the greatest risk to the 
environment from human presence, stations should routinely examine and re-evaluate 
their storage facilities.  Several sites had berms around the storage tanks and some had 
concrete pads for the tanks.  Two stations combined these two safety measures, but 
several stations had neither.  
 
Chemical storage 
 
All stations maintained and stored some hazardous chemicals, in particular industrial 
chemicals, and recognized the importance of safe storage.  In several instances, there 
seemed to be a misconception that paint, cleaners and solvents are not necessarily 
hazardous chemicals.  Most stations did not provide separate dedicated storage for 
hazardous chemicals including industrial chemicals, although the more modern facilities 
did provide separate storage with containment protection, such as fire protective flooring, 
to control and contain any leakage or release in the event of a fire.  Failure to provide 
these protections could result in harm to personnel and the environment.  
Helicopter activity  
Several stations raised concerns over disturbance to bird and seal colonies because of 
helicopter traffic.  Giant petrel colonies in particular were singled out, as these birds are 
highly susceptible to disturbances.  Some stations used helicopters for support operations, 
and the threat of increased activity by tour operators was also noted.   
Domestic animals 
The team found no domestic animals at any station. 
Plants 
Although most stations had no plants on station, some grew vegetables and some 
grew decorative plants, which they cited as being important for staff morale. 
Communication 
 
The team found INMARSAT numbers shown in the Council of Managers of 
National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) listings were not always current and 
notification of our intention to inspect in most cases was conducted by radio.  The ever-
improving state of electronic communications should allow telephone numbers, radio 
frequencies and e-mail addresses to be kept more current in the COMNAP directory. 
Tourism 
 
Overall, tourism did not appear to be a major problem for stations, although some 
stations raised concerns, including the possibility of large increases in the number of 
tourists.  Visits by tour groups had now become fairly routine at most stations.  Tour 
operators usually called ahead for permission to visit the station and agreement or 
 
 
6
understandings between the stations and the tour operators controlled the number of 
tourists on station at any one time.  In certain situations where tourism had posed 
potential problems, some tourism controls had been implemented, such as marked 
walking paths and signs delineating “no entry” or “off limit” areas.  
Station managers pointed out that tour ships provided a service to some stations by 
assisting with medical evacuations, transporting station personnel to stations, and 
providing some re-supply or waste removal service. 
 
Recommendations 
 
Fuel Storage 
 
Regular ultrasound testing and scheduled maintenance including protective painting 
for all tanks should be adopted.  Berms or protective trenches should surround tanks.  As 
storage tanks are replaced, the new tanks should be double lined and installed with an 
under liner and berm.  Excess tanks, including those under-utilized or no longer in use, 
should be cleaned, stabilized, and ultimately removed.  
 
Hazardous Substance Storage 
 
Separate storage with containment protection, such as fire protective flooring should 
be provided to control and contain any leakage or release in the event of a fire.  Ideally, 
this would be in a separate building or site, but where space is limited, the materials 
should be safely distanced from work and living areas. The storage area should also be 
properly ventilated to prevent fume build-up.  
Treaty and Protocol Obligations 
 
Station managers should routinely review the reporting requirements under the 
Protocol for emergency situations, such as spills, fire, shipwrecks (Article 15), as well as 
for environmental impact assessments (Article 8 and Annex I). 
 
Inspection checklist 
 
Station managers should review and complete the Inspection Checklist for their 
stations, which was adopted at the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting.  As noted, this 
provided a useful means of self-assessment to help determine the station’s compliance 
with the provisions of the Treaty and Protocol. 
Emergency response 
 
Stations should routinely review procedures for emergency response to oil spills and 
evacuations for fire or chemical alerts, as well as the obligations for compliance under the 
Protocol. All main buildings should be equipped with smoke detectors or fire detection 
equipment. Fuel spill and chemical containment materials should be available on station 
 
 
7
in adequate supply to respond effectively to the maximum potential spill.  Station 
managers who relied on the re-supply ship to provide absorbent materials in the event of 
a release during re-fueling could find that there are not enough materials on hand in the 
event of a real emergency.  Stations should have a spill prevention and containment plan 
that specifically addresses the types of storage containers at the station. 
Helicopter use 
 
Stations that operated or relied upon low-flying aircraft should regularly review the 
potential disturbance to nearby bird and seal colonies. 
Communication 
 
Station managers should review and update telephone numbers, radio frequencies 
and e-mail addresses listed in the COMNAP directory. 
 
Tourism 
 
 
 
 
Stations should be encouraged to study or monitor the effect of tourist 
activity on protected areas and colonies of birds and mammals. 
