XXIV Консультативное совещание
по Договору об Антарктике
XXIV Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting
XXIV Reunion Consultative
du Traite sur l'Antarctique
XXIV Reunion Consultiva
del Tratado Antartico

St. Petersburg
R U S S I A
July 9-20, 2001

                                  ATCM XXIV
                                  Information Paper IP-82
                                  Agenda Item 10

                                  Belgium-Sweden

                                  English

Questions on
insurance and limitation of liability
under the Annex on Response Measures


Submitted by Belgium-Sweden
Questions on insurance and limitation of liability under the
Annex on Response Measures

This paper discusses questions on insurance and limitation of liability under the
Annex on Response Measures. It deals with the questions in relation to the
Chairman's draft. It discusses some more technical matters, as well as the more
principal question if the liability should be limited.

Limitation of liability or limitation of insurance

In the Chairman's draft, it is suggested that the insurance in case of government
activities be adequate and in case of non-governmental ones should cover the
liability up to the limits according to Article 9.

It is generally difficult to set limits of liability in international agreements and
such decisions are often taken in the last moments of negotiations. Not all liability
agreements limit liability. Some prescribe unlimited liability. Examples of recent
liability agreements that contain limits are the HNS Convention (10 million SDR1
to 100 million SDR) and the Basel Protocol (1 million SDR to 30 million SDR).
The latest example of unlimited liability is the 1999 Montreal Convention.

Any decision on limits will have to take into account information on costs for
response actions, but may also be influenced by political aspects.

If the scope of the Annex is restricted to response measures, the reasons for
limiting the liability loose substantially in strength. The extent of measures that
may be taken will be limited and the cost as a consequence fairly predictable. In
addition, the obligation to take measures, and the cost for such measures, is also
restricted by the fact that the measures should be reasonable. The word
reasonable will in itself limit liability under the Annex and it is questionable if an
additional limit is needed.

1 If limits are used in the annex the amount could be in SDR (Special Drawing Rights), which is the
monetary unit of the International Monetary Fund.
If the liability under the Annex in not limited, the insurance obligation for non-governmental activities would have to be defined further by the Annex. It is presently not possible to obtain unlimited insurance cover for such risks as those in question. There are two ways of achieving this. One is to introduce limits in the Article on insurance, the other to leave the level of insurance to be defined by each Party in relation to its operators.

In case the insurance level is set out in the Annex, the problem is to find a suitable level. The level would have to adequately cover larger and more complicated operations. Such a level may, however, be a troublesome economic burden for smaller operators. This problem applies equally if the liability itself is limited in the Annex. A limit suitable for some operations may be financially unreasonable to others.

The other way of solving the problem is that each Party decides on the insurance level in relation to its operators. With this solution appropriate insurance cover could be decided in relation to each specific operation. The benefits are that no unnecessary economical burdens are created. On the other hand there is of course a risk that Parties require insufficient insurance cover.

Technical issues relating to the insurance question

To make liability a useful tool for the protection of the general public and the operator there is general agreement that it ought to be covered by insurance or some other type of guarantee. The provision on insurance raises a number of additional questions.

The first question is which type of insurance, security or guarantee that should be accepted. As far as the question relates to guarantees, declarations of self-insurance are normally only accepted by states. The question of which kinds of securities that should be accepted is not controversial. Normally bonds or bank guarantee are used. When it comes to insurance, the liability may not have to be covered by a normal liability insurance policy. Instead of the commercial general
liability insurance policy (CGL), which covers general liability arising from a 
normal business operation, the policy could specify with reference to the activities 
of the operator (transport of persons or goods or other operations), what type of 
special environmental liability policy coverage should be provided for. This is 
however a question that may be left to be resolved on the national implementation 
level.

A connected question is whether a specific insurance policy or guarantee should 
cover the risk of a specific operation. If that is desirable the commonly used 
wording is to state that the insurance or guarantee may only be drawn upon to 
cover liability under the Annex. As a result a specific insurance policy would have 
to be taken out. If such language is not used, the operator could use a more 
general insurance policy. For instance, a tour operator could cover both liability 
for the environment and for the passengers under the same policy.

The next question is if evidence that the obligation is fulfilled is needed. There 
may be need for a procedure to assure that all the necessary insurance 
requirements are fulfilled, such as a certificate evidencing the nature of the 
financial guarantees.

Another question is the issue of a direct action against the insurer or the 
guarantor. If a direct action is introduced, the defenses available to the latter 
should also be addressed. Compared to a system where the insurer has to 
reimburse the operator for what he has paid, the direct action provides protection 
against fraud by the operator.

An important point is that the validity of the insurance guarantee should not be 
terminated before the end of the period during which actions for compensation 
can be brought against the operator. In accordance with article 7, all actions for 
compensation shall be brought against the operator within three years of the 
detection of the environmental emergency. The prescription period of the action 
against the insurer should coincide with this period.
