Page 1 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-52  
Agenda Item 4c) 
IAATO 
Original: English 
 
 
 
Issues Relating to Cumulative Environmental  
Impacts Of Tourist Activities 
 
                     
 
During CEP/SATCM XII (September 2000) IAATO offered to provide an 
information paper to the Committee of Environmental Protection on progress related 
to issues of Cumulative Environmental Impacts.  
 
This paper briefly addresses the following areas: Collection of Baseline Data; Site 
Integrity; Tourist Numbers; Cumulative Impacts Workshop Results. 
 
Cumulative impact is the impact of combined past, present and reasonably foreseeable 
activities. These activities occur over time and space (from Cumulative 
Environmental Impacts in Antarctica Minimisation and Management, Proceedings of 
the IUCN Workshop on Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica, Washington DC, 18-21 
September, 1996).  It is understood that cumulative impacts may be the result of the 
repetitive occurrence of a single activity, or the combined effect of multiple activities 
by some or several agents and that cumulative impact may be additive, interactive, 
synergistic, antagonistic or a result of bio-magnification.  
 
 
1. Collection of Baseline Data  
 
 
A. Twelve years of data representing landing activities and sites visited by tour 
operators have been collected by tour operators and compiled by the United 
States National Science Foundation. The information has been collected by 
each tour operator filling out Post Visit Site Reports for each voyage. The 
individual voyage information is compiled into data sheets, which include an 
overview of landing sites, nationalities and overall tourist numbers.  These 
data sheets can be found on the IAATO website at www.iaato.org. 
 
Missing from these sheets are some of the yacht activities and National 
Program vessels who land at specific sites but don’t report their activities.  
Efforts are underway to capture more information in the future on yacht 
Page 2 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
activities.  In order to get a more accurate picture, however, it would be 
helpful if National Program vessels with tourists on board would report their 
landing activities and all sightseeing aircraft activities would also be 
monitored.   
B. The Post Visit Site Report form was amended in 1997 at ATCM XXI. Further 
amendments are being requested at ATCM XXIV in order to be able to integrate 
the Post Visit Site Reports into the future IAATO database. IAATO is in the 
process of developing a data base system to facilitate collecting and analyzing the 
information. IAATO plans to implement use of the new database hopefully in 
April 2002.
 
C.  IAATO members have been supporting the Antarctic Site Inventory project, 
operated by the United States nonprofit foundation Oceanites, Inc., which for 
seven seasons has been collecting baseline data at numerous sites in the Antarctic 
Peninsula. Appendix B is a brief synopsis of the work the Inventory is conducting 
and results from the project's first seven field seasons. 
 
  2. Site Integrity 
 
A. IAATO members already follow guidelines for conducting activities ashore 
that are designed to protect flora and fauna and artifacts.  IAATO members 
meet yearly and discuss sites that might benefit from additional protection or 
any behavior modifications necessary by expedition staff in organizing and 
supervising landings ashore. During the June 2001 IAATO meeting, members 
agreed to establish a Site Guideline Committee composed of experienced 
expedition leaders and staff members to begin looking at the top 20 sites that 
host over 80% of the visits in the Peninsula region.  The objective will be to 
develop site-specific guidelines for sites where additional guidance is merited. 
 
B. Dry Valleys: Currently only one operator visits the Dry Valleys on a regular 
basis. A brief overview of activities is described in Appendix C.   
 
3. Tourist Numbers 
 
Numbers and location of tourist visits are reported yearly at the ATCM and statistics 
can be found on the IAATO website. 
 
An increase or decrease in the numbers of tourists is not in itself a good indicator of 
whether cumulative impact is any more or less likely to occur. One has to look at the 
activities themselves and whether the tourist groups are going ashore or simply 
cruising in Antarctic waters.  It is also important to consider a variety of related issues 
such as whether the groups are landing or not landing, if landing, for how long, and if 
the site itself can handle large or small groups.  
 
While it is convenient to focus on numbers, the numbers themselves are not 
meaningful without careful analysis. Other physical and biological factors must be 
considered in this analysis. Those factors could include but are not limited to: 1 
• The biological diversity at the site, 
                                                 
1 The above list derives from the Cumulative Impacts workshop held June 7-9, 2000. 
Page 3 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
• Location relative to the distributional ranges of the species present,  
• Robustness of the species present,  
• Availability of open space,  
• General topography, 
• Novelty of the site,  
• Ice and weather conditions,  
• Availability of safe anchoring or holding sites, acoustic characteristics,  
• Location of comparable sites nearby, meteorological information,  
• Amount of krill and other food sources in close vicinity to assure wildlife can 
have sufficient resources,  
• Snow pack,  
• Ice edge 
 
*. To be able to fully evaluate cumulative impacts requires consideration of these 
factors – clearly necessitating cooperation and coordination between scientists, the 
Antarctic community at large and IAATO. 
 
4. Cumulative Impacts Workshop 
 
From June 7-9, 2000 IAATO jointly hosted with the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency and the U.S National Science Foundation (NSF) a workshop entitled 
“Assessment of the Possible Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Commercial Ship-
Based Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Area.” Appendix A is the Executive 
Summary. NSF will publish the final report from this workshop in August 2001. The 
workshop was very successful and will hopefully be a meaningful step in developing 
future direction for both the tourism and scientific communities to better understand, 
avoid, minimize or mitigate cumulative impact from tourist activities in Antarctica. 
(SATCM XII, IP 32, Appendix H included the agenda and workshop objectives). 
 
Recommendation 13 in the Executive Summary encourages the establishment of an 
independent steering group, made up of appropriate experts, to assist in scoping, 
implementing, and overviewing needed actions.  IAATO offers to coordinate the 
steering group and seeks input from the Antarctic science community.  
 
Conclusion 
 
IAATO acknowledges the necessity and responsibility of considering cumulative 
impacts. At current levels of growth we believe that tourist activities both historically 
and those planned for the next 5 years will continue to have no more than minor or 
transitory impact on the biological, and physical aspects of the Antarctic Peninsula. 
The formation of an IAATO Site Guideline Committee, a willingness to establish 
Steering Group with appropriate experts to guide implementation of needed activities 
identified in the Executive Summary (Appendix A), the continued use of the Post 
Visit Site Report forms, the formation of the IAATO data base, the general 
monitoring that IAATO members do on each of their vessels and land programs, 
demonstrate that IAATO is addressing the issue and that activities and impacts are 
being monitored.  
 
Page 4 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
Further work by IAATO is continuing.  It has been agreed by many that a true 
measurement of cumulative impact is very difficult, but IAATO remains committed to 
monitoring and planning future work in this area.  
 
Page 5 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
 
Appendix A 
 
Cumulative Impacts Workshop, June 2000, San Diego 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Tourism in Antarctica, particularly ship-based tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula area, 
has increased steadily in the last decade.  Currently available information is 
insufficient to accurately predict how or to what extent the physical features and biota 
at particular sites may be affected by repeat visits or to accurately predict the 
frequency and duration of visits likely to produce particular effects or how those 
effects might best be avoided. 
A number of studies have been and are being done that provide the kinds of data 
needed.  It is not clear, however, whether these studies are providing all of the needed 
information and, if not, what additional research and monitoring are necessary to 
resolve the uncertainties.   
 
To help address these issues, a workshop was held in La Jolla, California, June 7-9, 
2000, jointly sponsored by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF), the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the International Association of 
Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO).  The principal objectives of this workshop were 
to: identify the types of cumulative environmental impacts that possibly could result 
from commercial, ship-based tourist operations in the Antarctic Peninsula area; 
review on-going research and monitoring programs in the Peninsula area to determine 
whether they likely will be able to detect the possible cumulative adverse effects of 
ship-based tourism before they reach significant levels, and; describe changes in 
existing research and monitoring programs or additional programs that would be 
required to detect cumulative adverse effects before they reach significant levels. 
 
Participants included scientists from several countries with many years of research 
experience in Antarctica, representatives of companies engaged in Antarctic tour 
operations, and representatives of U.S. government agencies with responsibilities for 
implementing the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.   
 
The first set of presentations focused on overview of commercial ship-based tour 
operations in the Peninsula area.  Topics included an historical overview of tourism, 
how expeditions are planned, and how activities ashore are managed.  Additional 
presentations and discussions considered examples of possible cumulative 
environmental impacts and the site variables and activity variables possibly affecting 
cumulative impacts.  Presentations were also made by researchers involved in long-
term research and monitoring programs being conducted in the Peninsula area and 
near McMurdo Station.  Among other things, these study results indicated that long-
term studies are likely to be necessary to detect any possible cumulative impacts of 
ship-based tourism. 
 
In the discussions, the participants noted that a range of measures could be taken to 
avoid, minimize, or mitigate the possible cumulative impacts of ship-based tour 
operations.  These measures included limiting the number of visits and visitors to 
particular sites; maximizing, minimizing, or alternating the number of sites visited; 
Page 6 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
developing site-specific visit guidelines for different types of sites; establishing 
qualification standards for ship operations and expedition staff; conducting 
comparative studies and perturbation experiments; instituting site modifications such 
as marking walking paths; encouraging self-regulation and self-policing; and 
establishing and periodically reviewing guidelines or codes of conduct for activities 
not already covered by existing protocols. 
 
The presentations and discussions led the workshop participants to identify specific 
needs and opportunities for detecting, avoiding, or mitigating cumulative adverse 
impacts from ship-based tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula area.  These needs and 
opportunities fall into four general categories:  1) Site Monitoring; 2) Coordination 
with Related Research and Monitoring Programs; 3) Tour Planning; and 4) 
Expediting Long-Term Program Planning and Evaluation. 
 
Site Monitoring 
 
1. For reasons of cost effectiveness and practicality, it would be desirable to identify 
and focus-monitoring efforts on a series of sites believed to be representative of 
the types of sites of interest to, and being visited by, tourists in the Peninsula area. 
 
2. The Antarctic Site Inventory project is providing the types of information needed 
to detect possible long-term cumulative impacts at typical sites.  At present, 
however, the project lacks a stable, long-term funding base.  It is not clear whether 
the sampling regime being used is adequate to detect any but major changes in the 
variables being monitored; whether all potentially relevant variables are being 
monitored; or whether variables being monitored will yield useful results. 
 
3. Observations at a series of comparable sites along a gradient with different types 
and levels of tourist activities, and/or observations at a series of comparable sites 
subjected intentionally to different types and levels of tourist activities likely will 
be necessary to distinguish any cumulative environmental impacts resulting from 
tourist activities from those caused by other factors. 
 
4. Reliable information on both tourist and non-tourist activities at particular sites 
will be needed to do the kinds of analyses required to determine the likely cause 
or causes of any observed changes in the variables being monitored. Procedures 
should be established to periodically review the data currently being collected to 
assure that it will enable meaningful retrospective analyses. 
 
Coordination with Related Research and Monitoring Programs 
 
5. Long-term observation will be necessary to detect possible cumulative 
environmental impacts of ship-based tourism in the Peninsula area. 
 
6. If continued for the foreseeable future, the AMLR, LTER, and other research 
programs being carried out in the Peninsula area should detect region-wide 
changes in potentially affected penguin, sea bird, and seal populations, and 
provide the kinds of information needed to determine whether any changes 
detected at tourist visitor sites are due to natural processes, fisheries, scientific 
research, or tourist activities. 
Page 7 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
 
7. Mechanisms should be established by the various organizations conducting or 
supporting related research in the Peninsula area to coordinate research planning, 
share data and logistic support, and cooperatively analyze and report data of 
mutual interest.  Standard methods for collecting and formats for recording data of 
common interest should be established.  Consideration should be given to 
establishing common base maps and geographic information systems for 
archiving and analyzing data with geographic attributes. 
 
8. Efforts should be made to promote development of innovative research proposals 
and to seek funding from both government and private sources for short-term 
studies to document how disturbance affects the behavior and reproductive 
success of various species and for long-term monitoring to detect population level 
effects.  Procedures should be developed to take advantage of the research 
opportunities afforded by accidents or by natural catastrophes. 
 
9. Consideration should be given to long-term international programs to monitor the 
presence, level and effects of biological and chemical contaminants and disease 
organisms in indicator areas and species and to encouraging research coupling 
marine and terrestrial systems. 
 
Tour Planning 
 
10. It would be desirable to develop site-specific visit guidelines to manage tourist 
activities at sites which are visited frequently and which contain flora, fauna, 
geological features, or historic artifacts that may be particularly vulnerable to 
damage or destruction. 
 
11. Codes of conduct or guidelines should be established for tourist-related activities 
for which appropriate guidelines do not currently exist (e.g., whale watching, 
scuba diving, camping). 
 
12. Basic qualification standards should be established for deck officers, expedition 
leaders, naturalists, zodiac drivers, and observers responsible for safe and 
environmentally benign tour operations in the Peninsula area. 
 
Expediting Long-Term Program Planning and Evaluation 
 
13. Recognizing the broad scope and complexity of these tasks, the most effective 
way to proceed might be to establish an independent steering group, made up of 
appropriate experts, to assist in scoping, implementing, and over viewing needed 
actions.  Among other things, such a group might: 
 
• 
Develop or oversee development of a handbook of standard methods for 
characterizing tourist visitor sites and detecting the possible cumulative 
impacts of ship-based tourism; 
 
• 
Assist in the identification of representative “type” areas in which monitoring 
efforts should be focused; 
 
Page 8 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
• 
Help identify and determine how best to access historic data and data from 
ongoing research and monitoring programs that could contribute to detecting 
and determining how best to avoid, minimize, or mitigate the possible adverse 
cumulative effects of ship-based tourist activities in the Peninsula area; and 
 
• 
Assist in the development of site-specific codes of conduct; visit guidelines, 
and monitoring plans for the most frequently visited areas. 
 
 
Page 9 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
 
Appendix B 
 
Antarctic Site Inventory Results 
Oceanites 
 By Ron Naveen 
 
• The project began in 1994, and recently completed its seventh field season.  
Funding is secure for the coming 2001-02 field season, with work expected to  
begin in November 2001. 
 
• Through February 2001, Inventory researchers have made 336 visits to 66  
Antarctic Peninsula locations. During the 2000-01 season, 49 site visits were  
accomplished and 7 new locations were added to the Inventory. In addition,  
key northeastern Peninsula study sites were photo documented successfully in a  
cooperative effort between the Inventory and the Her Majesty’s Royal Navy  
ship, HMS Endurance, coordinated by the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office  
(Polar Regions Section, Overseas territories Department) and Oceanites, Inc. 
 
• Inventory intentions for the 2001-02 field season, and beyond include: 
• The eighth field season of Antarctic Site Inventory data collection commences 
in November 2001. 
• There will be an increased assessment/monitoring effort at select sites 
previously determined to be highly diverse or potentially sensitive to 
environmental disruption, or which are proximate to long-term Peninsula 
research projects: Hannah Point, Livingston Island (62 39’S, 60 37’W); Paulet 
Island (63 35’S, 55 27’W); Baily Head, Deception Island ((62 58’S, 60 30’W), 
Orne Island (64 40’S, 62 40’W), and Petermann Island (65 10’S, 64 10’W). 
• Future plans include expanded and enhanced dissemination of site-specific 
data, maps, photo documentation, and other relevant information via the new 
Oceanites website; a penguin culmen experiment, potentially enabling 
breeding chronologies to be determined more precisely; and further 
investigation of the Peninsula Blue-eyed Shag population. 
 
Recent Published Papers in Polar Record include two peer-reviewed papers by 
Inventory researchers (Naveen, Forrest, Dagit, Blight, and the Trivelpieces):  
 
• Censuses of penguin, Blue-eyed Shag, and Southern Giant Petrel populations 
in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334 
(2000); and Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 
1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132 (2001). 
 
The Census paper presents penguin, Blue-eyed Shag, and Southern Giant  
Petrel census data collected from 26 Antarctic Peninsula locations, collected  
by the Antarctic Site Inventory from 1994 to 2000, in accordance with CEMP  
standard methods. For nine sites, population data are published for the first  
time. During the period, significant declines in nesting populations of  
Blue-eyed Shag was documented at three northwestern Peninsula locations. The  
only trends noted are those suggested by comparable data the Inventory has  
Page 10 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
collected; it is cautioned that historic censuses may not be comparable to  
Inventory data because they were accomplished at various times, in varying  
fashions, and not necessarily in accordance with the CEMP standard methods.  
 
• The Zodiac landings paper examines the location, intensity, and frequency of 
zodiac landings by expedition tour ship passengers in the Antarctic Peninsula 
over ten seasons, 1989-90 through 1998-99.  
 
In this period, the number of passengers increased 307%, from 2,460 to 10,013. 
Zodiac landings have occurred at 165 Peninsula region sites, concentrating in the 
South Shetland Islands and the northwestern part of the Peninsula. From 1989-90 to 
1998-99, the number of zodiac landings in the Peninsula region increased 423%, from 
164 to 858. The most visited sites are identified, as are sites experiencing increases in 
the second half of this 10-year period. The 10 and 20 sites experiencing the most 
zodiac landings each season consistently account for approximately 55% and 75% of 
that season’s landings, respectively. Based on 1998-99 data, sites with high or 
medium species diversity or with high or moderate sensitivity to potential 
environmental disturbance account for a significant percentage of landings; however, 
the question of whether the frequency and intensity of human visitation translates to 
actual disturbance of resident fauna and flora needs to be explored fully. 
Recommendations for improved site evaluation and site visit  
reporting is also presented. 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
Appendix C 
 
Evaluation of Operational Procedures and Impacts for Tourist 
Landings by Helicopter in The Dry Valleys, Victoria Land 
 by Quark Expeditions 
 
With Contributions by: Susan Adie, R.K. Headland,  
Denise Landau, John Splettstoesser, and 
Werner Stambach 
 
 
A. History of Tourist Landings in Dry Valleys  
 
The Dry Valleys area was discovered during the Discovery Expedition of R. F. Scott, 
in 1901-1904. The McMurdo Dry Valleys are the largest ice-free region of the 
Antarctic continent, encompassing an area of some 15,000 km2, located about 100 km 
west of Ross Island in Victoria Land, with approximate boundaries of 77°-78.5 °S, 
160°-164.5°E. The area is about 30 percent largely free of ice (Vincent, 1996).  
 
The Dry Valleys area has been extensively studied in a number of scientific 
disciplines since the beginning of the International Geophysical Year, 1957-58, and 
continues in that regard. Large, multidisciplinary projects include the Dry Valley 
Drilling Project, conducted in the 1970s, and in 1993 the National Science Foundation 
supported the establishment of a Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site in the 
Valleys.  
 
Commercial tourism in the Dry Valleys is recent and limited, restricted to brief visits 
each season since the 1992-93 austral summer, by helicopter transport to Taylor 
Valley from the Russian icebreaker Kapitan Khlebnikov. Either Russian MI-2 or MI-8 
helicopters, or western style (Bell) helicopters have been used for these visits. These 
have consisted of a single visit in a season, two visits or, in one year, three visits, all 
to Taylor Valley, and nearly all to the same location in the valley. A short history of 
this activity is given below, with passenger/staff numbers per season listed in Table 1.  
 
Information on the Dry Valleys can be found in the extensive literature that has 
resulted from scientific research projects conducted there and in reports on 
environmental issues resulting from workshops conducted in 1995 and 1998. These 
reports allude to tourism in various parts of the text and discuss potential impacts of 
tourism presence. The first two reports include an established Environmental Code of 
Conduct for Field Work in the McMurdo Dry Valleys. 
 
1. Vincent, W. F. (ed.) (1996). Environmental Management of a Cold Desert 
Ecosystem: The McMurdo Dry Valleys. Desert Research Institute, University 
of Nevada, USA, special publication, 57 pp.  
 
2. Wharton, R. A., Jr. and P. T. Doran (eds.) 1999. McMurdo Dry Valley 
Lakes: Impacts of Research Activities. Desert Research Institute, University 
and Community College System of Nevada, USA, special publication, 54 p.  
 
Page 12 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
In addition, environmental issues related in part to the Dry Valleys are discussed in 
the following report: 
 
3. Jezek., Kenneth C. and Lynn Tipton-Everett (eds.). 1995. Managing the 
Antarctic Environment: From Observations to Policy. A Workshop Report. 
BPRC Report No. 12, Byrd Polar Research Center, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, 42 pages.  
 
On its maiden voyage to Antarctica in the 1992-93 austral summer, the Russian 
icebreaker Kapitan Khlebnikov carried tourists on the final leg of its three cruises that 
season to the Ross Sea area, and made the first flights by ship helicopters to the 
Taylor Valley. A shipboard observer from the New Zealand Government was aboard, 
and together with the Expedition Leader, made the first flights for reconnaissance 
purposes to determine a safe and acceptable flight path into Taylor Valley, and also 
select a landing site. Just over 100 passengers were then landed in groups by the two 
helicopters during a period of about 8 hours on 10 February 1993. Each group spent 
approximately 15 minutes on the ground to relish the experience.  All stayed in the 
immediate area while the helicopter remained with rotors turning.   Staff accompanied 
each group for purposes of safety and environmental management. Following the 
ground time all boarded the helicopter and returned to the ship to exchange 
passengers and repeat the procedure.  The following seasons operated similarly, 
except for some in which expedition staff and passengers are left at the landing site in 
the Taylor Valley while the helicopter returned to the ship to collect the next group, 
returned to the landing site and exchanged passengers.  At this time the number of 
people on the ground doubled during the brief period of exchange. Generally there are 
no more than 30-50 tourists ashore at anyone time although the maximum number 
ashore would be 100. 
 
The United States and New Zealand Antarctic Programs recommended landing at this 
specific location in the Taylor Valley so that no interference with current scientific 
projects would be made. The flight path and altitude were determined as a result. The 
landing site was chosen in about the center of the valley, on or about Nussbaum 
Riegel, well away from any of the valley glaciers, research camps, or lakes. Landing 
sites in succeeding years have changed, and follow procedures given later in this 
report. Nearly all-flying activities have been done with United States, Australian, or 
New Zealand observers present, and with the concurrence of United States and New 
Zealand authorities at McMurdo Station and Scott Base. In some seasons, flights for 
sightseeing only or for reconnaissance extended farther to the west, reaching Taylor 
Glacier before returning to the ship.  
 
 Note that passenger complements on Russian icebreakers number about 100 per trip, 
but may range slightly higher or lower. Table 1 figures for passengers include staff, 
crew, and observers in some cases. 
 
Table 1. Tourist visits to Taylor Valley, 1992-93 through 2000-2001 seasons.  
 
Year 
Number of Tourists 
1992-93 
106 
Page 13 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
Year cont. 
Number of Tourists 
1993-94 
104 
1994-95 
313 
1995-96 
221  
1996-97 
184   
1997-98 
217 
1998-99 
199 
1999-2000 
212 
2000-01 
209 
Total All Seasons 
1,765 
 
Note: Modified from IAATO website: www.iaato.com  
 
 
Table 2. Tourist visits to Taylor Valley, 1993 through 2001, noting total time ashore 
per visit. 
 
Date of Visit 
Number of Visitors 
Duration of Visit (hours) 
10 Feb 1993 
106 
 8  
8 Feb 1994 
104 
8  
11 Jan 1995 
112 
 8  
3-4 Feb 1995 
105 
 4  
22 Feb 1995 
96 
5  
19 Jan 1996 
105 
6.5 
17 Feb 1996 
116 
7  
10 Jan. 1997 
76 
6 
14 Feb 1997 
108 
7.75 
3 Feb 1998 
127` 
6.25 
24 Feb 1998 
90 
14 (landing interrupted by 
weather) 
25 Jan 1999 
114 
7 
18 Feb 1999 
85 
6.5 
25 Dec 1999 
97 
10.25 (landing interrupted by 
weather) 
19 Jan 2000 
115 
8.5 
9 Jan 2001 
103 
6.5 
Page 14 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
29 Jan 2001 
106 
7 
Total All Seasons 
1,765 
102,25 (includes flying hours, 
landing, take off and ground 
time) 
 
Sources: D. Schoeling and E. Waterhouse (modified from Vincent, 1996), Post Visit 
Site Reports, Nadene Kennedy (National Science Foundation Office of Polar 
Programs, USA. The Visitor column includes passengers, staff, crew and observers in 
most cases.  
 
B. Practical Information for Helicopter Flights and Landings for Tourism Visits 
in Taylor Valley  
The following descriptions include operational procedures for typical seasonal 
helicopter activities based from the Russian icebreaker Kapitan Khlebnikov visits to 
McMurdo Sound and Taylor Valley.  
 
1. Landing Site  
By recommendation from the National Science Foundation and in accordance with its 
Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE), during previous Antarctic seasons, Quark 
Expeditions has been landing tourists by helicopters at a landing site close to Canada 
Glacier in Taylor Valley, at 77° 38' South and 163° 03' east. This location is about 20-
25 nautical miles away from the ship, which is "parked" in fast ice south of Marble 
Point.  
 
Helicopter flight time from the ship to Canada Glacier is about 15-20 minutes 
one way. Approximately 10-11 flights per helicopter are necessary to transport 
about 100 passengers and staff in a normal operation using two Russian MI-2 
helicopters (capacity 8 each plus pilot). Other modes of flying operations have 
involved an MI-8 helicopter (capacity approximately 20 plus 3 crew), and a 
Bell Long Ranger (capacity 5 plus pilot), so numbers of total flights vary 
somewhat depending on the season and type of aircraft used, but on average 
22 flights per visit are made for 95-100 passengers and staff on an icebreaker, 
including transport of survival equipment (see below), and no more than 32 
visitors are on the ground at any one time, except for brief times for exchange 
of passengers.  Total duration of a day’s visit ranges to as much as 8 hours, but 
is often less and sometimes more if the event is delayed by weather (table 2).   
No helicopter fuel is brought ashore, as helicopters are refueled on the ship. 
 
2. Safety Procedures  
At each landing, the following survival equipment is taken ashore prior to passenger 
landing, along with all staff, which includes the ship's doctor: 
2 / 24-person tents, a long-range VHF radio 
3 / 6-person tents 
42 sleeping bags 
 42 sleeping mats  
Emergency food and water 
 2 Coleman camp stoves and stove fuel  
 
Page 15 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
Flags, shovels, and similar equipment are included as necessary. One 24-person tent is 
erected and long-range radio communication is established with the ship. The 
remainder of the equipment is either placed on the outside skirt of the tent or inside 
the tent, completing the land depot. A light-walking path is marked between the depot 
and the helicopter landing site area, which is about 20 meters or more away from the 
depot.  
 
3. Operational Procedures / Visitor Management  
Depending upon weather conditions, normally a maximum of two visits are made 
(excepting 1994-95) per season. During each visit, up to 95 visitors and 10 staff are 
landed at the location described above (on average – individual seasons vary). At any 
one time, there are never more than 32 visitors on the ground (except for passenger 
exchanges), who are supervised by the 10 or so staff. Each visitor has from 60 to 70 
minutes in the Dry Valley.  
 
3a. Visitor Management Walking Routes: In the 2000-01 season on both visits, a 
series of routes were flagged and staff members guided passengers along these routes. 
There were four flagged sections:  
 
Flag Section '1' marked the muster station where passengers are gathered near 
the helicopter landing area for the following purpose: 1) for a briefing prior to 
their walk; and 2) to compile a muster list prior to reboarding the helicopter. 
Flag Section '1' leads from the helicopter landing area to the beginning of a 
single file walk towards a sensitive area of moss beds. Passengers are directed 
to walk from flag to flag, but not necessarily to walk single file. There are no 
mosses in this area.  
 
Flag Section '2' starts at a gathering point where passengers are briefed again 
about the moss and then passengers are guided to this area that we feel is 
sensitive. Here they proceed carefully towards positions where the vegetation 
can be seen. (This is to the down-stream side of the flow, which is in front of 
the Canada Glacier.)  
 
Flag Section '3' is near the front of the Canada Glacier but on the other side of 
the stream where visitors are allowed to walk in a more open fashion, i.e. not 
single file. This appears to be satisfactory in terms of reducing any impact.  
 
Flag Section '4' is the final flagged path, which brings passengers back 
towards the helicopter landing area. It appears to us that because visitors have 
already seen the most interesting areas, they seem to return single file, simply 
one following the other, with great concern given to where they walk.  
 
A series of flags indicating places of several mummified seals of various ages leads 
passengers away from the stream to a maximum of about 200 meters towards the 
middle of the valley. Passengers are advised in the shipboard briefing prior to landing 
that there are no bathroom facilities ashore, and to use bathrooms on the ship prior to 
going ashore.  
 
4. Environmental Impacts 
Visible impacts from this area could include:  
Page 16 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
Marks where the tires or skids touched down, footprints where staff went to 
help people out of the helicopters, at and towards the muster station. No marks 
remained visible between visits; wind obliterated them promptly.  
Flagged sections: When the site was vacated observations that in comparison 
with past years, there may actually be more impact when passengers walk in 
single file than more openly. More feet stepping in one location leave a deeper 
impression. Where clients had walked 30 meters along an unflagged route 
from the helicopter landing area to visit a mummified seal, very little impact 
was evident. Other observations include that when people spread out, the 
damage of one-foot fall in one place is quantifiably less and the damage in that 
one spot is greatly reduced. Often this impact is not visible at all. If, however, 
people walk in the same path repeatedly, footfalls make this path more visible.  
Moss beds In general, there was no or very little sign of people having walked 
in the vicinity of moss beds. However, on one visit visible damage to some 
individual clumps of moss was observed.  
 
5. Recommendations  
A. Tourist walks in the Dry Valleys should be conducted in guided small groups that 
follow pre-determined areas, but not in single file. This may produce fewer impacts 
than the minor ones observed. As an alternative approach, it may be more sensible to 
allow tourists to spread out in some areas, i.e. uphill from the landing site, perhaps 
walking further into the valley, in small guided groups. Staff would therefore act as 
scouts near the set limits of the walking area.  
 
B. Throughout a landing, staff is in radio and personal contact with each other and the 
helicopter muster station by radio. This ensures the safety of individuals, and 
environmental aspects are constantly invigilated. It isn’t practical or favorable to 
move the landing site farther inland, as increasing the distance from the ship to the 
landing site can involve increased safety concerns. Other sites may have equally 
sensitive areas, therefore the issue of visitor management at the chosen site remains. 
However designating a landing site in moss free or areas with fewer mosses could be 
sensible. 
 
C. Summary  
The helicopter operations for tourist visits to Taylor Valley total nine years of 
experience and have been improved upon each year. Safety measures are similar to 
those in place for comparable tourist visits to other sensitive and remote areas (e.g. 
Emperor Penguin colonies) where field equipment for safety and survival is essential. 
The presence of about 1,765 1,74 visitors in Taylor Valley over a period of 9 years, 
requiring 20-22 flights per visit, is believed to have negligible impact. Tourists 
usually spend no more than one hour on the ground, and passenger numbers ashore at 
any one time are strictly limited. Up to 8 hours are normally required for a single visit 
to Taylor Valley due to the helicopter rotation requirements. 
 
By comparison, the very active science programs conducted by the United States and 
New Zealand Programs in the Dry Valleys operate during an entire summer season, 
rather than on a single day or two in January or February for tourism visits. A summer 
station was established by the New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme at Lake 
Vanda ('Vanda Station') in the Wright Valley during the 1967-68 summers. This was 
occupied for the 1969 and 1970 winters and every subsequent summer until moved 
Page 17 of 17                                                                                                 ATCM XXIV Issues relating to Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Tourist Activities 
and replaced by a smaller station in 1995. There are several other field stations in the 
valleys, which are occupied by scientific staff sporadically during most summers.  
 
As an example of a single season, an analysis of United States Antarctic Program 
(USAP) and Antarctica New Zealand helicopter landings and takeoffs during the 
1995-96 austral summer field season (September 1995 - February 1996) shows that 
there were about 700 landings and takeoffs at the major camps within the Dry Valleys 
(Wharton and Doran, 1999, p. 13). Of those flying activities in Taylor Valley, the 
Lake Hoare MCM-LTER Camp received 306 landings and takeoffs, 142 at Lake 
Bonney, 106 at Lake Fryxell, and 30 at F6 Camp at Lake Fryxell, a total of 584 for 
Taylor Valley.  
 
Based on 9 years of conducting successful tourist operations, in conjunction with 
effective standard operating procedures and environmental precautions in place there 
is justification to conduct tourist landings in the Dry Valleys in the future. Tourist 
visits to date have had no than a minor or transitory impact on the environment and 
non-interference with ongoing science programs conducted in Taylor Valley. One to 
three landings per season (weather permitted) are planned by Quark Expeditions in 
the Dry Valleys however should there be reason to consider another landing site 
Quark Expeditions is interested in liaising with the United States and New Zealand 
Antarctic Programs. Quark Expeditions has included additional information in their 
Initial Environmental Evaluation. 
 
 
 
