 
 
CEP IV  
Information Paper IP-30  
Agenda Item 4g 
Australia 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AT SSSI 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
Australia 
 
1 
 
 
Report on Management Activities at SSSI 25 
 
 
In accordance with Article 10 (1) (b) of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia wishes to advise Parties of management action 
it proposes to undertake to protect vertebrate fossil fauna located in SSSI 25.   
 
SSSI 25 is located at Marine Plain in the Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land.  It was 
designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1987 because of its vertebrate fossil 
fauna.  In addition to the dominant fossils such as molluscs and diatoms, which define the 
age of the Pliocene marine sediments, the site has yielded well preserved vertebrate remains 
of a new species, genus and probably family of fossil dolphins and evidence of at least one 
other vertebrate species. 
 
A visit was made to Marine Plain during the 2000/01 summer to obtain information to 
assist in future management of the area, particularly the protection or remediation of fossil 
remains exposed by past research activities.  Observations made during this visit indicate 
that the fossils are degrading as a result of their exposure to natural processes such as salt 
weathering, wind, frost, unloading, temperature and moisture changes.  The Australian 
Antarctic Division is currently in communication with relevant specialists to examine 
options for the in-situ preservation or removal and conservation of the fossil remains.  This 
would be accompanied by regular monitoring, in the form of photo-documentation and 
other visual methods, to objectively evaluate the impacts of any natural or human-induced 
disturbance.  
 
The visit has highlighted a number of deficiencies in the current management plan.  These 
include the need to further minimise impacts of pedestrian and vehicular transport due to 
the presence of a highly delicate diatomite surface crust and the need for ongoing 
monitoring of research sites.  Consequently, Australia wishes to notify Parties of its intent 
to review the management plan for SSSI 25 in accordance with Article 6 (4) of Annex V of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  
 
