CEP/IP 
May 2001 
Agenda Item: 8 
Original: English 
 
 
 
CCAMLR’s EXPERIENCE WITH DATA MANAGEMENT 
 
 
CCAMLR Secretariat 
 
 
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
PO Box 213   North Hobart   Tasmania   7002  Australia 
email: ccamlr@ccamlr.org     website: www.ccamlr.org 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Page 
 
 
Summary 
1 
Introduction 
2 
Data Management 
3 
Key Issues in Data Management 
3 
Discussion 
4 
Appendix 1 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
SUMMARY 
 
 
This paper addresses CEP’s request to the CCAMLR Secretariat to provide information on its 
experience with data management including consideration of annual reports.  
 
Under Article IX of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources, CCAMLR is responsible for the acquisition, compilation, analysis and 
dissemination of data on all fishery and research activities conducted on exploited, dependent 
and related species within the Convention Area. These data are submitted to the CCAMLR 
Secretariat and are managed in line with established rules of access and use, and the 
increasing needs of the Commission and Scientific Committee. 
The management of CCAMLR data (including the new Catch Documentation Scheme for 
toothfish) has grown into a major activity of the Secretariat, and a core group of seven staff 
are involved with data processing and validation, data correspondence, data analysis, and 
database administration, development and maintenance. In addition, other staff are involved 
with data-related activities such as the preparation of standard methods and the dissemination 
of data on the website. 
 
Key issues of possible interest to CEP are discussed in general terms. 
 
 
2
INTRODUCTION 
 
This paper addresses CEP’s request to the CCAMLR Secretariat to provide information on its 
experience with data management including consideration of annual reports (CEP-III, 
paragraph 116). 
 
The CCAMLR Secretariat is responsible for the management, routine analysis and 
dissemination of large and diverse datasets collected within, and outside, the CCAMLR 
Convention Area. Many of these data originate from: 
 
• 
research in support of CCAMLR’s Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP); 
• 
fishing operations within the Convention Area; 
• 
the Catch Documentation Scheme for toothfish; and 
• 
compliance issues. 
 
The types of data managed include: 
 
• 
biological data on land-based predators; 
• 
data on marine debris; 
• 
vessel specifications and licences; 
• 
fishery catch, effort and biological data; 
• 
scientific observations aboard fishing vessels; 
• 
acoustic survey data; and 
• 
landings and trade data. 
 
 
DATA MANAGEMENT 
 
CCAMLR data are held by the Secretariat in databases developed and maintained in line with 
the increasing uses of data by the Commission, Scientific Committee and Working Groups. 
About one third of all data held in the CCAMLR databases have been submitted within the 
past three years, and approximately 15% of all records were processed in the 1999-2000 
intersessional period (Fig. 1).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: 
Amount of data processed by the CCAMLR Secretariat, expressed as a 
percentage of the total amount of data processed to October 2000. 
 
0
25
50
75
100
1985
1990
1995
2000
Year
Amount of data processed
 (% of total)
 
3
This increase in data reflects increases in the number of activities conducted in the 
Convention Area, the amount of detail submitted, and the number of issues considered by the 
Commission. Linked to this, routine analyses conducted by the Secretariat are growing in 
number and complexity, and there is an increasing amount of correspondence between data 
originators, data users and the Secretariat. 
 
Today, the management of CCAMLR data is a major activity of the Secretariat, and a core 
group of seven staff are involved with data processing and validation, data correspondence, 
data analysis, and database administration, development and maintenance. In addition, other 
staff are involved with data-related activities such as the preparation of standard methods and 
the dissemination of data on the website. 
 
Several key issues of possible interest to CEP are highlighted in the following section. 
 
 
KEY ISSUES IN DATA MANAGEMENT 
 
Standard Methods for Collecting and Reporting Data 
 
Standardisation of data collection and reporting is essential for consistency and quality of 
data. CCAMLR makes every effort to ensure that data are collected according to standard 
methods, and submitted on standard formats using standard codes. CCAMLR publications 
such as the Scientific Observer Manual and the CEMP Standard Methods provide detailed 
procedures for collecting and submitting data. Increasingly, CCAMLR Member countries are 
using the Internet to download data forms and guidelines from the CCAMLR website, and 
submit data via email. Electronic data forms have been developed using Microsoft Excel 
format. 
 
Rules for Access and Use of Data 
 
Most of the data submitted to CCAMLR are confidential, and all data are subject to strict 
rules of access and use. Originators/owners of data retain control over any use of their 
unpublished data outside of CCAMLR. The rules cover the use of data for analyses in support 
of the work of CCAMLR as well as analyses conducted outside of CCAMLR’s core business. 
The rules are listed in Appendix 1. 
 
Data Analysis 
 
CCAMLR data are central to the work of the Scientific Committee and its Working Groups, 
and the Standing Committee on Observation and Inspection. A major element of this work is 
the formulation of scientific advice on the management of fisheries and marine living 
resources within the Convention Area. Analyses are conducted by the Secretariat and 
Members based on data released under the rules of access and use. Most analyses are reported 
in meeting documents and the dissemination of these documents is restricted to meeting 
participants. Following review of these analyses, key findings and summary data may be 
published in the reports of the meetings. Data originators usually participate in the meetings. 
 
Annual Reports 
 
The Secretariat reports annually on the collection, processing and analysis of CCAMLR data. 
These reports include: 
 
• 
CCAMLR Statistical Bulletin; 
• 
Updates to CEMP Standard Methods and Scientific Observer Manual; 
 
4
• 
Analysis of trends and anomalies in CEMP indices; 
• 
Analysis of trends in the abundance of marine debris; 
• 
Implementation of Conservation Measures; 
• 
Implementation of the Catch Documentation Scheme; 
• 
Data Management report; 
• 
Summary of notifications for new and exploratory fisheries; 
• 
Summary of observations on compliance; and 
• 
Summary of scientific observations on fishing vessels. 
 
Meeting Reports  
 
All reports of CCAMLR meetings are reviewed and adopted by participants during the course 
of the meetings. Some reports are subsequently reviewed by the Scientific Committee and/or 
the Commission. Members also have a limited opportunity to review reports immediately 
after meetings. Most reports are published. Reports may reference confidential data submitted 
in meeting documents, or include a summary of these data (eg catch by area by season).  
 
Website 
 
The CCAMLR website (www.ccamlr.org) provides a framework for organising, presenting 
and delivering information to Member countries, related organisations and the general public 
in the four official languages. Information is delivered at two general levels: (1) general 
information and some published material is available to Members and the general public via 
open-access web pages; and (2) detailed information, meeting business and selected datasets 
is restricted to approved users via password-protected web pages. The responsibility for 
issuing passwords within a Member country is devolved to the representatives of the 
Commission and Scientific Committee. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Under Article IX of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources, CCAMLR is responsible for the acquisition, compilation, analysis and 
dissemination of data on all fishery and research activities conducted on exploited, dependent 
and related species within the Convention Area. These data are submitted to the CCAMLR 
Secretariat and are managed in line with established rules of access and use, and the 
increasing needs of the Commission and Scientific Committee. 
The integrity of the data are protected by established standard procedures for collecting and 
submitting data, and routine validation and analysis of the data and maintenance of databases. 
The contribution of these data towards meeting CCAMLR’s objectives increases as the times 
series lengthen.  
 
The cost of managing the data represents a significant component of the Secretariat’s annual 
budget: seven core staff are required, as well as other staff involved in data-related activities. 
Computer systems need to be maintained and upgraded as the amount of data increases, and 
technology advances. However, data management costs are an insignificant fraction of the 
value of the marine resources and associated fisheries managed by CCAMLR. 
The Secretariat would welcome the opportunity to further discuss its experience with data 
management. 
 
 
 
 
5
APPENDIX 1 
 
RULES FOR ACCESS AND USE OF CCAMLR DATA 
 
 
 
 
The following Rules for Access and Use of CCAMLR Data were adopted by the Eleventh 
Meeting of the Commission (CCAMLR-XI, paragraph 4.35): 
 
(a) 
All data submitted to the CCAMLR Data Centre should be freely available to 
Members for analysis and preparation of papers for use within the Commission, the Scientific 
Committee and their subsidiary bodies. 
 
(b) 
The originators/owners of the data should retain control over any use of their 
unpublished data outside of CCAMLR. 
 
(c) 
Requests to the Secretariat by individual scientists of a Member for access to data in 
the CCAMLR Data Centre will only be considered if the request has been approved in writing 
by the Representative to the Scientific Committee (or his nominated deputy) of that Member.  
The Representative is responsible for informing the individual scientist requesting the data, of 
the rules governing access to CCAMLR data and for obtaining the requester’s agreement to 
comply with these rules. 
 
(d) 
When Members request access to data for the purpose of undertaking analyses or 
preparing papers to be considered by future meetings of CCAMLR bodies, they should 
indicate the reason for the request and the nature of envisaged data analysis.  The Secretariat 
should supply the data and inform the originators/owners of the data of this action, together 
with the details of the original request.  When data are requested for purposes other than 
consideration by future meetings of CCAMLR bodies, the Secretariat will, in response to a 
detailed request, supply the data only after permission has been given by the 
originators/owners of the data. 
 
(e) 
Data contained in papers prepared for meetings of the Commission, the Scientific 
Committee, and their subsidiary bodies should not be cited or used in the preparation of 
papers to be published outside of CCAMLR without the permission of the originators/owners 
of the data.  Furthermore, because inclusion of papers in the Selected Scientific Papers series 
or any other of the Commission’s or Scientific Committee’s publications, constitutes formal 
publication, written permission to publish papers prepared for meetings of the Commission, 
Scientific Committee and Working Groups should be obtained from the originators/owners of 
the data and authors of papers. 
 
(f) 
The following statements should be placed on the cover page of all unpublished 
working papers and background documents tabled: 
 
This paper is presented for consideration by CCAMLR and may contain unpublished data, analyses, 
and/or conclusions subject to change.  Data contained in this paper should not be cited or used for 
purposes other than the work of the CCAMLR Commission, Scientific Committee, or their subsidiary 
bodies without the permission of the originators/owners of the data. 
 
 
 
