 
 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-62  
AGENDA ITEM 4F 
Chile 
Original: English 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE CHILEAN VESSEL “PATRIARCHE” ACCIDENT 
 
 
General Information 
 
The Chilean vessel “Patriarche” ran aground the past January 26 2001at 4am at 62°26 3´S latitude 
and 59° 47.5 W longitude; to the west of the Ecuatorian base “Maldonado” in Greenwich island. 
 
 
The Patriarche is a vessel of 76,5 meters of length rented by the Ecuatorian Antarctic Programme. 
 
 
On January 27 the accident the vessel was aided by the Chilean Navy patrol  “Lautaro” and towed  to 
a safe area for the emergency repairs because the hull was damaged. 
 
 
As a result of this grounding and hull damages, according to information determined inmediaetly at 
the location of the accident, there could have been a leakage of microfiltered diesel to the sea, although there 
was no obvious diesel stain in the sorrounding area. 
 
 
At the time of the grounding and in order to prevent a posible leakage patrolship “Lautaro” initiated 
the combat task and contamination control undertaking the following actions: 
 
a) Installing retaining barriers along the ship. 
b) Control, reparation and waterproofing the damaged tank of the vessel. 
c) Changing the diesel of the damaged tank to avoid a future leakage into the sea. 
d) Permanent surveillance around the vessel with the purpose of detecting at time any evidence of leakage. 
e) During January 30, personel of the Chilean Navy, with the support of marine biologist specialists, made 
coastal patrol near the accident, not finding any evidence of contamination or any animal life affected. 
f) 
On February 1, personnel of the Chilean Navy, with the support of a smallcraft inspected the surrounding 
area without detecting any presence of leaked diesel. 
g) The patrol “ Lautaro” remained near the damaged vessel and ready to act in case of any emergency. 
h) The vessel “Patriarche”, once repaired  on February 17 at 6.00 am, sailed to Punta Arenas accompanied 
by the patrol “Lautaro”; both arrived on February 20 without problems. 
 
Further Information. 
 
After all the enquiries, it was established that, although the amount of  microfiltered diesel leakage into the 
sea was aproximately 1500 liters, it was a leakage which did not cause damage to coastal and marine 
enviroment of the accident site mainly because of climate conditions with winds of 30 knotes during 48 hours 
which rapidly dispersed the diesel at sea. 
 
Until today, there are no visible negative consecuences to the Antarctic enviroment caused by this 
accident as a result of the grounding of the vessel “Patriarche”, which was timely and efficently helped by the 
patrol “Lautaro” of the Chilean Navy. 
 
 
Currently, surveillance is maintained in the coastal area near the accident to determine evidence of 
contamination of the coastal areas and posibles effects on the flora and animal life ecosystem around the area. 
 
 
 
