 
________________________________________________________________________
Agenda Item 5  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
       ATCM XXIV 
Saint Petersburg 
Russia 
 
 
 
Information Paper :  
COMNAP Report to ATCM XXIV 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. 
This report provides an overview of the activities of the Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) during the two years ending May 2001.   
 
2.  
COMNAP was established in 1988 to provide a forum to facilitate the exchange of views 
and experience between directors and logistics managers of national Antarctic agencies and to 
improve the effectiveness of our operations in Antarctica. COMNAP has a permanent Standing 
Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) and various task-oriented working 
groups. An attachment to this paper provides the COMNAP objectives, the current membership of 
the COMNAP Executive, and the committee and working group structure. 
 
3.  
In response to requests from ATCM XXIII and SATCM XII/CEP III for COMNAP input, 
papers have been provided to ATCM XXIV/CEP IV on Reviewing Environmental Impact 
Assessments, and jointly with SCAR on a Response to ATCM XXIII Resolution 5 (1999).  
COMNAP has also been involved in the inter-sessional work on the rationalisation of exchange of 
information procedures under the Antarctic Treaty System and on Diseases in Antarctic Wildlife. 
 
 
CURRENT OPERATIONAL ISSUES/MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES 
 
4. 
Previous COMNAP reports to the ATCM have noted that COMNAP members are 
increasingly supporting integrated research projects focused on global issues, and looking to 
technology developments to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of Antarctic science.  These 
continue to be key issues.   
 
5. 
Involvement in global-issues research include such areas as climate and sea level change, 
ozone depletion, space-weather, ice sheet changes, paleoenvironmental records, sea ice zone 
dynamics and ecology, ocean circulation and biodiversity.  The COMNAP forum continues to 
facilitate international co-operation in the provision of logistics support for inter-disciplinary and 
international research, including consideration of opportunities to improve and collaborate on air 
access to the Antarctic, and exchange of information on new technology for science and 
operational support.  A half-day joint COMNAP/SCAR forum considering scientific interests and 
mechanisms for international co-operation was held during the SCAR and COMNAP meetings in 
Tokyo in July 2000. 
2 
6. 
International programs supported by logistics co-operation continue to include the 
European Program for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA), Vostok ice coring, Concordia Project 
and the International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE). The Cape Roberts Project is 
now complete and a new ANDRILL consortium has been established to pursue further geological 
drilling research.  Interest continues to grow on sub-glacial lake exploration and the scientific 
goals and guiding principals were developed at a SCAR workshop held in Cambridge during 
September 1999.  Sub-glacial lake interests will be included as an item on the agenda of the next 
COMNAP meeting to help encourage international co-operation in technology development, 
logistics planning and environmental protection.  
 
7. 
The development of air linkages from both Australia and South Africa to East 
Antarctica is continuing.  The South African and Scandinavian Antarctica Programs co-operated 
in a joint test flight between Cape Town and Dronning Maud Land in January 2001 using a 
chartered Ilyushin 76, connecting with a Basler DC3 and Twin Otter aircraft.  The Australian 
program has undertaken an extensive study during the last two years on the possibility of creating 
an air link from Hobart to East Antarctica.  A project team has been set up to progress 
implementation of the study recommendations and it is planned to undertake trial flights during 
the 2001/2002 season.  The US program also contracted the Basler DC3 for a trial period and the 
US Italian and New Zealand programs cooperated in the use of chartered Twin Otters. 
 
8. 
National operators continued to work together on emergency needs.  The Royal New 
Zealand Air Force (RNZAF) evacuated several ill expeditioners from McMurdo station and a 
Twin Otter (chartered from the Canadian company Ken Borek) made an unprecedented winter 
flight to evacuate and replace a sick doctor at South Pole station.  The Twin Otter staged through 
Punta Arenas and Rothera station with excellent support from Chile and the UK. 
 
9. 
Increasing fuel costs have been an issue for all national programs over the last two 
years.  The remoteness and environment result in high fuel demands for both transport and 
heating. 
 
10. 
As noted in the last COMNAP report to the ATCM, the ratification of the Antarctic 
Environmental Protocol in January 1998 has shifted environmental compliance from responsible 
management to legal imperative.  The Antarctic Environmental Officer’s Network (AEON), under 
the umbrella of COMNAP, has continued to address environmental monitoring and environmental 
impact assessment to provide support for individual members activities in these areas. The 
COMNAP web page now includes both the EIA guidelines approved by CEP III, and the 
Handbook on Antarctic Environmental Monitoring.  The potential impact of a Liability Annex to 
the Environmental Protocol on international co-operation continues to be an area of concern. 
 
11. 
The period since the last ATCM has seen an increased focus on interaction between 
private expeditions and national programs.  This appears to be the fastest growing area of non-
government activity in Antarctica.  Issues are arising in respect of safety and contingency backup, 
and likely demands on national operators for search and rescue reponse.  For example an accident 
on a private expedition to the Antarctic Peninsula drew on both tour ship and national program air 
transport resources for recovery; and a private expedition arrived at Scott Base (New Zealand) and 
McMurdo Station (United States) after the tour ship that they had planned to depart from 
Antarctica on had left the area.   
 
12. 
COMNAP members have also commented on the increase in large tour ships visiting 
Antarctica, and concerns over the management of cumulative impacts.  COMNAP members have 
been involved in facilitating workshops considering these issues - one in the USA on cumulative 
impacts, and the other in NZ considering tourism scenarios, risks and benefits. 
 
 
3 
KEY ACTIVITIES DURING 2000/2001 
 
Annual Meeting & Associated Events 
 
13. 
There have been two COMNAP Annual meetings since the XXIII ATCM (1999).  
The Indian National Centre for Antarctic Research (NCAR) hosted the eleventh COMNAP 
meeting in Goa during September 1999.   The twelfth meeting was held in conjunction with the 
SCAR biennial meeting (XXVI SCAR) hosted by the Japanese National Institute for Polar 
Research (NIPR) in Tokyo in July 2000. 
 
14. 
An Antarctic Environmental Officers (AEON) workshop was also held in conjunction 
with the eleventh COMNAP meeting in Goa.  It addressed environmental monitoring and 
environmental impact assessment procedures. 
 
15. 
The VIII SCALOP Symposium on Logistics and Operations and a Trade Exhibition 
was held during the Tokyo meeting.  Fifteen technical papers were presented at the one-day 
Symposium on topics including communications technology, telemedicine, environmental 
monitoring and hydroponics.  For the first time an expert from the private sector was invited to 
present a keynote address that was well received.  The Trade Exhibition attracted fourteen 
organisations from Australia, Canada, China, France, Japan, New Zealand and Norway.  The 
Proceedings of the Symposium were published by the host country, Japan, and distributed to all 
COMNAP member agencies. 
 
16. 
A half-day “Workshop on Risk Assessment (RA) and Accident, Incident and Near 
Miss Reporting (AINMR)” was held following the Symposium.  Several papers were presented on 
national procedures for risk assessment and accident reporting.  At the conclusion of the 
discussion it was agreed to establish a “password protected” section on the COMNAP web site 
where national operators could post AINM reports that will facilitate the exchange of data in this 
important field.  The reports are to be posted in the following categories: 
 
 
• 
AINM Reports – Field and Station 
 
• 
AINM Reports – Marine 
 
• 
AINM Reports – Air 
 
• 
Known tourist AINMRs 
 
17. 
At the end of the 2000 meeting in Tokyo, a half-day joint COMNAP/SCAR 
“Workshop on Future International Science Projects” was held.  This proved to be a valuable 
contribution to the understanding of both COMNAP and SCAR representatives on what may be 
required in the future and how successful major projects have been managed.  It is likely that 
similar events will be held in conjunction with future biennial SCAR/COMNAP meetings. 
 
 
Antarctic Data Management 
 
18. 
The development of the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) is under the direction of 
the Joint Committee of Antarctic Data Managers (JCADM).  A Joint SCAR/COMNAP Steering 
Committee (STADM) undertakes general guidance and oversight of JCADM.  Responsibility for 
the development of National Antarctic Data Centres (NADCs) rests with each national program 
whereas JACDM helps facilitate the linking of NADCs to form the Antarctic Master Directory. 
 
19. 
Because of concerns by SCAR and COMNAP on the slow and “patchy” acceptance of 
the AMD, funding for the project was suspended in 2000.  The Joint SCAR/COMNAP Executive 
Committee Meeting held in conjunction with the Tokyo meeting accepted a proposal from the 
4 
Chief Officer of JCADM to fund the development of the AMD over two more years (2001/2002) 
at a level of US$40,000 per year.  The funds are to be used to support the work that is being 
carried out on the AMD by the NASA Global Change Master Directory (GCMD).  The funding is 
conditional on JCADM developing a contract that specifies deliverables and provides for quarterly 
progress reports to COMNAP and SCAR. 
 
 
Working Paper on an Assessment of Environmental Emergencies 
 
20. 
Resolution 6 of ATCM XXII (Tromso) requested that COMNAP undertake an 
assessment of the risks of environmental emergencies arising from activities in Antarctica over the 
last ten years.  ATCM XXIII (Lima) noted that only 17 of the 29 member countries responded to 
the survey and requested COMNAP to seek the missing responses.  Additional responses have 
now been received from all but seven countries of which two do not conduct operations in the 
Antarctic but use the support of other programs. 
 
21. 
A revised paper was submitted to SATCM XII (The Hague) which indicated that the 
additional data did not change the conclusions of the initial survey, namely: 
 
• 
there are minimal adverse environmental impacts resulting from ground or air 
 
transport incidents or fires (These events appear to occur infrequently and when 
 
they do the magnitude of their impact on the environment is insignificant); 
• 
the most common incidents with the greatest potential to cause environment im
 
pacts are fuel spills; 
• 
most fuel spills in Antarctica are likely to be small and confined to a station or base 
 
or the adjoining waters and are unlikely to threaten wildlife; 
• 
fuel spills in the marine environment have a low probability of occurrence but pose 
 
a greater magnitude of risk to wildlife than terrestrial or ice sheet spills  (Clearly, 
 
marine spills in the vicinity of rookeries, breeding grounds or primary habitats for 
 
marine mammals or birds pose a higher risk than marine spills in open sea or less 
 
sensitive areas); and 
• 
because fuel spills have greatest potential to cause environmental impacts, spill 
 
prevention strategies are the most effective tool to minimize potential environ
 
mental impacts, followed by emergency preparedness and spill response. 
 
 
 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Antarctic Shipping Guidelines 
 
22. 
A number of COMNAP/SCALOP members attended this meeting in conjunction with 
their national delegations.  COMNAP and SCAR were represented by their respective Executive 
Secretaries.  The ATME report was considered at COMNAP’s meeting in Tokyo during July 
2000.  COMNAP agrees with the overall conclusions and recommendations of the ATME.  
COMNAP stresses the importance of operational recommendations for vessels in Antarctic 
waters. 
 
Working Paper on Liability  
 
23. 
ATCM XXIII (Lima) requested that COMNAP and SCAR provide definitions and 
advice relating to the development of the Liability Annex to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection. Following general discussion at the COMNAP annual meetings in Goa and Tokyo, a 
drafting group met following SATCM XII to prepare responses to questions (c) and (d) of ATCM 
XXIII, Resolution 5 (1999).  A joint SCAR/COMAP Working Paper has subsequently been 
prepared and submitted to ATCM XXIV and CEP IV for consideration. 
5 
Practical Guidelines for the Implementation of Environmental Monitoring 
 
24. 
Following a proposal from the Antarctic Environmental Officers network (AEON), 
COMNAP has agreed to fund the development of guidelines that will assist national operators in 
implementing environmental monitoring programs.  These guidelines will complement the 
Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook that was published in May 2000 and provides 
technical guidance on standard techniques and methodologies for a first tier of indicators for 
monitoring programs.  A contract has recently been signed for the development of the  
“implementation guidelines” by consultants and is scheduled for completion by February 2002. 
 
Working Paper on Analysis of IEEs 
 
25. 
The Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) held a Workshop on 
Environmental Impact Assessment in conjunction with the COMNAP meeting held in Goa during 
September 1999.  A report on the workshop is available for download on the COMNAP web site 
(under “Environment”). 
 
26. 
One of the items discussed at the workshop was the value of comparing EIAs for 
similar activities.  At the CEP III Meeting in The Hague the issue of implementing and 
interpreting the Madrid Protocol requirements was discussed.  The CEP III noted that COMNAP 
Working Paper WP22 (SATCM XII) proposed work on a comparison of IEEs and asked 
COMNAP to report on progress at the next CEP meeting.  A Working Paper on the proposed 
terms of reference and study methodology has been submitted for consideration at CEP IV. 
 
COMNAP Web Site 
 
27. 
The COMNAP web site was revised and restructured in late 2000 to simplify 
navigation and provide additional information and features for members and the general public.  A 
public section on “Antarctic Operations” has been added that provides illustrated pages of 
information on “Science”, “Meteorology”, “Aviation”, “Shipping” and “Marine Navigation”.  
Tables are available for download that list the ships and aircraft used by national Antarctic 
programs. 
 
28. 
A new page on “Environment” has been added that describes the work of the 
Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) and includes links to various reports and 
reference documents that can be downloaded.  The page also provides a password protected 
“Discussion” facility for AEON members and provides a means for posting reports and other 
reference information. 
 
29. 
The “Publications” page has been considerably expanded to enable the download of 
all COMNAP Guidelines, the Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook, the Report on the 
Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica, the proceedings 
of the AEON Workshop on Environmental Monitoring and Environmental Impact Assessment and 
various ATCM documents including: 
 
 
• 
Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; 
 
• 
Guidelines for Antarctic Protected Areas; and 
 
• 
Environmental Impact Assessment (in English, French and Spanish). 
 
30. 
As previously noted, a new password protected site has been added to collect reports on 
accidents, incidents and near misses in Antarctica.  The site is also now being used to post the 
majority of papers presented to the COMNAP annual meetings.  Additional fields have recently 
been added to facilitate the posting of COMNAP papers to the ATCMs.
6 
 
ATTACHMENT 
 
COMNAP 
Objectives, Committees, Working Groups and Networks 
 
 
 
COMNAP Objectives 
 
• 
To review, on a regular basis, operational matters and to facilitate regular exchanges of 
information; 
• 
to examine, discuss and seek possible solutions to common operational problems; 
• 
to provide a forum for discussion in order to frame in a timely, efficient and harmonious 
manner; 
 
- 
responses to common issues directed to Antarctic Operators, in particular  
 
 
requests from and Recommendations of the ATCM, and 
 
- 
appropriate input to SCAR responses to questions involving science and   
 
 
operations/logistics; and 
• 
to provide, in conjunction with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the 
appropriate forum for discussions on international collaboration in operations and logistics. 
 
 
 
 
COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) 
 
 
Ms Gillian Wratt (NZ)  
Chairperson 
 
Dr Karl Erb (USA) 
 
Member 
 
Dr Gerard Jugie (FR) 
 
Member 
 
Mr Patricio Eberhard (CH) 
SCALOP Chairman 
 
Mr Jack Sayers (AU) 
 
Executive Secretary 
 
 
 
 
COMNAP Secretariat 
 
 
Mr Jack Sayers 
 
COMNAP Secretariat  
 
 
Suite 25 
 
 
GPO Box 824 
 
Salamanca Square 
 
Hobart 
 
Tasmania 7000  
 
Tasmania 7001 
 
AUSTRALIA  
 
AUSTRALIA 
 
Tel: 
+61-3-6233 5498 
 
Fax: 
+61-3-6233 5497 
 
E-mail: jsayers@comnap.aq 
 
 
7 
 
 
Committees 
 
 
Executive Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
EXCOM 
 
Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations 
SCALOP 
 
Steering Committee on the Antarctic Master Directory  
STADM 
 
Environmental Coordinating Group 
 
 
 
ECG 
 
Coordinating Group on Education and Training   
 
CEDAT 
 
 
 
Working Groups  
 
 
Air Operations WG 
 
 
 
 
 
AIROPS 
 
Emergency Response and Contingency Planning WG 
 
EMRAC 
 
WG to Monitor the Liability Annex 
 
 
 
MOLIBA 
 
Ship Operations WG 
 
 
 
 
 
SHIPOPS 
 
Symposium WG 
 
 
 
 
 
SYMP 
 
Tourism and NGOs WG 
 
 
 
 
TANGO 
 
 
 
 
Networks 
 
 
Antarctic Environmental Managers Network 
 
 
AEON 
 
Information Officers Network  
 
 
 
INFONET 
 
Training Officers Network 
 
 
 
 
TRAINET 
 
 
 
 
Note:  
A list of COMNAP and SCALOP members and the membership and objectives of  the various 
committees, working groups and networks may be found on the COMNAP Home Page at URL: 
http//:www.comnap.aq 
 
 
 
 
