 
 
CEP IV  
Information Paper IP-31  
Agenda Item 4g 
Australia 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON MAWSON’S HUTS HISTORIC SITE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
Australia 
 
1 
 
 
Report on Mawson's Huts Historic Site 
 
 
 
Background 
Mawson’s Huts Historic Site is one of the few structures surviving from the “heroic era” of 
Antarctic exploration.  The huts were established by the Australasian Antarctic Expedition  
1911-14.  Mawson's hut, together with a cross and plaque erected nearby, were listed as 
historic monuments at ATCM VII. 
 
In accordance with ATCM recommendation I-IX(2), this paper reports on conservation 
work carried out to stabilise Mawson's Huts. 
 
Conservation Work 
The site remained largely untouched after its abandonment in 1914 until 1977 when an 
Australian National Antarctic Research Expedition team removed some ice from the main 
hut and undertook minor repairs.  In 1984/85 and 1985/86 a private expedition, Project 
Blizzard, undertook site recording and emergency stabilisation of the structures.   
 
In 1996, the Australian Associated Press group of companies established the AAP 
Mawson’s Huts Foundation.  In partnership with the Australian Antarctic Division and the 
Australian Heritage Commission, and with financial assistance from the Australian 
Government, commenced a program of conservation works.   
 
A conservation and archaeological work program was successfully undertaken over the 
1997-98 and 2000-2001 Antarctic summers.  This work involved repairs to the main hut 
and stabilisation works to other structures, together with archaeological and conservation 
recording in and around the site.  A clean up of the site was carried out to remove recent 
materials that detract from the historical ambience of the site.  With the completion of this 
work the long-term stability of structures in the historic site has been ensured.   
 
Future Action 
A Conservation Management Plan has been prepared to guide future management of the 
site.  In accordance with the recommendations of the Conservation Management Plan, 
Australia intends to seek formal protection of the site at ATCM XXV, in accordance with 
the provisions of Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty.  
 
