 
 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-63  
Agenda Item 4g 
Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain,  
UK, USA, ASOC and IAATO 
Original: English 
 
 
WORKSHOP ON A MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR DECEPTION ISLAND 
Information Paper submitted by  
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
At SATCM XII and CEP III (The Hague, 2000), Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain and the UK 
submitted an Information Paper entitled Deception Island - Future Management’ 
(XII SATCM/IP8). This paper outlined the significance of Deception Island, and the need for 
an integrated approach to the management of activities on the island. Seven options for the 
future management of the island were summarized. The preferred option - the designation of 
Deception Island as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA), within which would be 
located protected zones (Antarctic Specially Protected Areas- ASPAs), Historic Sites and 
Monuments (HSMs), and further zones - was highlighted. 
 
During an informal meeting held in the margins of SATCM XII, Chile offered to host a 
workshop to facilitate the early involvement of interested Parties and organizations in the 
production of a Management Plan for Deception Island, and to provide the opportunity to 
discuss the management of future activities on the island.  
 
 
2. DECEPTION ISLAND WORKSHOP 
 
The Deception Island Workshop was held at the headquarters of the Instituto Antártico Chileno, 
Santiago, Chile, during 26-29th March 2001. A total of 24 delegates from Argentina (2), Chile 
(7), Norway (2), Spain (2), the UK (2), the USA (2), ASOC (3), IAATO (2), and including the 
Secretariat (2), attended. The workshop consisted of a series of keynote presentations, working 
groups and drafting sessions covering environmental risk, historic sites, science and research 
stations, tourism, and emergency response, with the overall aim of finding common ground to 
develop an ASMA Management Plan under Annex V of the Protocol. A report of the workshop 
is currently under preparation and will be made widely available.   
 
2.1 
Key Outcomes 
 
The key outcomes of the workshop were: 
 
1. 
The Management Strategy for Deception Island  was agreed by the participants at the 
workshop, subject to minor revision; 
2. 
That the preferred option for the future management of the island might look like - i.e. 
that the whole island would be designated as an ASMA, within which would be located 
ASPAs and HSMs. The rest of the island would be managed by a general Code of 
Conduct for visitors, scientists and support staff. Specific Codes of Conduct for particular 
activities or specific areas could also be prepared, as required; 
 
 
3. 
A framework ASMA Management Plan was agreed; 
 
 
4. 
An informal Deception Island e-mail contact group involving the interested parties was 
established, with the overall objective of progressing and completing the ASMA 
Management Plan. Terms of Reference were prepared and a list of twelve major tasks was 
agreed and assigned to sub-groups at the Workshop. These tasks include: developing a 
management programme for the Whalers Bay Historic Site; a review of existing SSSIs on 
the island, and identification of other important areas of scientific or ecological 
importance; the production of appropriate maps for inclusion in the management plans, 
and a Geographical Information System for Whalers Bay; an island-wide oil spill 
contingency plan and emergency evacuation plan in case of volcanic eruption; a Visitor 
Code of Conduct; further interpretative material, including appropriate signposts for the 
Whalers Bay Historic Site; a biological monitoring programme at Baily Head, and; co-
ordination of an International Expedition to Deception Island. Overall co-ordination of 
the sub-groups will be through the Deception Island contact group. The UK was tasked 
with co-ordinating the contact group; 
5.  
Argentina proposed an International Expedition to Deception Island in January 2002. 
 
3.  
THE WAY FORWARD 
 
Following on from the successful workshop in Santiago, the priority for the Deception Island 
contact group will be to advance the progress made so far with the first draft ASMA 
Management Plan.  
 
