 
1
The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 
The Antarctica Project 
ASOC Secretariat 
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W. 
Washington, DC 20009 USA 
Tel +1 202 234-2480 
Fax +1 202 387 4823 
antarctica@igc.org 
www.asoc.org 
 
 
 
Legal Implementation of the Five Annexes of 
the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty 
 
 
 
Submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 
for the XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, St. Petersburg, Russia, 
9-20 July 2001 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
In 1998 ASOC began a Special Implementation Campaign to ensure the faithful implementation of the 
Antarctic Environmental Protocol by the 27 Consultative Parties of the ATS. As part of the Campaign, 
ASOC has been monitoring Parties’ progress in developing national legislation, administrative regulations 
and other measures that allow for the Protocol’s implementation as the original drafters intended. This 
Information Paper aims to highlight Parties’ implementation progress to date. 
 
The Madrid Protocol includes a binding set of environmental standards for national programs, commercial 
tour operators and non-governmental entities undertaking activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area – unless 
implicitly exempted through customary international law (right of innocent passage or overflight) or 
explicitly addressed through other international agreements (e.g., ICRW, CCAS, CCAMLR). The 
Protocol is claimed by Parties to provide a rigorous international environmental protection regime, and to 
demonstrate the validity and commitment of the Antarctic Treaty System. However, the true test of the 
Protocol’s effectiveness is whether and how it is implemented in practice.1  
 
Enforcement of the provisions of the Protocol is left solely to its twenty-seven individual Contracting 
Parties. Even the Inspection system – notwithstanding some joint inspections – remains nationally driven. 
Whatever the formal obligations of Parties to ensure other Parties and actors act in accordance with the 
Protocol, in practice very little beyond an influence-by-example approach has been evident to date.2 For 
all practical purposes, a critique of Protocol compliance and implementation is a critique of individual 
state practices.  
 
The notion of implementation refers to “all the measures that have been taken by a state party to fulfill the 
objectives of the [Madrid] Protocol”. Implementation3 can be considered to have two separate 
components, which at times operate in parallel and at times sequentially: legal implementation—
incorporation of the relevant provisions of the Protocol into the national legal system—and practical 
 
2
implementation—the measures taken to put the Protocol into action, including the application and 
enforcement of the national law.4  
 
In examining Protocol implementation by the Consultative Parties, ASOC has tried to be sensitive to the 
differences in their established juridical systems. Clearly not all legal systems are the same, and therefore 
different Parties will provide the legal and/or administrative bases for the implementation of the Madrid 
Protocol in different ways. The two ends of a legal continuum are represented by, on the one hand, the 
legal requirement to re-write entirely the provisions of an international agreement as a national law, and 
on the other hand, and the automatic acceptance of an international agreement as a source of national law. 
 
In this context, the fact that a Party has not produced the legal instruments to implement certain aspects of 
the Protocol does not necessarily mean that it is not implementing its Protocol obligations and that it is 
perhaps using ad hoc procedures. The opposite is also true: the existence of implementing legislation does 
not necessarily imply adequate practical implementation. Implementing legislation could be legal but not 
real. It should be noted, however, that the Protocol is not a unicum: certain obligations may be self-
executing while others are not.5  
 
Even those obligations that are clearly self-executing may be subject to considerable differences in 
interpretation. The Protocol establishes obligations of result rather than obligations of action.6 Therefore 
additional provisions may be necessary as required by Art.13 (1) to ensure full compliance with the 
Protocol's requirements, even when the Protocol may already be fully incorporated in the national legal 
system. For instance, setting up EIA and permitting procedures under Annexes II and V of the Protocol 
would in most cases require some additional action, such as requiring Parties to assign clear 
responsibilities for specific obligations under the Protocol. This may require additional laws or other legal 
or administrative instruments, the need for which may not be immediately apparent or urgent, ultimately 
delaying an effective implementation of the Protocol. 
 
This Information Paper focuses only on the legal aspects of implementing the five Annexes of the 
Protocol as: Annex I: Environmental Impact Assessment; Annex II: Conservation of Antarctic Flora and 
Fauna; Annex III: Waste Disposal and Waste Management; Annex IV: Prevention of Marine Pollution; 
and Annex V: Area Protection and Management. 
 
ASOC has listed information that demonstrates how Parties have progressed in implementing the Protocol 
through administrative and/or legal mechanisms in Appendix 1. Data gathered for this Information Paper 
has been taken directly from documentation required under Articles 13 (3) and 17 of the Protocol, 
comprising mostly Information Papers tabled at the ATCMs, since the signing of the Protocol in 1991. It 
has been further supplemented by information and data gathered by ASOC through its Special 
Implementation Campaign. As a complement to this analysis, Appendix 2 describes a quantitative 
analysis of both legal and practical implementation by European ATCPs. 
 
ASOC has sought to accurately depict Parties’ measures for Protocol implementation. We welcome 
comments from delegations. Since this is the second time any entity under the ATS has undertaken such 
an overall evaluation of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol by the ATS as a whole, it may be 
assumed that there exists scope for improvement. ASOC plans on updating this document for future 
ATCMs. 
 
3
Annex I: Environmental Impact Assessment 
 
According to the data available to ASOC, most countries (19) have adopted some form of regulation to 
implement Annex I. The level at which this requirement of the Protocol is inserted into the various 
national legal systems varies greatly. At one end of the spectrum, some States have transferred the 
Protocol regulations verbatim or without much modification into the national law. At the other end of the 
spectrum, some States have adopted interim (or perhaps semi-permanent) ad hoc procedures, in some 
cases based on national EIA legislation or, in the case of some European ATCPs, on EU regulation. In 
these cases, the National Antarctic authority is often in charge of processing these EIAs. 
 
In practice, not all States have submitted EIAs to the ATCMs or to the CEP. A breakdown by State of the 
IEEs or CEEs included in the CEP lists of impact assessments since 1987 are listed in Fig. 1.7  
 
 
Annex II: Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna 
 
According to the data available to ASOC, 66% of all Parties have implemented Annex II legislatively, 
while 30% have implemented it through regulations or in practice. For most Parties, an agency has been 
designated to review permit applications and issue permits. 
 
ASOC is aware of at least two instances in which research programs have reportedly been cancelled due 
to the large scale of the taking that was required under those programs. This is an encouraging sign that in 
some instances conservation values are being put as a first priority over all other Antarctic activities, 
worthwhile as they might be in their own right. 
 
Annex III: Waste Disposal and Waste Management 
 
According to the data available to ASOC, 44% of all Parties have implemented Annex III legislatively; 
two-thirds of these have also produced waste management plans for part or all of the National 
Programme. Additionally, 37% of all Parties have implemented the Annex through regulations or 
administrative procedures. 
 
Annex IV: Prevention of Marine Pollution 
 
According to the data available to ASOC, 70% of all Parties have implemented Annex IV legislatively 
(usually through the national legislation that implements MARPOL; one-fifth of these have also produced 
regulations to implement the Annex. Additionally, 37% of all Parties have implemented the Annex 
through regulations or administrative procedures. 
 
Annex V: Area Protection and Management (Recommendation XVI/10): 
 
According to the data available to ASOC, 63% of all Parties have implemented Annex V legislatively; of 
these, 12% have also implemented regulations to implement the Annex, while 65% have updated 
management plans to comply with Annex V. Additionally, 15% of all Parties have promulgated 
regulations or implemented procedures and updated management plans to comply with this Annex, 7% 
have issued regulations or implemented procedures, and 15% have updated management plans. However, 
Annex V has still not legally entered into force because not all Parties have accepted or ratified 
Recommendation XVI-10, or the notification has not been finalized. 
 
 
4
Of particular note is the proposed protected area at Deception Island, as conservation issues have been 
addressed largely from a strategic, proactive perspective. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
The Madrid Protocol establishes that the protection of the Antarctic environment is a fundamental 
consideration for all human activities in Antarctica. Thus the effective implementation of the Madrid 
Protocol by each country operating in Antarctica is a pre-requisite for the protection of the Antarctic 
environment as a whole. All human activities in Antarctica – individually and collectively – have the 
potential to cause a significant environmental impact. This includes large-scale operations as well as 
comparatively minor activities. 
 
Being able to operate in Antarctica combines both privileges and obligations. For a State involved in 
Antarctic science and decision-making, the privileges of operating in Antarctica are obvious and 
immediate. It is at times less clear what steps are necessary to ensure that the obligations resulting from 
the Protocol are met. Implementing legislation can be one of these steps, although as mentioned earlier the 
requirements of the different legal systems are very diverse, and range from requirements for very 
comprehensive regulation to immediate acceptance following ratification. However, implementing 
legislation or regulations do not assure practical implementation.  Any of the legal approaches can work 
as long as the obligations of the Protocol are met and, importantly, they result in tangible evidence of 
increased environmental protection in Antarctica. 
 
Evidence as to whether the Protocol is being effectively implemented on the ground results from both 
official and unofficial inspections. Recent official inspections suggest that whilst there has been progress 
in some aspects of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol, other aspects require further work (UK and 
Germany 1999).  These observations are consistent with those reported by ASOC-member Greenpeace 
during the period 1991-1997, which was presumably a transition period pending legal entry into force of 
the Protocol.8 However, the picture of implementation has not changed dramatically suggesting a very 
slow implementation progress if not chronic implementation delays. 
 
Appendix 2 summarizes the effort of implementation of the Madrid Protocol since September 1999.9 The 
trends for European ATCPs as a whole show a slow increase of the implementation effort of 1-2% a year, 
suggesting that the Protocol would be implemented by all European ATCPs to the level of the top 
performers (as identified using ASOC’s method) by around 2015.  Arguably the overall level of 
implementation and the rate of progress would be lower if all 28 ATCPs were included in this analysis.   
 
An overview of Party-by-Party efforts to ensure the legal implementation of the Protocol might indeed 
suggest that a flurry of legal activity is taking place across the ATS.  This is positive, since implementing 
legislation provides the basis for the long-term implementation of the Protocol, including its practical 
aspects.  However, legal implementation should be regarded in the context of the all the implementation 
actions taken in the past ten years.  Considering that the Protocol was signed in October 1991 and that 
Parties pledged themselves to interim implementation pending ratification, the progress has been 
exceedingly slow, by some Parties at least.  This has retarded progress for the ATS as a whole.  Much has 
been achieved, but much remains to be accomplished.  The challenge is whether remaining issues will be 
resolved within a reasonable time frame, or otherwise many more years would have to pass before all of 
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties achieve the objectives set forth in 1991. 
 
 
 
 
5
APPENDIX I 
 
Countries that have passed national legislation and/or developed administrative measures to 
implement the Annexes are as follows: 10 
 
 
Disclaimer 
 
ASOC has attempted to include the most accurate and up to date information available on the legal 
implementation of Annexes I-V of the Protocol by all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. However, 
this list may contain errors or omissions.  ASOC welcomes corrections or additions to ensure an accurate 
reflection of Parties activities.   
 
 
 
Annex I: Environmental Impact Assessment 
 
Note: The listing of IEEs or CEEs submitted to the ATCM or CEP since 1987 comes from the website of 
the CEP, updated on 14 May 2001 at the time of writing this document. 
 
Argentina: The country adopted statue No. 24.216 to enact the Protocol into national law. Disposition 
87/2000 contains provisions for EIAs including a form to be completed by those wishing to undertake an 
Antarctic activity11. From this form, the DNA can determine the likely level of impact for each activity, 
and the need for IEEs or CEEs. Argentina produces an “Annual Antarctic Plan” which reviews all the 
activities for the season utilizing different questionnaires that require information on the nature of 
activities including those related to Annexes II and V12.  
 
Australia: The Antarctic (Environment Protection) Legislation Amendment Act of 1992 requires a 
Preliminary Environmental Evaluation (PEE) for every Antarctic activity. If an activity has the potential 
to produce a minor or transitory impact or greater, the Australian Antarctic Division requires an IEE or a 
CEE. The Australian Antarctic Division has written guidelines for the preparation of environmental 
impact assessments, which it published as “Australian Guidelines for Preparation of Initial 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations.”13 
 
Belgium: To ASOC’s knowledge draft Belgian regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. Belgium has not submitted any IEEs or CEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 1987.14 The country 
has not reported on the status of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol under Art. 17 
 
Brazil: In 1994, the Grupo de Avaliaçaõ Ambiental (GAAm, or Environmental Assessment Group) was 
created to work with the Brazilian Antarctic Program to implement the Protocol. In relation to the EIA 
process the group assesses adverse impacts on the environment of “scientific, tourist, and logistic 
activities, or any other activity;” and advises on whether an activity should be allowed to proceed or be 
modified.15 The Brazilian Antarctic Agency has introduced logistic and scientific questionnaires that 
allow the activities to be evaluated based on potential impact.  
 
Bulgaria: It was considered by Bulgarian authorities that the activity at the Bulgarian station could 
continue without an EIA until the Bulgarian Regulations on the Protection of the Environment in the 
Antarctica entered into force.16 Consequently Bulgaria has not submitted any IEEs or CEEs to the ATCM 
or CEP since 1987.17 ASOC understands that these Regulations were approved by Council of Ministers 
 
6
on 15 February 2001 and were published in the state gazette on 23 February 2001. The Regulations 
describe a procedure for conducting EIAs and provide guidance as to what level of EIA would be required 
depending on the proposed activity. The Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources processes 
EIAs.18  
 
Chile: Executive Decree no. 396 enacted the entire Protocol. Under the Basis of General Law on the 
Environment (Law no. 19.300) the National Environmental Commission (CONAMA) is responsible for 
EIA evaluation.19 Guidelines reflecting Annex I of the Protocol are contained in “Manual of Procedures 
for the Application of the Madrid Protocol,” approved by Resolution N° 291 on 22nd August 1994 by the 
Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
Ecuador: The Oceanographic Institute of the Navy (INOCAR) is the agency in charge of evaluating all the 
activities that are carried out by the Ecuadorian Program including the EIA process. 
 
Finland: The Act on the Environmental Protection of Antarctica, which became law on 14 January 1998, 
gives the Ministry of the Environment responsibility for reviewing environmental evaluations.20 
Furthermore, the Act has been supplemented by the Decree on the Environmental Protection of 
Antarctica.”21 Finland has submitted one IEE and no CEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 1987.22 
 
France: To ASOC’s knowledge draft French regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. Reportedly, in the interim EIA procedures in France are adapted from domestic EIA legislation. 
France has not submitted any IEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 1987, and has submitted two CEEs, one of 
them jointly. France has not reported on the status of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol under 
Art. 17.23 
 
Germany: In 1994, the German government adopted the Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection that includes EIA provisions24. Under this Act, a license by the Federal Environmental Agency 
is required for all activities in Antarctica25. Germany has submitted 11 IEEs (two jointly with other 
ATCPs) and one CEE to the ATCM or CEP since 1987.26 
 
India: Administrative guidelines for EIAs developed by the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean 
Research focus on reducing environmental impact by human activities. Informal EIAs have been 
undertaken on and around India’s base. An environmental laboratory has been set up to monitor and 
check the impact of activities at and around the base. 
 
Italy: ENEA-ANTAR, a unit of the National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Environment 
(ENEA, in Italian) that is in charge of the Italian Antarctic Research Programme (PNRA, in Italian), has 
been instructed to implement the Madrid Protocol pending the preparation of national legislation27, which 
reportedly is in the process of being drafted. Reportedly Italy has applied domestic EIA regulations. Italy 
has submitted no IEEs and one joint CEE to the ATCM or CEP since 1987.28 It has also submitted “An 
environmental overview of the Italian Terra Nova Station”, which was not a formal EIA under 
Art.8/Annex I but followed Protocol EIA regulations closely.29 
 
Japan: Provisions for Annex I are contained under the Law relating to Protection of the Environment in 
Antarctica (Antarctic Environment Law). The law states that “no person shall engage in any activity in 
Antarctica other than Antarctic Activities included in an Antarctic Activity Plan that has been certified by 
the Director General of the Environment Agency.30” The Agency has the authority to determine whether 
all the activities contained in the Activity Plan “satisfy requirements” including provisions that activities 
shall not “threaten to eliminate significant habitats of species of animals or plants” and “threaten to reduce 
drastically the important intrinsic value of Antarctica.31” 
 
7
 
Netherlands: The Dutch Protection of Antarctica Act applies the Environmental Management Act of 1993 
in order to implement Annex I.32 Within this framework, the organizer must write an EIA for all activities 
likely to create more than a minor transitory impact. The Netherlands has submitted one joint IEE and no 
CEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 1987.33 
 
New Zealand: The Antarctica Environmental Protection Act of 1994 forbids an activity that violates the 
guiding principles of the Protocol.34 The Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade may “…modify, suspend, 
or cancel the activity…” in order to avert any violations of those principles.35 The same official is 
responsible for determining at what level an environmental evaluation should be carried out (i.e., IEE vs. 
CEE). Violators of Annex I, can get up to one year in jail or a fine of as much as $100,000 (NZ).36 
 
Norway: The “Regulations Relating to Protection of the Environment” in Antarctica require at least an 
IEE for all Antarctic activities37. Anyone organizing an expedition must notify the Norwegian Polar 
Institute no less than one year beforehand.38 Norway has submitted six IEEs and no CEEs to the ATCM 
or CEP since 1987.39 
 
Peru: The Environmental Protection Working Group is responsible for preparing EIAs and recommending 
cancellation or modification of activities, among other activities. 40 For all Antarctic expeditions, one 
person is responsible for supervising the fulfilment of the environmental prevention measures and 
ensuring that all the scientific research activities do not adversely impact either the ecosystem or the 
Antarctic environment. Since 1999 a Program of Environmental Evaluation has been carried out at Punta 
Crepin, King George Island, and its associated ecosystems. This evaluation includes diagnostic, 
monitoring and modelling of the main environmental factors and the influence of human activities on the 
research areas. 
 
Poland: To ASOC’s knowledge Poland uses an ad hoc procedure to implement Annex I. According to the 
CEP website Poland has not submitted any IEEs or CEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 1987.41 According 
to a 1999 official inspection it was not apparent whether newly constructed buildings and the new science 
programmes had been subject to an EIA, although a descriptive environmental assessment of the station 
was carried out in 1991.42 In addition, reportedly the Department of Antarctic Biology of the Polish 
Academy of Sciences produced an EIA in 1997.  
 
Russia: Under Russian law all activities by Russian individual and private entities require a permit. The 
basis of a permit is an EIA. Law no. 1476 “On the Adoption of the Procedure for Consideration and 
Issuance of Permits for Activities of the Russian Individual Personas and Legal Entities in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area” contains provisions for permits43. Law no. 130 lists a set of documents to be submitted by 
“Russian individual persons” and “legal entities” applying to undertake an Antarctic activity44. According 
to the CEP website Russia has not submitted any IEEs or CEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 198745; 
however, it did submit a draft IEE for the construction of a snow runaway at the XXIII ATCM46 and 
several other documents related to EIA and monitoring.47 
 
South Africa: The Antarctic Treaties Act, No. 60 of 1996 enacts the Protocol. All requests from scientists 
and support personnel for any operations in the Antarctic are submitted in accordance with set guidelines 
which are evaluated and permits issued in accordance with the Protocol.”48 However, while the Act 
Schedules failure to act in accordance with key aspects of the other Annexes as offences punishable by 
various terms of imprisonment, it does not list the failure to conduct an EIA in accordance with Annex I 
as a punishable offence. As such, it leaves a gaping hole in the effective implementation and enforcement 
of the requirements of Annex I of the Protocol in South African law. 
 
 
8
Spain: EIAs are regulated at a basic level by the Royal Legislative Decree 1302/1986 (28 June), and the 
Royal Decree 1121/1988 (30 September) that incorporate earlier regulation of the State Council 
concerning the evaluation of environmental impacts. In the Antarctic context the final responsibility 
belongs to the National Antarctic Authority. The Interministerial Commission of Science and Technology 
(“CICYT”) fulfills the functions of the National Antarctic Authority. The agency in charge of 
coordinating all activities of the National Antarctic Authority is the Spanish Polar Committee (CPE, in 
Spanish) through its Technical Secretary.49 The CPE processes EIAs from different Spanish operators or 
organizers of Antarctic activities.50 Spain has submitted 15 IEEs and no CEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 
1987.51 
 
Sweden: The Swedish Antarctica Act requires every individual to obtain a permit before engaging in any 
activity in the ATA.52 Every permit application must include “…an environmental impact assessment that 
makes it possible to make a comprehensive assessment of the impact of the visit or activity on the 
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.”53 Sweden has submitted 12 IEEs and 
no CEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 1987.54 
 
United Kingdom: The Antarctic Act of 1994 implements the Protocol. Under this law, every operator must 
obtain a permit for each Antarctic expedition.55 The U.K. has enacted regulations called the “Antarctic 
Regulations 1995.” These regulations specify procedures for permit issuance and EIAs. The United 
Kingdom has submitted five IEEs and two CEEs to the ATCM or CEP since 1987.56 
 
United States: The Antarctic Science, Tourism, and Conservation Act of 1996 requires U.S. Antarctic 
operators to prepare an EIA. U.S. law applies the National Environmental Policy Act of 196957 in order to 
enforce the EIA requirements.58 Each responsible federal agency must prepare an EIA for every Antarctic 
activity.59 EIA regulations for all non-governmental activities (including tourism), are contained in the 
interim“ Rule on Environmental Impact Assessment of Nongovernmental Activities in Antarctica.”  
 
Uruguay: Law No. 16.518 on 22 July 1994 adopted the entire Protocol. Decree 555 gives the Uruguayan 
Antarctic Institute control over policy guidelines for Uruguayan activities in the ATA, in agreement with 
the norms established by the ATS. The Uruguayan Antarctic Institute has developed a “Guide for 
Environmental Impact Evaluation” that includes an “Environmental Impact Assessment Form.60” On 10 
January 2001 Law N° 17.283 was enacted and establishes sanctions for Uruguayans that impact the 
environment, including penalties for activities in Antarctica. 
 
Annex II: Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna 
 
Argentina: The Antarctic National Directorate administers permits under Disposition 87/200061. 
Provisions under the measure require permits for the taking and harmful interference of Antarctic flora 
and fauna and for the introduction of domestic plants and animals, as well as, laboratory plants including 
viruses, bacteria, yeast and fungi62. There is also a provision that dictates that a maximum of 5% of a 
mammal or bird population in the area of study can be sacrificed63.  
 
Australia: Under the Antarctic (Environment Protection) Legislation Amendment Act the Environment 
Minister issues permits for takings and harmful interference for scientific activities only. Permits must 
include specific descriptions for each activity, and the law restricts conditions under which the Minister 
can issue a permit. 
 
Belgium: To ASOC’s knowledge draft Belgian regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. The country has not reported on the status of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol under 
Art. 17 
 
9
 
 
Brazil: The CIRM (Inter-Ministerial Commission for the Sea Resources) is the Federal body with 
responsibility under law for implementing the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR). PROANTAR 
includes all the activities that Brazil carries out in Antarctica, including those matters related to the 
Madrid Protocol. 
 
 
Bulgaria: Bulgarian Regulations establishes that the Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources 
may permit taking species from (or introducing species to) the Antarctic Treaty area, but permits are 
issued on the basis Arts.3 and 4 of Annex II of the Protocol.64 
 
Chile: Executive Decree number 396 enacted the entire Protocol. Guidelines reflecting Annex II of the 
Protocol are contained in “Manual of Procedures for the Application of the Madrid Protocol” approved by 
Resolution No. 291. The Chilean Antarctic Institute has the authority for permitting both takings and 
introduction of animals and plants. 
 
Ecuador: The Oceanographic Institute of the Navy (INOCAR) is the agency in charge of evaluating all the 
activities that are carried out by the Ecuadorian Program including granting authorizations for takings. 
 
Finland: Under the Act on the Environmental Protection of Antarctica permits are issued for harmful 
interference and takings only if they serve a scientific purpose. The Ministry of the Environment ensures 
that no more specimens are taken than necessary, that kills do not exceed the local population’s recovery 
rate, and that the diversity of species is maintained.”65 Chapter 3 of the Decree on the Environmental 
Protection of Antarctica identifies Antarctic Fur and Ross Seals as specially protected species under the 
Act.66 
 
France: To ASOC’s knowledge draft French regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. France has not reported on the status of its implementation of the Madrid Protocol under Art. 
17 that would enable an evaluation of its performance. 
 
Germany: The Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection stipulates that in order to 
engage in takings of, or harmful interference with, native species;67 or to introduce non-native species68 
operators must first obtain a permit from the Federal Environmental Department. Permits are only issued 
for scientific purposes.69 
 
India: Administrative Guidelines prepared by the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research 
allows for sampling of species for scientific experimentation only. Introduction of non-native species and 
harmful interference is strictly prohibited. Permits, when needed, are to be issued in accordance with the 
guidelines by the concerned ministry, i.e. Department of Ocean Development. 
 
Italy: Permits for sampling and other science activities are given on the authority of the Italian Foreign 
Ministry.70 
 
Japan: The Law relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica (Antarctic Environment Law) 
contains provisions for Annex II. The law contains prohibitions to “capture, injure or kill Antarctic 
mammals or Antarctic birds, or to collect or damage the eggs of Antarctic birds71” and to “introduce [to] 
Antarctica any living organism (including virus)” except in some cases, including “where introducing 
yeasts and other fungi or plants for consumption as food.72” 
 
 
10
Netherlands: Dutch Protocol law combines the entire permit system into a single general permit. As such, 
the law does not require separate permits for Annexes II, III, or V; instead, this general permit must cover 
all activities. The Ministers cannot grant permits unless the activity serves an important scientific purpose 
that cannot be undertaken elsewhere. The Netherlands has written a draft of a decree to delineate 
regulations for permit applications under the Protection of Antarctica Act.73 Dutch implementing 
legislation entered into force on April 1st, 2001. 
 
New Zealand: Under the Antarctica Environmental Protection Act of 1994, the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade has authority over permit issuance. Anyone seeking to obtain a permit must apply in 
writing to the Minister74 with a specific description of the activity and its participants.75 The Minister 
retains the right to grant or refuse a permit,76 or to revoke or suspend it “…at any time….”77 
 
Norway: According to the “Regulations Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica,” the 
Norwegian Polar Research Institute has the authority to issue permits, with regard to takings or harmful 
interference.78 The Institute also controls the introduction of alien species through permitting.79  
 
Poland: To ASOC’s knowledge Poland has an in-house procedure at the Polish Academy of Sciences for 
granting permits under Annex II of the Protocol. 
 
Russia: Under Russian law all activities by Russian individuals and private entities require a permit. The 
basis of a permit is an EIA. Russia has reported on exchange of information and on the number and nature 
of permits regarding flora and fauna.80 
 
South Africa: All requests from scientists and support personnel for any operations in the Antarctic are 
submitted in accordance with set guidelines which are evaluated and permits issued in accordance with 
the Protocol.”81 Under South African law there is a one-year imprisonment penalty for takings or harmful 
interference without a permit and two years imprisonment for introducing foreign animals or plants into 
the Antarctic environment.  
 
Spain: The agency in charge of coordinating all activities of the National Antarctic Authority is the 
Spanish Polar Committee (CPE, in Spanish) through its Technical Secretary.82 The CPE processes permits 
under Annex II from different Spanish operators or organizers of Antarctic activities. 
 
Sweden: The Swedish Antarctica Act prohibits “taking or harmful interference with native plant or animal 
species…” without a permit.83 Furthermore, the act bans alien introductions onto the land, ice, or into the 
waters of the ATA without a permit.84 
 
United Kingdom: The Antarctic Act 1994 restricts activities relating to taking of, and harmful interference 
with, Antarctic wildlife only to operators who have obtained a permit.85 Introduction of non-native species 
also requires a permit under British law.86. The “Antarctic Regulations 1995” specify procedures for 
permit issuance with respect to Annex II. 
 
United States: The National Science Foundation has the authority to issue permits for Annex II of the 
Protocol. The NSF can only approve permits for taking or harmful interference if the activity serves a 
scientific purpose. In order to give the public a chance to comment, the NSF must print all permit 
applications in the Federal Register.  
 
Uruguay: The Uruguayan Antarctic Institute (IAU) has the authority to issue permits for Annex II of the 
Protocol.  
 
11
 
Annex III: Waste Disposal and Waste Management 
 
Argentina: Under Argentine Disposition 87/2000, operators responsible for activities in the ATA must 
adopt provisions necessary to eliminate, process or remove wastes from the area87. Four categories of 
waste are established as follows: biodegradable waste, non-biodegradable waste, dangerous waste, and 
inert waste88. The measure designates waste that can be incinerated and that which must be removed from 
the ATA89. The National Antarctic Directorate maintains a record of all the waste produced at the bases.  
 
Australia: The Australian Antarctic Division has implemented a waste management strategy pursuant to 
their Antarctic (Environment Protection) Legislation Amendment Act 1992 that includes measures for 
collection, reduction, and recycling. Regulations to implement Annex III have been promulgated by the 
Federal Cabinet. 
 
Belgium: To ASOC’s knowledge draft Belgian regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. The country has not reported on the status of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol under 
Art. 17. 
 
Brazil: The CIRM (Inter-Ministerial Commission for the Sea Resources) is the Federal body with 
responsibility under law for implementing the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR). PROANTAR 
includes all the activities that Brazil carries out in Antarctica, including those matters related to the 
Madrid Protocol. 
 
Bulgaria: Bulgarian Regulations provide guidelines concerning prohibited products and obligations for 
waste disposal.90 
 
Chile: Executive Decree No. 396 enacted the entire Protocol. Guidelines reflecting Annex III of the 
Protocol are contained in the “Manual of Procedures for the Application of the Madrid Protocol.” More 
detailed procedures are contained in “Elimination Plan of Waste” which gives specific instructions related 
to the five categories of waste under the Protocol and waste management procedures at Chilean bases. 
The Chilean Antarctic Institute has also developed a “Manual of Protection for the Antarctic 
Environment” which also contains guidelines for Annex III.  
 
Ecuador: A waste management plan has been completed for its Maldonado base. 
 
Finland: The Act on the Environmental Protection of Antarctic requires operators to remove wastes from 
the ATA, or store or treat them, and implement a waste management plan – to be stipulated in the Decree 
on the Environmental Protection of Antarctica.91 The Decree identifies the specific kinds of wastes and 
the appropriate ways of disposing of them.92 
 
France: To ASOC’s knowledge draft French regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. France has not reported on the status of its implementation of the Madrid Protocol under Art. 
17 that would enable an evaluation of its performance. 
 
Germany: The Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection designates the Federal 
Ministry of the Environment, Nature Protection and Reactor Safety with regulatory responsibility for 
waste management93. The Act sets out to eliminate waste disposal in the Antarctic “…as far as 
possible,”94 to store it carefully in order to minimize its dispersion into the environment,95 and to clean up 
old dumps.96 The law requires permits for the disposal of liquid wastes into the ocean, but bans their 
disposal onto ice-free land or into fresh water.97 Guidelines for waste management have been developed98. 
 
12
 
India: The National Centre has developed Administrative Guidelines for Annex III for Antarctic and 
Ocean Research, to the effect of “minimizing waste generation as far as possible”. The waste management 
strategy is based on “ waste avoidance and minimization, waste reuse, waste recycling, and waste 
disposal’, thereby reducing pollution on the base and surrounding. Incinerators are operational and open 
burning of waste is prohibited. Treated domestic wastes are discharged and solid waste is carried back 
home.  
 
Italy: A formal waste management plan was prepared in 1991. The basic policy is that all waste is 
removed from the AT area.99 
 
Japan: The Law Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica (Antarctic Environment Law) 
states that “all persons shall endeavour to reduce production of waste in Antarctica and to remove from 
Antarctica waste that has been produced.100” The law states that “no person shall burn, bury, discharge, 
abandon, or otherwise dispose of waste in Antarctica101” except by stipulated methods, for example, for 
liquid waste which can be disposed of on the land or discharged into the sea “if it has been determined by 
an ordinance of the Prime Minister's Office that the said disposal or discharge is unavoidable and causes 
only a minor impact on the Antarctic Environment.102” 
 
Netherlands: The conditions attached to a permit shall specify the methods to dispose of plants and dead 
animals, and wastewater; generally waste awaiting disposal should not be allowed to enter the Antarctic 
environment.103 
 
New Zealand: The Antarctica Environmental Protection Act of 1994 includes the language for waste 
disposal and management contained in Annex III, Article 1,104 along with Articles 2 and 7,105. 
 
Norway: Implementing legislation forbids leaving waste in Antarctica, except waste to be burned in 
incinerators “…with no environmentally harmful emissions,” according to Norwegian Polar Institute 
regulations, which may include exemptions106. The law also requires waste awaiting incineration or 
removal to “…be stored in such a way as to prevent its dispersal or emission into the environment. In 
collaboration with the Finnish Antarctic Program and the Swedish Polar Research Secretariat, Norway has 
written an “Antarctic Waste Management Handbook.” 
 
Peru: Waste management plans have been competed for Machu Picchu station107. 
 
Poland: To ASOC’s knowledge Poland has not passed implementing legislation detailing waste 
management procedures. However, according to official inspectors, Poland’s Arctowski Station 
implements” a sound waste management policy”.108 
 
Russia: Reportedly Russia is in the process of developing waste management plans for the Russian 
stations, which will reportedly be introduced to the Russian Antarctic Expedition stations during the 
period 2000-2003. Russian ships have Shipboard Garbage Management Plans corresponding to the 
requirements of MARPOL 73/78. Russia is also working on the creation of a database for the area of past 
RAE activities, which will reportedly be finished in 2003.109 
 
South Africa: The Antarctic Treaties Act, No. 60 of 1996 sets the maximum jail sentences at one year for 
violations with regard to waste disposal and storage,110 and one year for introducing a banned substance 
under Article 7.111  
 
 
13
Spain: The agency in charge of coordinating all activities of the National Antarctic Authority is the 
Spanish Polar Committee (“CPE”) through its Technical Secretary.112 The CPE is in charge of the 
preparation and audit of waste management plans for Spain’s Antarctic facilities.113 Waste management 
plans for both Spanish stations have been produced. 
 
Sweden: The Swedish Antarctica Act charges, “generation and storage of waste in Antarctica shall be 
reduced as far as practicable114. In conjunction with Norway and Finland, the Swedish Polar Research 
Secretariat has published an “Antarctic Waste Management Handbook.” 
 
United Kingdom: Measures under Annex III are contained in the “Antarctic Regulations 1995.” 
 
United States: The U.S. Protocol implementing legislation establishes banned waste, disposal activities 
prescribed by the Protocol115 and prohibits waste disposal without a permit.116 The NSF bears 
responsibility for permit issuance under Annex III.117  
 
Uruguay: The country has completed waste management plans for its two bases: Artigas and ECARE. 
 
Annex IV: Prevention of Marine Pollution 
 
Argentina: Under Argentine Disposition 87/2000, operators responsible for activities that originate from 
vessels are responsible for provisions contained in the Annex IV of the Protocol118. The measures 
stipulate that sludge, dirty ballast, tank washing waters, and other oily residues and mixtures must be 
retained by the vessel119 Similar to the Protocol it prohibits discharge of “any noxious liquid substance 
and any other chemical or other substance, in quantities or concentrations that are harmful to the marine 
environment120.”  
 
Australia: Australia had a technical problem with Article 6 of Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol in that the 
1993 implementing legislation (amendments to the Protection of the Sea - Prevention of Pollution from 
Ships Act 1983 - administered by Transport) did not formally enter into force, as the proclamation was 
not made within the then requisite 6 months. Although not legally covered, Australia still complied with 
the Annex pending entry into force. The legal issues were resolved and the amending provisions went into 
force on 28 December 2000. 
 
Belgium: To ASOC’s knowledge draft Belgian regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. Belgium has not reported on the status of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol under Art. 
17. 
 
Brazil: The country has an oil spill contingency plan for its vessel the Ary Rongel121. 
 
Bulgaria: Bulgarian regulations do not specifically address Annex IV. Some articles concerning waste 
disposal have general provisions concerning “harm” to the environment or dispersal into the 
environment.122 
 
Chile: The entire Protocol was enacted by Executive Decree no. 396.” Basic provisions related to Annex 
IV are contained in the “Elimination Plan of Waste.”  
 
Ecuador: An oil spill contingency plan is in place for the research vessel Orion. 
 
Finland: The Act on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Vessels123 that implements MARPOL 73/78 
applies in the ATA, as do the regulations that enforce that law. The Act on the Environmental Protection 
 
14
of Antarctica expands on those existing provisions in order to implement Annex IV. An Oil Spill 
Contingency Plan (OSCP) has been developed in cooperation with the Norwegian and Swedish Antarctic 
Programs124. 
 
France: To ASOC’s knowledge draft French regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. France has not reported on the status of its implementation of the Madrid Protocol under Art. 
17 that would enable an evaluation of its performance. 
 
Germany: Under the Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection, operators must record 
all waste and effluent discharges according to Annex IV and MARPOL 73/78.125 Furthermore, the 
operator must notify the Federal Maritime Agency of any such discharges in the case of emergency.126 
Operators organizing their expedition in Germany are subject to the German permitting system and can be 
prosecuted for violating MARPOL and Annex IV.127  
 
India: Administrative guidelines are followed as prescribed in the Protocol and MARPOL 73/78, enforced 
by NCAOR. 
 
Japan: Under the Law Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica (Antarctic Environment 
Law} there are some provisions for the disposal of “liquid wastes” by ships. This disposal must be “done 
in accordance with the provisions of the Law Relating to the Prevention of Marine Pollution and Maritime 
Disaster (Law No. 136 of 1970)128.” 
 
Italy: Terra Nova Station is equipped with a sewage treatment system in operation since 1986/87. The 
effluent is reportedly “clean” and is discharged at sea; the sludge is transported back to Italy.129 The 
Italian research and cargo vessels has her own oil pollution prevention and control plan130 
 
Netherlands: Dutch legislation implements Annex IV with the Prevention of Pollution from Ships Act, 
which implements MARPOL.  
 
New Zealand: Regulations under New Zealand’s Maritime Transport Act 1994 implement Annex IV. 
 
Norway: The 1995 implementing legislation forbids any ship traveling through the ATA while carrying 
more than 10 people to dump sewage into the ocean within twelve nautical miles of land or ice shelves. 
The Norwegian Polar Institute reported that it would write regulations to implement contingency plans 
under this Annex.131 Under Norwegian law, the authority for these provisions derives from Act no. 7 of 9 
June 1903, also called the Seaworthiness Act with Regulations, which includes provisions to implement 
MARPOL 73/78. An Oil Spill Contingency Plan (OSCP) has been developed in cooperation with the 
Finnish and Swedish Antarctic Programs132. 
 
Peru: Peru tabled a paper that describes the treatment of solid waste on its research vessel Humboldt133. 
 
Poland: Under the 1996 Polish Constitution Annex IV has entered into force along with the rest of the 
Protocol. To ASOC’s knowledge there are no additional legal mechanisms to enforce it. 
 
Russia: The research expedition vessels Akademik Fedorov and Akademik Aleksandr Karpinsky have 
Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plans that incorporate MARPOL 73/78.134 
 
South Africa: A contingency plan for the mv Aguhlas based on guidelines set by COMNAP has been in 
effect since 1996. Discharges of oil or oily mixtures or of noxious liquid or chemical substances into the 
sea are Scheduled in the Antarctica Act No. 60 of 1996, as punishable by a prison term of up to five years. 
 
15
Disposal of garbage or sewage into the sea is punishable under the Act by a prison term of up to two 
years. 
 
Spain: The agency in charge of coordinating all activities of the National Antarctic Authority is the 
Spanish Polar Committee (“CPE”) through its Technical Secretary.135 The CPE is in charge of the 
preparation of emergency plans for Spain’s Antarctic facilities, in order to prevent adverse effect on the 
Antarctic environment.136 A contingency plan has been developed for Gabriela de Castilla base, which 
covers fuel spills, fires and other catastrophes.  
 
Sweden: The Antarctica Act prohibits the discharge of oil and oily mixtures, noxious liquid substances, 
and other chemical substances from its ships into the ATA, and it requires Swedish vessels to retain 
“…all sludge, dirty ballast, tank washing waters and other oily residues and mixtures….” The Antarctica 
Act clarifies that Swedish maritime law in the ATA applies strictly to its own flagged ships, and ships 
under its operation.137 An Oil Spill Contingency Plan (OSCP) has been developed in cooperation with the 
Finnish and Norwegian Antarctic Programs138. 
 
United Kingdom: Measures under Annex IV are implicitly contained in the “Antarctic Regulations 1995.” 
 
United States: The Antarctic Science, Tourism and Conservation Act of 1996 specifically prohibits 
transporting passengers through the Antarctic on a ship that does not comply with MARPOL 73/78.139 In 
order to facilitate this prohibition, the Act employs the previously existing Act to Prevent Pollution from 
Ships140. The U.S. Coast Guard has regulatory authority to enforce Annex IV and marine emergency and 
contingency plans141. 
 
Uruguay: The country has a contingency plan for its vessel the ROU Vanguardia that reflects norms 
established by the International Maritime Organization142.  
 
Annex V: Area Protection and Management (Recommendation XVI/10): 
 
Argentina: Disposition 87/2000 contains provisions for permits to enter Protected Areas. Entrance into a 
Protected Area is permitted if the activity to be carried out corresponds with the area’s Management 
Plan143. The law stipulates that holders of the permit must carry a copy of it with them when they are in 
the Protected Area144 The country has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex 
V. 
 
Australia: Annex V is implemented by the Antarctic (Environment Protection) Legislation Amendment 
Act 1992. Australia has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V. 
 
Belgium: To ASOC’s knowledge draft Belgian regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. The country has not reported on the status of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol under 
Art. 17. 
 
Brazil: Brazil has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V.  
 
Bulgaria: Bulgarian regulations do not specifically address access to Protected Areas. However, all 
Bulgarian activities in Antarctica require both an EIA and a permit.145 
 
Chile: Chile has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V. The “Manual of 
Protection for the Antarctic Environment” establishes that all researchers working inside a protected area 
must have a permit issued by the Chilean Antarctic Institute. 
 
16
 
Ecuador: Ecuador has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V. The 
Oceanographic Institute of the Navy (INOCAR) is the agency in charge of granting permits for the 
Ecuadorian Program for entrance into protected areas. 
 
Finland: Under the Act on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Vessels146, the Ministry must issue a 
permit before anyone may enter a Protected Area. The country has revised management plans for 
protected areas according to Annex V. 
 
France: To ASOC’s knowledge draft French regulations implementing the Protocol are yet to be 
approved. France has not reported on the status of its implementation of the Madrid Protocol under Art. 
17 that would enable an evaluation of its performance. 
 
Germany: The Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection authorizes federal agencies to 
designate ASPAs, ASMAs, and Historic Sites and Monuments according to ATS regulations.147 In order 
to enter ASPAs, operators must first obtain a permit from the Federal Environmental Agency in 
accordance with specific conditions,148 and the operator must carry that permit at all times.149 German law 
requires the Federal Environmental Agency to circulate permits under Annex V among the Parties.150  
 
Italy: Permits for access to protected areas are given on the authority of the Italian Foreign Ministry.151 
 
Japan: The Law relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica (Antarctic Environment Law) 
states that persons are not allowed in Antarctic Specially Protected Area except for the purposes of 
engaging in a particular activity “contained in a certified Antarctic Activity Plan,” or “with permission or 
similar administrative treatment for entry pursuant to the provisions of a Related Law or Regulation of a 
State Party152.” The country has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V.  
 
Netherlands: Dutch Protocol law combines the entire permit system into a single general permit. As such, 
the law does not require separate permits for Annexes II, III, or V; instead, this general permit must cover 
all activities. The Ministers cannot grant permits unless the activity serves an important scientific purpose 
that cannot be undertaken elsewhere. The Netherlands has written a draft of a decree to delineate 
regulations for permit applications under the Protection of Antarctica Act.153 
 
New Zealand: Under the Antarctica Environmental Protection Act 1994, the Minister of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade has authority over permit issuance. Anyone seeking to obtain a permit must apply in writing to 
the Minister154 with a specific description of the activity and its participants.155 The law further specifies 
that anyone must first obtain a permit in order to “[e]nter or carry out any activity in an Antarctic 
Specially Protected Area….”156 Anyone who fails to comply with the management plan for an ASMA has 
committed an offence.157 Violators will be liable to summary conviction and imprisonment for up to six 
months or a fine up to $100,000. The country has revised management plans for protected areas according 
to Annex V. 
 
Norway: The Regulations Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica establish the existence 
of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas,158 Specially Managed Areas,159 and Historical Sites and 
Monuments.160 No one may enter an ASPA without a permit from the Norwegian Polar Institute, and 
while inside the ASPA, the holder must keep the permit on his or her person at all times.161 Likewise, NPI 
may designate ASMAs according to Protocol Annex V, Article 4(1).162 The country has revised 
management plans for protected areas according to Annex V. 
 
Peru: Peru has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V.  
 
17
 
Poland: Poland has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V, submitting 
Management Plan for Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 8163 and No.34164 and has participated 
in the development of an ASMA for Admiralty Bay, jointly with other ATCPs. The process of ratification 
and/or notification of Annex V/Recommendation XIV-10 has not yet been completed, although the 
Protocol and Annexes were ratified by presidential decree in 1995 before the 1997 Constitution of the 
Republic of Poland was put in place.  
 
Russia: Russia has presented a fauna inventory of the Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 7 - "Haswell 
Island" (in the vicinity of Mirny Station)165 and is reportedly working on a Management Plan for the 
Larsemann Hills jointly with other ATCPs. Russia reported on the number and nature of permits 
regarding protected areas, and on the activities in protected areas.166 The process of ratification and/or 
notification of Annex V/Recommendation XIV-10 has not yet been completed. 
 
South Africa: The Antarctic Treaties Act of 1996, Schedule 2, prescribes the penalty for violation of the 
Protected Areas Annex as a maximum of one year’s imprisonment167 and up to two years for damaging 
historic sites or monuments.168 Otherwise, the Antarctic Treaties Act 1996 gives responsibility for the 
implementation of Annex V to the Minister of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. 
The country has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V. 
 
Spain: The agency in charge of coordinating all activities of the National Antarctic Authority is the 
Spanish Polar Committee (“CPE”) through its Technical Secretary.169 The CPE is in charge of processing 
permits to access Protected Areas.170  
 
Sweden: Under the Antarctica Act, Sweden requires visitors to ASPAs and ASMAs to obtain a permit. 
The government promulgates regulations specific for each visited area.171  
 
United Kingdom: The Antarctic Act 1994 restricts entry into Antarctic Specially Protected Areas only to 
those with permits and includes protections for the sites themselves.172 The “Antarctic Regulations 1995-
1998” lists Specially Protected Areas and Historic Sites and Monuments.173 The UK has revised 
management plans for specially protected areas according to Recommendation XVI-10.  
 
United States: The Antarctic Science, Tourism and Conservation Act of 1996 explicitly forbids harming or 
removing any historic monument,174 and requires a permit for entering an Antarctic Specially Protected 
Area.175 The National Science Foundation has the authority to issue permits for Annexes V. The country 
has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V.  
 
Uruguay: Uruguay has revised management plans for protected areas according to Annex V. The 
Uruguayan Antarctic Institute (IAU) is the organization with responsibility for issuing permits for Annex 
V. 
 
18
APPENDIX 2 
 
Implementation Effort (IE) for European ATCPs, 1999-2001 
 
Introduction 
 
A time-serial monitoring performance in the implementation of the Madrid Protocol was conducted for a 
period of two years (March 1999-March 2001). This monitoring continues and includes data collection 
and analysis. Performance in the implementation of the Madrid Protocol was summarized in an index 
termed “Implementation Effort” (IE). These results provided an overall picture of how effectively the 
Protocol was being implemented by European ATCPs over time, individually and collectively, and 
allowed to estimate trends for future performance.  
 
In order to gain a better understanding of how Parties individually, and as a group, have performed so far, 
ASOC has developed a methodology to assess the implementation of the Protocol (ASOC 2000). Its 
purpose is to provide a basis for a systematic and objective overall assessment of the “Implementation 
Effort” (IE) of a state or group of states. ASOC’s method is based on 30 different indicators that reflect 
key requirements of the Protocol and its Annexes. The method has been described in detail elsewhere 
176(ASOC 2000). 
 
Indicators were selected to address: 
Significant obligations in the Protocol and its Annexes. 
Implementation at bureaucratic, administrative or operational centres; and in Antarctica itself. 
 
The indicators include:  
• Establishment of EIA and permitting procedures under Annexes II and V; and evidence that these 
procedures are used; 
• Establishment of monitoring programs and contingency plans;  
• Establishment of waste management plans and measures to prevent marine pollution; 
• Evidence of scientific cooperation, conducting of inspections, and overall compliance with the 
objectives and principles of the Protocol;  
• Meeting annual reporting requirements on the implementation of the Protocol and other specific 
reporting requirements; 
• Participation in the liability debate; 
• Passing of suitable legislation implementing the Protocol. 
 
The main features of the methodology are: 
• The 30 indicators are selected to cover, so far as possible, both legal and practical implementation 
e.g.: The methodology verifies, inter alia, compliance with obligations to report on procedures for 
issuing permits—an indication that some legal and administrative action has been taken in accordance 
with the Protocol. Verification of reporting on the actual issuance of permits examines whether the 
procedures have been implemented in practice. 
• The implementation effort is expressed on a 0-100% scale.  
• The methodology is designed so that the assessment can be made using readily available information, 
such as official documents tabled at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and meetings 
of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP).  
• The methodology penalizes lack of reporting by the Parties as this suggests no action and/or poor 
performance in Protocol implementation.  
 
19
• The indicators are given different weights based on criteria established by ASOC, namely importance 
of the indicator concerning environmental protection, and objectivity of the data. 
• The uncertainty generated by non-reporting or lack of information available to ASOC is also reflected 
in the overall assessment with a +/- value, which when applied to the final Protocol implementation 
score, provides a range of possible values of implementation effort.  
 
The data collection methods included a review of public documents submitted to the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) and meetings of the Committee for Environmental Protection. In 
particular they include official inspection reports, which provide a relatively objective view on a third 
Party performance (e.g. United Kingdom and Germany 1999). Other data collection methods include 
semi-structured interviews with key actors in the implementation of the Madrid Protocol, in the context of 
ASOC’s Special Implementation Campaign; and direct observations made by ASOC members during 
single or time-serial visits to about a dozen stations run by European ATCPs177 prior to the entry into 
force of the Protocol i.e. between 1991 and 1998. Data collection specifically with the purposes of 
monitoring the implementation of the Madrid Protocol by European ATCPs began in March 1999. The 
method was first applied in September 1999. 
 
The application of the method described above allowed assigning a number, or series of numbers, for the 
IE of the countries sampled for this a (n=13) (Table I). Ukraine has not been included in this analysis, 
even though it conducts year-round Antarctic activities, as it has only ratified the Protocol this year. 
 
 
 
Table I—Implementation Effort (IE) for European ATCPs, 1999-2001 
 
 
 
 
September 
1999 
(post-XIII 
ATCM) 
July 2000 
(pre-XII 
SATCM) 
September 
2000 (post-
XII SATCM) 
April 2001 
(pre-XXIV 
ATCM) 
Average IE (%) 
65% 
66% 
68% 
68% 
Maximum IE 
(%) 
74 
73 
73 
73 
Minimum IE 
(%) 
56 
58 
63 
63 
IE’s Standard 
Deviation (%) 
17 
17 
17 
17 
 
 
4. Results and Discussion 
 
Some aspects of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol require one-off action (e.g. the approval of 
comprehensive implementing legislation), while others require periodic or ongoing action (e.g. waste 
management, annual reports under Art. 17). The fulfilment of the later set of obligations might be uneven 
from year to year and therefore the IE of some Parties fluctuates. An earlier work suggested that the level 
 
20
of Protocol implementation for Europe had been established as 63% plus or minus 7%, i.e. roughly a 
55%-70% range (ASOC 2000).178 Arguably the IE for the ATS as a whole would be lower. Considering 
that the Protocol was signed in October 1991 and that Parties pledged themselves to interim 
implementation pending ratification, the progress has been exceedingly slow.  
 
Official inspections suggest that whilst there has been progress in some aspects of the implementation of 
the Madrid Protocol, other aspects require further work (UK and Germany 1999). These observations are 
consistent with those of ASOC-member Greenpeace during 1991-1997, suggesting a very slow 
implementation progress if not chronic implementation delays (ASOC 2000).  
 
Table I summarizes the effort of implementation of the Madrid Protocol since September 1999.179 The 
trends for Europe as a whole show a slow increase of 1-2% a year, suggesting that the Protocol would be 
implemented by all European ATCPs to the level of the top performers (as identified using ASOC’s 
method) by around 2015. 
 
 
                                                 
1 See for instance Harris Colin and Meadows Janice (1992): Environmental Management in Antarctica: Instruments and 
institutions. Marine Pollution Bulletin 25:9-12, 239-249.  
2 It should be noted that the efforts of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), whilst worthy, are focused more at 
the level of interpretation and methodological standardization. 
3 A distinction should be made between “application”—which may be taken to mean meeting the substance of the obligations 
established by the Protocol—and “implementation”, which carries a clearer sense of meeting legal obligations. In short, there 
could be application even before the legal obligation enters into force, whereas implementation can only occur once the 
Protocol has entered into force (Hemmings A., pers. comm. 2001). 
4 Bastmeijer Kees (2000): Implementing the environment protocol domestically: An overview. In: Davor Vidas (ed.): 
Implementing the environmental protection regime for the Antarctic. Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Pp. 287-308.p.288. 
5 Pineschi Laura (2000): A self-executing treaty? Italian legislation and practice in implementing the environmental protocol. 
In: Davor Vidas (ed.): Implementing the environmental protection regime for the Antarctic. Dordrecht-Boston-London: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.p.357. 
6 Vigni, pers.comm.2001. 
7 http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange 
8 ASOC XII SATCM/IP22 
9 It should be noted that the range of IE diminishes through time as ASOC’s understanding of (and information about) 
individual Parties’ implementation effort increases. 
10 To ASOC’s knowledge, the legal system for some European ATCPs including Spain and Poland does not necessarily require 
passing implementing legislation, nor does Italy under the special regime under which the Protocol was incorporated to the 
national legal system (i.e. ordine di esecuzione—Italy, XXIII ATCM/IP11). The same notion may apply to other ATCPs. 
11 Argentina XII SATCM/IP 34 
12 Ibid.  
13 Australia XXII ATCM/WP 19 
14 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
15 Brazil XXIII ATCM/IP 93 
16 Bulgaria XII SATCM/IP36 
17 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
18 Bulgaria XXIII ATCM/IP120. Arts. 3-9. 
19 ATCM XX/WP 19. 
20 Finland XXII ATCM/IP 110. 
21 Finland XXII ATCM/IP 106. 
22 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
23 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
24 Germany XII SATCM/IP 1 
25 Ibid.  
26 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
27 Italy XXIII ATCM/IP11 
 
21
                                                                                                                                                                            
28 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
29 Italy, op.cit. 
30 Chapter II (5) 
31 Chapter II (7)(1 & 2) 
32 The Netherlands XXII ATCM/IP 31. 
33 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
34 Part I, Section 10(1)(a). 
35 Part I, Section 10(1)(e). 
36 Part III, Section 24(1)(a-f) lists those actions (and inactions) that constitute an offence under Part III of the law. 
37 Norway XXI ATCM/IP 38. 
38 Chapter 3, Section 9. 
39 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
40 Peru XXII ATCM/IP 9. 
41 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
42 United Kingdom and Germany (1999): Report of a joint inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty by United 
Kingdom and German observers. London: Foreign and Commonwealth Office; Bonn: Awswartiges Amt.  
43 Russia XII SATCM/IP 25 
44 Ibid. 
45 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
46 Russia XXIII ATCM/IP79 
47 Russia XII SATCM/IP125 
48 Appendix D: Environmental Management of Antarctica and the Islands, “Consultants’ Report on the Review of the South 
African National Antarctic Programme”, Period of Review 17-23 January 2000. 
49 Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología, Comité Polar Español (1999): Procedimiento para la evaluación de los impactos 
ambientales de las activitidades españolas en la Antártida. In: http://www.cicyt.es/comitescar/  
50 Spain XXIII ATCM/IP29 
51 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
52 Section 16.  
53 Section 18. 
54 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
55 Part II, Section 3. 
56 CEP website: http://cep.npolar.no/innhold/about_cep/cep_act.htm#EIA Exchange.  
57 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq. 
58 16 U.S.C. Section 2403a (a)(1)(A). 
59 16. U.S.C. Section 2403a (a) 
60 Uruguay XII SATCM/IP 16 
61 Argentina XII SATCM/IP 34 
62 Chapter IV (19) 
63 Chapter IV (17)(b) 
64 Bulgaria (1999) op.cit. Arts. Arts. 17-18. 
65 Section 21. 
66 Chapter 3, Sections 4 & 5. 
67 covered by Article 17 
68 covered by Article 18 
69 Article 17(2). 
70 Italy op.cit. 
71 Chapter III (2)(14)(2)(1) 
72 Chapter III (2)(14)(2)(2) 
73 The Netherlands, XXII ATCM/IP131 
74 Part IV, Section 29(1) 
75 Part IV, Section 29(3). 
76 Part IV, Section 29(5) 
77 Part IV, Section 29(6). 
78 Chapter 4, Section 14. 
79 Chapter 4, Section 15. 
80 Russia XII SATCM IP25 
81 Appendix D: Environmental Management of Antarctica and the Islands, “Consultants’ Report on the Review of the South 
African National Antarctic Programme”, Period of Review 17-23 January 2000. 
 
22
                                                                                                                                                                            
82 Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología, Comité Polar Español (1999): Procedimiento para la evaluación de los impactos 
ambientales de las activitidades españolas en la Antártida. In: http://www.cicyt.es/comitescar/  
83 Section 7. 
84 Section 8. 
85 Part II, Section 7 
86 Part II, Section 8. 
87 Chapter V (21) 
88 Chapter V (22) 
89 Chapter V (23)(3); (24) 
90 Bulgaria (1999): op.cit. pp. Arts. 19-24 
91 Section 27. 
92 Chapter 4, Section 7. 
93 Article 23(1). 
94 Article 21(1). 
95 Article 26. 
96 Article 27. 
97 Article 24. 
98 Germany XXIII ATCM/IP 6 
99 Italy, op. cit.. 
100 Chapter III (3)(15) 
101 Chapter III (3)(16) 
102 Chapter III (3)(16)(6) 
103 The Netherlands XXII ATCM/IP32 Art.4. Permits, section 15. 
104 Part V, Section 34 
105 Part V, Section 35. 
106 Chapter 5, Section 17. 
107 XXII/IP 14 
108 United Kingdom and Germany (1999): Report of a joint inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty by United 
Kingdom and German observers. London: Foreign and Commonwealth Office; Bonn: Awswartiges Amt. pP.30. 
109 Russia XII SATCM/IP25 
110 Schedule 2(II)(3)(a). 
111 Schedule 2(II)(3)(b). 
112 Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología, Comité Polar Español (1999): Procedimiento para la evaluación de los impactos 
ambientales de las activitidades españolas en la Antártida. In: http://www.cicyt.es/comitescar/  
113 Spain XXIII ATCM/IP29 
114 Section 9. 
115 According to 33 U.S.C. 1901 et seq. 
116 16 U.S.C. Section 2403 (b)(1-5). 
117 16 U.S.C. Section 2404(a). 
118 Chapter VI (29) 
119 Chapter VI (30)  
120 Chapter VI (31) 
121 Brazil XXIII ATCM/IP 93 
122 Bulgaria (1999): op. cit. Arts 12/2/ , Art.22 and Art. 24. 
123 Statutes of Finland no. 300/79. Finland XXI ATCM/IP 101. 
124 Sweden XII SATCM/IP 3 
125 Article 5(5). 
126 Article 5(6). 
127 Article 5(10). 
128 Chapter 3 (3)(16)(4) 
129 Italy, XXIII ATCM/IP 11 
130 Italy XXIII ATCM/IP 11 
131 Chapter 6, Section 24. 
132 Sweden XII SATCM/IP 3 
133 XXIIATCM/IP14 
134 Russia XII SATCM/IP 25 
135 Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología, Comité Polar Español (1999): Procedimiento para la evaluación de los impactos 
ambientales de las activitidades españolas en la Antártida. In: http://www.cicyt.es/comitescar/  
 
23
                                                                                                                                                                            
136 Spain XXIII ATCM/IP29 
137 Section 11. 
138 Sweden XII SATCM/IP 3 
139 16 U.S.C. Section 2403(a)(1-13). 
140 33 U.S.C. 1901 et seq. 
141 This authority supplements the USCG’s authority with respect to the Act to Prevent Pollution form Ships, which is 33 
U.S.C. 1901 et seq., the implementing legislation for MARPOL. 16 U.S.C. Section 2405(b). 
142 Uruguay XII SATCM/IP 16 
143 Chapter 7 (34) 
144 Chapter 7 (35) (d) 
145 Bulgaria (1999): op.cit. Arts.3-16. 
146 Statutes of Finland no. 300/79. Finland XXI ATCM/IP 101. 
147 Article 29(1). 
148 Article 29(2); Article 3(5), and the general principles of Article 3(4). 
149 Article 30(3). 
150 Article 30(4). 
151 Italy op.cit. 
152 Chapter III (4) (19) 
153 The Netherlands, XXII ATCM/IP131 
154 Part IV, Section 29(1) 
155 Part IV, Section 29(3). 
156 Part IV Section 28(1)(a). 
157 Part IV, Section 27. 
158 Chapter 7, Section 25 
159 Chapter 7, Section 26 
160 Chapter 7, Section 27. 
161 Chapter 7, Section 25 
162 Chapter 7, Section 26 
163 Poland XII SATCM WP9 
164 Poland XII SATCM WP10 
165 Russia XII SATCM/IP26 
166 Russia, XII SATCM/IP25 
167 Schedule 2(II)(5)(a). 
168 Schedule 2(II)(5)(b). 
169 Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología, Comité Polar Español (1999): Procedimiento para la evaluación de los impactos 
ambientales de las activitidades españolas en la Antártida. In: http://www.cicyt.es/comitescar/  
170 Spain XXIII ATCM/IP29 
171 Section 10. 
172 Part II, Sections 9-10; Section 11 requires permits for CCAMLR CEMP sites. 
173 U.K. XXII ATCM/IP 3. 
174 16 U.S.C. Section 2403(a)(1-13). 
175 16 U.S.C. Section 2403 (b)(1-5). 
176 ASOC (The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition) (2000):  
177 These included Bellingshausen (Russia), Dumont D’Urville (France), Faraday (United Kingdom), Gabriel de Castilla 
(Spain), Gondwana (Germany), Juan Carlos I (Spain), Leninsgradskaya (Russia), Progress (Russia), Rothera (UK), Signy 
(UK), St. Kliment Ochridski (Bulgaria), Terra Nova (Italy), Verdnaskiy (Ukraine; not included in this study), as well as several 
refuges and abandoned sites or stations.  
178 July 2000 assessment; note that Ukraine was included in this analysis 
179 It should be noted that the range of IE diminishes through time as ASOC’s understanding of (and information about) 
individual Parties’ implementation effort increases. 
