 
 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-45  
AGENDA ITEM 4A) 
China 
Original: English 
 
 
 
2000/2001 Chinese Antarctic Environmental Report 
 
1. Introduction  
1.1 Location of the Chinese Antarctic Station 
China has two wintering Antarctic stations. Their locations are: 
Great Wall station: W 58゜57’52”;  S 62゜12’59” 
Zhongshan station: E 76゜22’40”;  S 69゜22’24” 
 
1.2   2000/2001 main activities in Antarctica 
The 17th Chinese National Antarctic Expedition (2000/2001) was composed of 37 Chinese persons, 
including 22 in Great Wall station and 15 in Zhongshan station. 
Several scientific research projects and logistic work were carried out in Great Wall station: 
 GPS international collaborative observation, 
 Study of impact of human activities on the ecology of bird in King George Island, West 
Antarctica, joined by Sino-German scientists. 
 Meteorology study 
 Repairing and maintaining of generators and vehicles 
In Zhongshan station, the 15 wintry people, who were transferred by Polar Bird, conducted the 
following projects: 
 Meteorology study 
 Ozone observation 
 Upper atmosphere physics study 
 Magnetic observation 
 GPS international collaborative observation 
 Sea-surface monitoring 
 Repairing and maintaining of generators and vehicles  
 
The vessel “Xuelong” did not take a duty on Antarctica mission this Antarctic season. 
 
2.  The environmental impact assessment 
According to the Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol, all Chinese Antarctic activities are requested 
to provide an EIA report before the projects are proceed in Antarctica. All the EIA reports whose 
projects would be carried out in 2000/2001 Antarctic season were evaluated and the activities were 
classified as “less than a minor or transitory impact” on the Antarctic environment. So, they can be 
conducted in Antarctica without IEE or CEE requested. 
 
 
 
3. Protection of flora and fauna in Antarctica 
All the persons are asked to avoid disturbing birds and animals whether or not they proceed their 
work in station and in the field. The driver must drive the vehicle in the existing road and avoid 
damaging the flora on the ground. The scientific research activities should take care of the animals’ 
breeding and resting area. Waste foods are prohibited to expose outside building in case they could 
become the comestible supply to the birds. 
On 8th Jan.2001, a symposium on the “Protection on the Ecology in the King Gorge Island” was held 
in Great Wall station, joined by the representative and scientists from Great Wall station of China, 
Escudero station of Chile, Bellingsagsgausen station of Russia, Artigas station of Uruguay, King 
Sejong station of Korea and scientists from German. 
Six recommendations were made from the symposium: 
a. Scientists should provide the pilots of airplane or helicopter a map on the distribution of the 
sensitive birds habitation 
b. The pilots should manage to avoid accessing these habitation areas except emergency situation, 
c. All the vehicles are prohibited to come through these areas and should be driven according to the 
existing road,  
d. People should avoid coming to the bird breeding area when they do field work outside, 
e. It is forbidden to feed the animals by using the food 
f. All the stations have the responsibility to supply information on the protection measures to the 
new ones coming to Antarctica, 
 
4.Waste management 
4.1 The solid waste materials were divided into 4 catalogues and treated in different ways in the 2 
stations. 
 Combustible materials were not permitted to store in the station for a long time. They were 
burned in the incinerator after being recorded. The remains were put in case and would be 
transported back to China. 
 Metal, plastic and other non-combustible materials were collected and piled to be transported 
back to China; 
 Glass materials were smashed into pieces and put into cases to be transported back to China 
 Battery useless was collected into cases and would be transported back to China. 
 
4.2 The daily domestic liquid waste was treated in the sewage treatment system and then discharged 
into the sea. 
 
4.3 No radioactive materials were used in the stations in 2000/2001 Antarctic season. 
 
5. Prevention of marine pollution 
The vessel “Xuelong”, which is specially engaged in the Chinese Antarctic marine transportation 
and scientific research, did not go to Antarctica in 2000/2001 season. 
 
6. The function of the equipment 
Sewage treatment system and incinerator are installed in the two stations respectively. The sewage 
treatment system can automatically function 24 hours per day. After the sewage outlet water is 
 
 
treated, it is discharged into sea in Great Wall station and on the shoreline in Zhongshan station. 
The incinerator in the two stations runs well. It uses two burners. All harmful emissions from the 
incinerator are reduced to maximum extent practicable. 
 
7. Monitoring project 
7.1.The treated sewage water was monitored and analyzed in 1999/2000 season and they compiled 
with the marine discharged standard.  
7.2. An aerosol collection system is set up in Zhongshan station to sample for monitoring the 
physical and chemical characters of the local air. 
7.3. A monitoring project is made on the investigation of the ecology and population of skua in 
Fields Peninsula of King George Island.  
7.4. Samples, which were taken from skua, penguin in Lasman Hills and meat of poultry, as well as 
the sewage water in Zhongshan station in 1999/2000, are analyzed to determine whether or not 
they are affected by IBDV. The analysis result is positive. No IBDV is found in the blood 
samples taken from skua and penguin. Nor is found in the meat of poultry.  
 
8. Protection measures to be taken 
8.1. The environmental officers were appointed in two stations, who are charge of the 
environmental management in the Antarctic stations. 
8.2. Before going to Antarctica, all the members of the expedition were trained on the 
environmental protection in Antarctica. The operators were trained how to manipulate the 
incinerator and the sewage treatment system. 
8.3. The maintaining and repairing of the vehicles and generators were done in the buildings. All the 
useless spare parts were collected to be stored for transporting back to China. Useless oil was 
concentrated in the drum. 
8.4. All the people working in the field outside the stations were asked for taking back the rubbish to 
the stations. 
8.5. All the pipelines and valves were checked in order to protect the leakage of oil. 
8.6. The regulation is made out on the usage and management of meteorite. The regulation is made 
clear on the recovery, disposal, storage and scientific research of meteorite found in Antarctica. 
The meteorite found in Antarctica is forbidden to the commercial use. 
 
9.Environmental Accident 
No environmental accident was reported in the two stations. 
 
10. Future plan 
10.1 A new living building will be set up in Zhongshan station area. At Great Wall station, it is 
planned to build a new generator building. The EIA is now being prepared. 
10.2 The Oil Spill contingency will be revised and relative equipment or materials will be added to 
the stations.  
 
