 
 
1
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-37  
Agenda Item 4a 
Italy 
Original: English 
 
ANNUAL REPORT OF ITALY  PURSUANT TO  ARTICLE 17 OF THE PROTOCOL 
ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
 
2000-2001 
 
Introduction 
 
 
This report is presented in compliance with article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which requires each Party to report annually on the steps 
taken to implement the Protocol in domestic law, including laws, regulations,  administrative 
actions and enforcement measures contemplated by article 13 of the Protocol. 
 
 
1.  Italy ratified the Antarctic Treaty in 1981 and became a Consultative Party in 1987 
following the launching and development of the Italian Antarctic Research Programme 
(PNRA). In 1990-91 took a very active part in the negotiations and drafting of the Madrid  
 
Protocol which was ratified by Italy in 1995. 
 
2.  The process of ratification of the Madrid Protocol involved the adoption of 1) a 
Parliamentary Act authorising the expression of Italy’s consent to be bound by the 
Protocol, in accordance with article 80 of the Italian Constitution; 2) the contextual 
adoption of an «implementation order» having the effect of «incorporating» the Protocol 
within the domestic legal system (ordine di esecuzione); and 3 the ratification of the 
Protocol by the President of the Republic pursuant to article 87 of the Constitution. 
 
 
3.  As a consequence of the above three-step procedure the Madrid Protocol forms an integral 
part of the Italian legal system and it can be applied by any relevant public authority and 
can be invoked and actioned by private parties whenever the need may arise. 
 
Provisional application of the Madrid Protocol 
 
After the signature of the Protocol in Oct. 1991 in Madrid, the President of ENEA (National 
Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Environment) which had been given the task of 
implementing the Antarctic Research programme, ordered that the Madrid Protocol had to be 
applied by ENEA-ANTAR, the ENEA unit in charge of the Italian Antarctic Research 
Annual Report Pursuant to the Protocol 
Environmental Protection to the Antarc
Treaty 
 
 
2
Programme (PNRA) implementation, before its ratification and pending the preparation of 
national legislation in the matter. 
In the following an outline of the actions taken by ENEA-ANTAR in the implementation of 
the Protocol is given. 
 
 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
 
At the beginning of the Italian research activities in Antarctica in 1985/86 no EIA was 
prepared. Neither the Italian legislation at the time , nor the Antarctic Treaty required it. At the 
XXI ATCM in Christchurch the Italian delegation presented a paper entitled «An 
Environmental Overview of the Italian Terra Nova Station». This paper was not a formal EIA 
but had been prepared following closely Annex I of the Protocol and its aim was to present the 
efforts made by the Italian Programme in the implementation of the Protocol. 
A formal CEE for the Concordia Project, a joint Italian-French project, was presented at the 
XIX ATCM in Seoul in 1995, during the first meeting of the TEWG, the predecessor of the 
CEP. This CEE was jointly presented by the French and Italian delegations. 
 
Emergency Response Action 
 
The main Italian research station, Terra Nova Bay, and the camp at Dome C where the 
construction of the CONCORDIA station and the EPICA deep ice drilling are being 
performed have a contingency plans.  There are also  fire protection plans and station 
personnel receive specific training for dealing with emergencies. Italy is also working with the 
USA and New Zealand for the development of a contingency plan for the Ross Sea Region. 
Also the vessel used by the PNRA as a cargo and oceanographic ship has her own oil 
pollution prevention and control plan. 
 
Co-operation with other Parties 
 
Art 6 of the Protocol asks Parties to co-operate in the planning and conduct of Antarctic 
activities, also in order to reduce impacts on the environment. Italy has a very wide range of 
international co-operations both in scientific activities and in logistics. In the latter area Italy is 
part of a logistic pool with the USA and with New Zealand, which has contributed to a 
rationalisation of the use of aircraft and has shown its great value in cases of medical 
emergencies. 
 
Waste management 
 
A Waste Management plan as a formal document was prepared in 1991, consolidating 
operating procedures and instructions given to expeditions members since the first campaign. 
The basic objectives are those expressed in the Annex III to the Protocol. The basic policy has 
been that all waste from the Italian Antarctic Programme is removed from the Antarctic 
Treaty area. 
Terra Nova Bay station is also equipped with a sewage treatment system, in operation since 
the second campaign in 1986/87. This plant produces a clean effluent which is discharged in 
the sea and sludges which are transported back to Italy. The sewage treatment plant has been 
recently upgraded to deal with increased personnel load and both the plant and its effluent are 
constantly monitored. 
 
 
3
 
Environmental Monitoring 
 
The monitoring programme was planned from the first campaign and was started in the 
second, during the construction of the base in 1986/87. The sampling is done for airborne 
particulates and for PAH (Policyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons), characteristic of combustion 
products.  
The data from the monitoring are used for feedback on operations. This is particularly true for 
the monitoring of the treated effluent of the sewage treatment plant. At present there is a set of 
monitoring data which goes back to fourteen  years. 
 
 
Fuel Storage 
 
Fuel is stored in three cylindrical steel tanks, with all welds checked by radiography and with 
double skin. This ensures a very high level of safety to the fuel storage, coupled with the 
contingency plan and the good training of the station personnel. 
 
Training of personnel 
 
All personnel going to Antarctica receives training on the environmental aspects of their 
activities there, in particular on the Protocol and its Annexes. This training is going to be 
widened to the Italian relevant legislation as soon as it will be available. 
 
Permits 
 
Permits for access to protected areas, for sampling and for other science activities are given on 
the authority of the Italian Foreign Ministry. 
In the 2000-2001 campaign 21 permits for sampling, 5 permits for entering in Specially 
Protected Areas and 5 permits for chemical reagents were granted. Each permit is released 
after an environmental evaluation of the activity. 
 
Conclusion 
 
As far as future implementing legislation is concerned, Italy has established an «Antarctic 
Unit» at the ministry of Foreign Affairs, comprising members of the same Ministry, of 
ENEA-ANTAR, of the Ministry for Environment, the Ministry for Research as well as legal 
advisers.  
This unit has the task of monitoring the implementation of the Protocol in domestic law 
and of formulating draft legislation to ensure proper implementation of the Protocol in areas 
in which domestic legislation is lacking, is inadequate or needs co-ordination in view of 
securing the effectiveness of the implementation of  the Protocol.  
 
In  the year 2000 this unit has promoted  a meeting which has been organised with the co-
operation of the offices of the Italian Parliament  on the Implementation in Italy of the 
Madrid Protocol.  
