 
 
Planning of waste disposal at the Russian Antarctic stations and ships 
 
1. Introduction 
 
In accordance with both, international and Russian legislation an environmentally safe 
waste disposal is an indispensable condition applied to the activities undertaken in Antarctica. 
An efficient waste disposal can be achieved only under conditions of strict conformity with 
Waste Management Plan developed for each station (field base) subject to its specificity and of 
compliance with the Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
1.1 Purpose 
 
To work out in conformity with the Protocol general procedures for waste disposal plan 
(WD Plan) at the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) stations and bases. 
 
1.2 Antarctic Legislation 
 
Antarctic legislation includes a combination of international and Russian documents. 
 In accordance with the Russian Federation Law "On ratification of the Protocol on 
Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty" and further Resolutions of the Russian 
Federation Government directed towards its implementation any activity of the Russian natural 
and juridical persons can be undertaken only with an appropriate permit issued.  Activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty area shall be conducted in accordance with Protocol and Annexes to it. In   
Annex III " Waste Disposal and Waste Management" there is a comprehensive consideration of 
the waste storage, disposal and removal from the Antarctic Treaty area as well as the possible 
ways to reduce the amount of wastes. 
 
1.3 Principles  
 
The protection of Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science free of 
activities-generated wastes is a fundamental principle of the Protocol. To comply with this 
principle the following should be taken into consideration: 
I. 
The amount of wastes introduced, produced or disposed in Antarctica  shall be 
reduced as far as practicable. 
II. 
Waste storage, disposal or removal from the Antarctic Treaty area as well as 
recycling and source reduction shall be essential considerations in the planning and 
conduct of activities. 
III. 
Wastes produced in Antarctica shall be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area to 
the maximum extent practicable. 
IV. 
Past waste disposal sites and ramshackle constructions shall be removed to restore 
the initial landscape. 
V. 
Waste removal operations shall be evaluated in terms of environmental impact and 
historic value conservation. 
 
(in accordance with Annex III, Article 1 of the Protocol) 
 
1.4 Aims 
 
 
 
An activity management suited to the Protocol requirements is currently an extremely 
important and necessary condition for the RAE. In this connection the RAE is being faced with 
the aims as follows: 
I. 
Waste management training of the personnel. 
II. 
Installation of the following up-to-date waste recycling and disposal equipment 
with regard to international experience: treatment plant, high-temperature 
incinerator, waste plastic containers, waste compactors and other auxiliary 
equipment. 
III. 
Waste storage prior to removal from the Antarctic Treaty area. 
IV. 
Cleaning up of the territory and of the past waste disposal sites. 
V. 
Development and introduction of the technologies of waste preparation and waste 
loading on board a ship. 
VI. 
Waste removal from the Antarctic Treaty area. 
VII. 
Arrangements for the return and disposal of the waste removed from the Antarctic 
Treaty area in the nearest to Antarctica ports and in St. Petersburg. 
VIII. Reduction of wastes introduced to and generated at the Antarctic stations. 
IX. 
Introduction of low waste technologies and of closed waste recycling technology. 
X. 
Environmental impact evaluation of waste disposal. 
XI. 
Financial evaluation, including involvement of non-budget means for the waste 
disposal activities. 
 
2. Waste disposal policy. 
 
A successful waste disposal depends in many respects on the correct choice of policy at the 
planning stage. Waste disposal plans may differ by both the types of the proposed environmental 
arrangements (for example, an extraction of snow/ice-bound vehicles at Mirny station and 
structure demolition at Molodezhnaya station) and the scope of activity (station  and field base). 
 
Waste disposal policy includes the directions as follows: 
 
• Reduction of waste amount introduced to Antarctica to the minimum extent. This 
direction  also covers  an expedition preparation period (the choice of packaging, use of 
returnable packaging, containers etc.) . 
• Designation of a waste disposal(WD) officials to develop and monitor waste disposal. 
An appropriate person should be delegated to each site where waste is generated. The 
purposes of the WD official are: to ensure that the waste disposal practice complies 
with the Waste Management Plan for the station and to be responsible for day-to-day 
waste disposal. 
• Waste separation. All waste is to be separated into categories and clearly marked in 
accordance with 6.1. All chemical waste should be stored in a special container marked 
"Waste chemicals". Chemicals should not be mixed in the same container. Containers 
with waste chemicals should be handled in a special room for the waste disposal 
preparation. 
• Waste preparation for disposal. Separated into categories waste is to be prepared for the 
disposal (incineration or removal). Waste preparation is to be done in a specially 
equipped room. 
• Safe waste storage. Waste prepared for further disposal should be stored in the 
environmentally safe and marked containers. 
• Waste disposal. Disposal of solid waste is to be done either by incineration at the 
station or by removal from Antarctic Treaty area. The latter is preferable and should 
 
 
become the main means of waste disposal. Sewage and food waste is to be discharged 
into the sea in accordance with the Annex III to the Protocol requirements. 
• Waste removal from the Antarctic Treaty area. Regular removal of the day-to-day 
expedition activity waste is to become a common practice when working in Antarctica. 
A special attention is to be paid to the waste as per Article 2 of Annex III to the 
Protocol. 
• Disposal of returned waste. Returned waste is to be sent for safe disposal or recycling 
with due regard to cost efficiency 
 
3. Hazardous and harmful products 
 
3.1 Prohibited products 
 
Prohibited products in terms of Article 7 of Annex III to the Protocol are not to be 
introduced to the continent, ice shelf or waters of Antarctic Treaty area. 
These includes: 
• Polychlorinates biphenyls (PCBS) 
• Non-sterile soil 
• Polystyrene beads, chips or similar forms of packaging 
• Pesticides, 
 
other than those which are required for scientific, hygienic or medical purposes. 
 
3.2 Products to avoid  
 
The following products should be avoided from being introduced to the Antarctic 
environment: 
• Lead fuels or fuels containing ethylene bromide and ethylene chloride 
• Products containing radio-isotope 
• Shredded paper 
• Plastic bags and rubber products 
 
3.3 Products that require a permit to be introduced to Antarctica: 
• Non-native species of animals, plants or microbes 
• Radio active sources  
 
3.3 Other environmentally harmful products 
 
as follows: 
• Batteries 
• Oils 
• Anti-freeze 
• Any other chemicals 
 
4. Waste separation 
 
All waste which is generated in Antarctica should be separated in categories according to 
the color codes as specified in 6.1. This separation helps to prevent that poisons and other 
 
 
hazardous chemicals mix with other waste. Chemicals other than the listed categories should be 
placed in separate containers and marked clearly. 
 
5. Responsibilities 
5.1 Allocation of responsibilities 
 
The following personnel are responsible for waste management additional to their normal 
tasks at the respective locations or routes: 
Waste management area 
Responsible person 
Name 
R/V "Akademik Fedorov" 
Captain 
 
R/V "Akademik Karpinsky" 
Captain 
 
Mirny station 
Station leader 
 
Vostok station 
Station leader 
 
Progress station 
Station leader 
 
Novolazarevskaya station 
Station leader 
 
Mirny-Vostok route 
Team leader 
 
Bellingshausen base 
Base leader 
 
Molodezhnaya base 
Base leader 
 
Druzhnaya-4 base 
Base leader 
 
Field camp 
Field camp manager 
 
 
   
Persons responsible for waste disposal at sledge-tractor trains and field camps arrange 
waste delivery to the nearest bases and stations. 
Personnel responsible for waste disposal at Antarctic stations and bases arrange the 
preparation of waste for the removal and report to the RAE summer season leader on board a 
ship on the waste to be loaded to the ship. A captain is responsible for the waste loading and safe 
disposal on board. Operations related to waste loading should be represented in the Voyage 
Instructions to the Captain. 
 
5.2 Responsibility for waste disposal 
 
Officers-in-charge of waste management are responsible for: 
a) implementing of waste management procedures (WMP) 
b) communicating the waste management procedures to subordinates 
c) applying the correct container and packaging procedures  
d) safe storage arrangements 
e) correct marking of waste containers 
f) monitoring and record keeping of waste handling 
g) reporting of waste quantities to the Officer in charge of waste disposal or if necessary, 
to the RAE Environmental Manager. 
 
6.Waste management procedures 
(prior to removal from Antarctic Treaty area) 
 
6.1 Waste categories 
All waste must be categorised and placed in marked containers. 
 
A. Recyclable waste 
• 
Glass              210 L click-lock drums        Green 
 
 
•       Metal 210 L click-lock drums                     Red 
• 
Oil      210 L oil drums                                White 
• 
Vehicle batteries special container 
• 
Paper* orange steel container 
 
B. Special treatment 
 
Sewage: 
Solid                 210 L fuel drums**            black 
Liquid               210 L fuel drums                black 
Kitchen waste   210 L fuel drums** 
                         Cut lids                               yellow 
Chemicals***  210 L click-lock drums     no colour 
Medical            100 L click-lock drums**  red 
                         Plastic containers 
 
*    All paper (A4, cardboard, magazines, etc) is sorted into white and coloured 
paper. Once sorted it is to be bundled and placed in an orange container for recycling. 
**   These drums are to be marked prior to waste being placed inside. 
***  Chemicals are to be placed in separate containers and the content clearly 
marked. 
 
C. General waste 
 
Timber              210 L fuel drums 
                         Cut lids                               Orange 
                         Orange steel containers 
 
Paper                Compactor plastic bags 
                         210 L fuel drums 
                         cut lids 
                         Orange steel containers       Orange 
 
6.2 Waste collection 
 
Waste containers including those indoors should be clearly marked to enable proper waste 
separation. 
 
Waste depots (WD) 
 
a. The number of WD (open sites, storage, etc) must be minimized. The depots shall be 
placed in the same place used during the previous take-over in order to avoid 
contamination of new territory. 
b. It is forbidden to use clean, free of ice and snow territories as a WD. 
c. All WD should be cleared at the end of activity. By the end of each RAE season waste 
should be loaded to the ship 
d. Only safely sealed and contained (click-lock drums) waste  may be stored at WD. No 
plastic bags of waste may be stored at WD. 
e. When WD is arranged cognizance must be taken of wind direction, snow 
accumulation, free access etc.  
 
 
f. WD should be easily accessed and clearly labeled or flagged and shown on the station 
map. 
 
6.4 Movement and transportation of waste 
 
Transportation and movement of waste must be done according to procedure to prevent 
pollution. If all other directives were followed, it would defeat the very purpose of this plan if 
pollution occurs during transportation of the waste. The following rules must be adhered to: 
a) Vehicle drivers must be informed on their responsibility for securing all waste cargo on 
vehicles under their command. 
b) Transport should not be overloaded with the waste to avoid its loss and environment 
pollution. 
c) Waste containers may only be off-loaded at a WD territory. 
d) Officers-in-charge must be informed of any waste deposited  and be present at a WD 
during waste unloading. 
e) All field-generated waste, if any, should be returned to a  point of destination and 
disposed in accordance with the adopted procedures. 
 
6.5 Sewage 
 
Ideally sewage should be treated on site in order to separate purified water (clear part) and 
sludge (solid part). The water is to be pumped either into the glacier crevasse (provided that the 
glacier movement ends in the sea) or into the sea with the sludge having been disposed  (burnt or 
removed). To transport the sludge cleaned fuel drums may be used. 
Waste water includes fecal (black)  and  dirty wash (gray)flows. The treatment of these 
flows should be done separately and their mix is inadmissible. 
Waste water at the inland Vostok station is to be discharged into special ice pits marked on 
the station map with reference to the beginning/end of their use. 
If  preliminary treatment is not feasible sewage and domestic liquid wastes may be 
discharged directly into the sea, taking into account the assimilative capacity of the receiving 
marine environment and provided that: 
a) such discharge is located, wherever practicable, where conditions exist for initial 
dilution and rapid dispersal; and 
b) large quantities of such wastes (generated in a station where the average weekly 
occupancy over the austral summer is approximately 30 individuals or more) shall be 
treated at least by maceration (cleaning, settling or dissolving) 
 
(Protocol, Article 5, Annex III) 
 
6.6 Chemicals 
 
All chemicals (waste or not) must be considered potentially harmful and toxic and should 
be treated accordingly. 
a) Chemicals brought to Antarctica must be stored in the original packings or capacities  . 
b) Waste chemicals produced at the stations (aluminate resulting from production of 
hydrogen) must be stored in metal fuel drums. 
c) Waste storage capacities (bottles, drums) must be properly sealed to prevent the 
introduction of chemicals into Antarctica. 
d)  Under no circumstances must the chemicals be mixed. 
 
 
e) All chemical waste should be clearly identified on the outside of the container, 
indicating name, quantity, person responsible. 
 
6.7 Fuel  
All fuel/oil waste treatment should comply with the contingency plans for fuel and oil 
spills. Unused (overdue, non-conditional) aviation fuel, used oil and other unfit product should 
be disposed as fuel/oil waste. 
a) Non-conditional fuel should be stored in fuel tanks before the removal from the 
Antarctic Treaty area. 
b) All fuel/oil waste should be stored and transported in 200 L metal fuel drums. 
c) These drums must be properly sealed before transportation to prevent occasional  spills 
and marked indicating the content. 
d) The amount of waste drums prepared for the removal outside of Antarctica must be 
recorded in the Report on the waste disposal (station name, No of Antarctic 
expedition). 
 
6.8 Packaging  
 
Packaging materials (styrofoam, PVC beads, shredded paper etc)should be carefully 
handled to prevent the introduction into Antarctica due to wind. The territory contaminated by 
these materials is difficult to be cleaned. A special care should be given to plastic and rubber 
packaging dangerous to wildlife. 
 
6.9 Field operating conditions 
 
Considering the unique circumstances of field operations special waste disposal 
arrangements are made for the field teams. The arrangements apply only when transport 
limitations prevent normal waste removal procedures. 
a) All waste generated in the field, except dirty wash water and urine, is to be returned to 
the main waste storage at the station for disposal. 
b) Gray water and urine may be discharged to ice pits or crevasses. Such pits shall not be 
located on: 
 
• Ice-flow lines which terminate at ice-free areas; 
• Areas of high ablation 
• Blue-ice areas 
• Exposed ground or rock surfaces 
c) The limited conditions of field research and small amounts of waste generated in the 
different waste categories  make detailed waste separation impractical. In view of this 
the following waste categories apply: 
• General waste -     paper, plastics, tins, glass etc 
• Sewage   -             human waste, food scraps 
• Chemical waste -any liquid waste eg. scientific chemicals (should be stored in 
separate sealed bottles) 
 
d) Field teams are supplied with special 20 L sealed waste containers and plastic bags. 
e) Human waste should be stored in 100 L drums with 500x500 mm black plastic bags  
inside them. In such a case a special biochemical waste treatment  is not needed. When 
full the bags are to be secured and drums to be sealed and placed in a temporary waste 
site for further removal. 
 
 
f) The field camp(team, base, group) manager is responsible for returning the waste to the 
station WD. 
 
7. Waste removal from Antarctica 
The waste is mostly removed from Antarctica by ships run by the RAE. 
The RAE seasonal Leader is responsible for loading of waste prepared at the stations in 
accordance with ship's requirements. The Captain is responsible for the waste reception and and 
disposition on board a ship. The amount of waste to be removed should not be less than 
produced during an expedition activity period  and prepared for the transportation amount. The 
waste amount should be registered in the Waste Management Report of the station (WMRS) The 
WMRS is to be submitted as an annex to the Report on Scientific/Logistic Expedition Activity 
by the Station Leader. 
The tasks related to the waste loading operations should be included in each Voyage 
Instructions to the Captain 
 
 
