 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-26  
Agenda Item 8b)  
Australia 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE CEP OBSERVER TO CCAMLR XIX 
AND SC-CAMLR XIX, 23 OCTOBER TO 3 NOVEMBER 2000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
Australia 
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE CEP OBSERVER TO CCAMLR XIX 
AND SC-CAMLR XIX, 23 OCTOBER TO 3 NOVEMBER 2000 
 
1. At the second meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection, the 
Chairman of the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR, who attended the CEP as an 
observer, proposed a reciprocal arrangement whereby a representative of the CEP 
should attend meetings of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR (SC-CAMLR) 
as an observer.  Dr Tony Press (Australia) was nominated to represent the CEP at 
SC-CAMLR XIX (October 2000). 
2. CCAMLR XIX and SC-CAMLR XIX met in Hobart from 23 October to 3 
November 2000.  Twenty-two of the twenty-three Members of the Commission 
attended.  Poland was not represented.  Bulgaria, the Netherlands, Namibia and 
Peru, all Contracting Parties to the Convention, also attended.  Namibia acceded 
to the Convention in June 2000 and advised CCAMLR XIX of its intention to 
apply for Commission membership.  Namibia has since become a Member in 
February 2001, the first occasion that a State has been a Member of CCAMLR 
without also being a Party to the Antarctic Treaty. 
3. The Report of CCAMLR XIX noted the attendance of the Chairman of SC-
CAMLR at CEP III and that Dr Press (Australia) represented the CEP at that 
meeting of the Commission. 
4. As part of the Commission's continuing efforts to develop improved relations with 
non-Contracting Parties with interests in fishing in the Convention Area or trade 
of toothfish, a number of non-Contracting Parties (Belize, China, Mauritius, 
Panama, Portugal, Seychelles and Vanuatu) were invited to attend CCAMLR 
XIX.  Mauritius was represented. 
SC-CAMLR XIX 
Fishery Status and Trends 
5. A total of 101,286 tonnes of krill (Euphausia superba) was caught during the 
1999/2000 (1 July 1999 to 30 June 2000) split-year, compared with 103,318 
tonnes in 1998/99 and 80,802 tonnes in 1997/98.  The catch was taken in the 
South Atlantic (Subareas 48.1, 48.2 and 48.3) by Japan, Republic of Korea, 
Poland, Ukraine and Uruguay. New estimates of krill biomass were calculated for 
the South Atlantic (Area 48), following a multi-nation krill synoptic survey 
carried out in January-February 2000 using vessels of Japan, Russia, UK and 
USA.  The revised biomass and potential yield estimates were used to set revised 
precautionary catch limits. 
6. The total reported catch of finfish in the Convention Area during the 1999/2000 
split year was 19,283 tonnes, compared with 18,094 tonnes in 1998/99 and 11,419 
tonnes in 1997/98.  Of this total, 14,441 tonnes of toothfish (Dissostichus 
eleginoides and D. mawsoni) were reported (13,689 and 751 tonnes respectively), 
compared with 17,558 tonnes in 1998/99 and 11,210 tonnes in 1997/98.  The 
reported catch of mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari) was 4,295 tonnes. 
Major catches of finfish were reported from Subarea 48.3 (4,693 tonnes), Division 
58.5.1 (5,009 tonnes) and Division 58.5.2 (2,579 tonnes). 
7. The Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) estimated illegal, 
unreported and unregulated (IUU) toothfish catches for the 1999/2000 split year at 
 
 
 
6,546 tonnes, compared with 10,733 tonnes for the 1998/99 split year, 33,583 
tonnes for 1997/98 and 38,000 to 42,800 tonnes in 1996/97.  At the time of the 
WG-FSA meeting, this apparent decrease was attributed to improved reporting of 
catches by Members as a result of the introduction of the Catch Documentation 
Scheme (CDS) rather than a decline in illegal fishing.  The Working Group again 
noted that difficulties in estimating IUU catch had increased, that estimates should 
be compared with caution, and that estimates are likely to be underestimates of the 
true catches to an unknown extent.  Figures submitted by Mauritian authorities at 
CCAMLR XIX, after the WG-FSA meeting, on landings of D. eleginoides at Port 
Louis highlighted the degree of uncertainty inherent in estimating IUU catch and 
that IUU catches in 1999/2000 represented a significant increase over 1998/99 
(see paragraph 18). 
8.  There was no directed fishery for crabs or squid in the Convention Area during 
the 1999/2000 split year.  Large by-catch rates of crabs in an experimental pot 
fishery for D. eleginoides prompted the Commission to agree that crabs caught as 
by-catch in other fisheries be counted against the catch limit set for the directed 
fishery. 
Dependent Species 
9. SC-CAMLR noted the following trends in certain populations of dependent 
species: 
A report on Adélie penguins at Béchervaise Island (Division 58.4.2) indicated 
the importance of distance of the sea-ice edge from the colony and the 
availability of food during the guard stage of the breeding cycle. 
An increase in macaroni penguin populations and a decrease (attributed to a 
habitat change) in chinstrap penguin populations at Bouvet Island (Subarea 
48.6) relative to counts in the 1996/97 season. 
An overview of pinniped research at Cape Shirreff in the 1999/2000 season 
indicated that reproductive performance for adult females and for the growth 
of pups were above average.  Additionally, dive data suggested that foraging 
fur seals were working well within their physiological limits for diving. 
10. No new CEMP sites were proposed for consideration by WG-EMM.  SC-CAMLR 
reviewed the management plans for both the Seal Islands and Cape Shirreff 
CEMP sites and recommended that the Commission extend protection for an 
additional five years.  This was subsequently agreed to. 
11. Analysis of 2000 data for seabird by-catch for regulated fishing in the Convention 
Area showed a reduction of the seabird by-catch rate in Subarea 48.3 from 0.01 
birds/thousand hooks in 1999 to 0.0004 (21 birds). This almost negligible level 
was attributed to fishing season restrictions and improved compliance with seabird 
by-catch mitigation measures established by CCAMLR, particularly Conservation 
Measure 29/XVI.  It was noted by the Scientific Committee that some 
improvement was still needed for Subareas 58.6 and 58.7, where increased fishing 
effort and poorer compliance with Conservation Measure 29/XVI contributed to a 
three-fold increase in seabird by-catch over last year. There was no seabird by-
catch reported for Division 58.4.4 and Subarea 88.1. 
12. The total seabird by-catch for the whole Convention Area for IUU longline fishing 
in 1999/2000 was estimated at 26,400−35,300 (lower level) to 50,900−68,300 
(higher level).  This compares with 18,000–20,000 to 44,000–59,000 for 1998/99 
and 43,000–54,000 to 76,000–101,000 for 1997/98.  While these estimates of 
 
 
 
seabird mortalities should be viewed with caution, because of the uncertainties 
and assumptions involved in their calculation, it is clear that IUU longline fishing 
continues to have a serious impact on populations of seabirds, including of 
endangered albatrosses.   
13. The Scientific Committee noted the promising results obtained from trials of 
underwater setting devices by Members and encouraged further trials of such 
devices, which are likely to present an effective solution to the seabird by-catch 
problem in the medium to long term, and of streamer line configurations and line-
weighting regimes in the short term.  The Commission agreed that every effort 
should be made to ensure full compliance with Conservation Measure 29/XVI. In 
response to concerns about some reports of non-compliance, the Commission 
revised the provisions relating to offal discharge and line weighting for the 
Spanish longline method to prevent the licensing of vessels that could not comply. 
The revised measure was adopted as Conservation Measure 29/XIX. 
14. The Scientific Committee noted the extensive discussions on advancing the 
ecosystem approach to management through the development of management 
procedures for krill, elaboration of objectives for predators, and the consideration 
of how to implement management measures as spatial scales smaller than 
statistical units.  The Committee noted that it will take another five to ten years to 
develop a management procedure for krill fisheries 
CCAMLR XIX 
Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area 
15. In 1999/2000 Members reported sightings of eight vessels in the Convention Area, 
possibly operating contrary to the objective of the Convention.  Most IUU effort 
seemed to be concentrated in the Indian Ocean in Area 58, with six of the eight 
vessels sighted in this area. This was consistent with information submitted by 
Mauritius (see paragraph 18). The Commission noted that the deterrent effect of 
legal fishing vessels appeared to be insufficient, and the presence of control and 
surveillance vessels was a more reliable and effective deterrent. Several Members 
reported undertaking joint patrols or surveillance activity. 
16. The Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp (toothfish), 
adopted by the Commission at CCAMLR XVIII, requires that Parties document 
the nature and origin of all toothfish catches, transhipments, landings and imports 
involving their flag vessels, ports and markets.  The CDS came into force on 7 
May 2000 and the Commission agreed that it had commenced in an encouraging 
manner, with signs that the scheme was proving useful in combating IUU fishing 
for Dissostichus spp, making trade in toothfish more difficult and less profitable.  
17. Further refinements were made to the CDS and associated documents 
(Conservation Measure 170/XIX) at the Commission meeting to resolve 
difficulties experienced by Parties in interpretation of terminology and in 
implementing the scheme, and to establish Rules of Access to CDS data.  The 
Commission adopted Resolution 14/XIX, urging those Contracting Parties and 
non-Contracting Parties that had not yet implemented the CDS to do so as soon as 
possible. Mauritius indicated its intention to implement the CDS as well as accede 
to the Convention.  The Commission accorded priority to further review of the 
operation of the CDS, including the issue of seized or confiscated catches 
resulting from legal action.  The Commission also adopted Resolution 15/XIX 
urging Contracting Party flag States to adequately monitor landings of toothfish in 
 
 
 
ports not implementing the CDS.  In the absence of such monitoring, Contracting 
Parties were urged to discourage their vessels from using such ports. 
18. Both Namibia and Mauritius provided data to the Commission on toothfish 
landings in their ports.  Mauritius remained the primary landing point for IUU-
caught toothfish, particularly after the introduction of the CDS in May 2000 and 
landings in ports other than Port Louis ceased.  The Mauritian data indicated that 
9,109 tonnes of toothfish was transshipped at Port Louis from January to October 
2000, including by vessels known or suspected to be involved in IUU fishing in 
CCAMLR waters.  While the information did not detail the processed state of the 
transshipped catches, it is likely that a large proportion would have been headed, 
gutted and tailed (HGT).  Applying a standard conversion factor to the [Port Louis 
data/9,109 tonnes HGT] indicates that up to about 15,000 tonnes (whole weight) 
of toothfish would have been caught.  The Observer from Mauritius agreed to 
consider whether more detailed information, in the format required by CCAMLR 
and, in particular, showing the origin of catches, could be provided. 
Assessment and Avoidance of Incidental Mortality of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources 
19. The Commission noted with concern the continued widespread occurrence of 
packaging bands indicated by surveys of beached marine debris.  Twelve of the 
twenty five reports of entangled Antarctic fur seals involved entanglement with 
packaging bands. 
20. Surveys at Bird Island, South Georgia revealed an unprecedented quantity of 
hooks (54% higher than the previous year) and fishing line in association with 
wandering albatrosses.  Analysis of regurgitated material from wandering 
albatross chicks indicated that 79% received food containing line and/or hooks. 
21. With one exception, reported incidental mortality of seabirds and marine 
mammals in association with trawl fisheries in the Convention Area was at a very 
low level, involving two Antarctic fur seals and three seabirds.  However, a 
trawler targeting icefish in Subarea 48.3 killed nineteen black-browed albatrosses 
in a single haul using pelagic trawl gear. 
22. The Commission encouraged the submission of data to its CCAMLR debris 
database and endorsed the Scientific Committee’s request of the Secretariat to 
prepare annual summaries of these data that would enable the Committee to view 
trends.  The Scientific Committee reiterated its conclusion of the previous year 
that the levels of mortality resulting from IUU fishing continue to be 
unsustainable for certain populations breeding within the Convention Area. 
23. The Commission commended Brazil, Chile, New Zealand and the USA for 
progress with regard to national plans of action in support of the FAO 
International Plan of Action on the Reduction of Incidental Catch of Seabirds in 
Longline Fisheries, and encouraged Members to participate in the next meeting to 
develop a Regional Agreement for the Conservation of Albatrosses under the 
Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals and in 
meetings to discuss solutions to the problem of seabird by-catch in longline 
fisheries. 
New and Exploratory Fisheries, Precautionary Catch Limits, and By-catch 
24. The Commission noted that fourteen conservation measures relating to new and 
exploratory fisheries were in force in 1999/2000, but in only five of these did 
 
 
 
fishing actually occur during 1999/2000, and in most cases the numbers of days 
fished and the catches reported were very small.  A similar situation was 
experienced in 1998/99. 
25. The increase in notifications for new or exploratory fisheries in some subareas or 
divisions of the Convention Area prompted concern at the potential escalation of 
effort.  In Division 58.4.4, six notifications had been made involving up to a 
maximum of fourteen vessels, and in Subarea 88.1, notifications of a total 
maximum of ten vessels were submitted.  It was noted that this strongly affects the 
average catch available per vessel and, since such a catch would most likely be 
taken within a short period of time, might result in a serious overshoot of the catch 
limit. 
26. Catch limits defined for exploratory fisheries for Dissostichus spp in 1999/2000 
were retained with revision of catch limit for D. mawsoni in Subarea 88.1 south of 
65°S and that the catch limit for Dissostichus spp in Division 58.4.2 be split 
evenly between trawl and longline fishing should these two types of fisheries 
proceed. 
27. A total of twenty-four new conservation measures were adopted at the 
Commission meeting, twelve measures were revised, and four new resolutions 
were adopted.  Apart from the CDS and research plan measures, these measures 
dealt with compliance of vessels with CCAMLR Measures, prohibition of directed 
fisheries, by-catch limits, precautionary and total catch limits for established 
fisheries, and new and exploratory longline and trawl fisheries for toothfish and 
other finfish species. 
28. Most by-catch elements of conservation measures in force in 1999/2000 were 
carried forward to the 2000/2001 season.  The general measure for Dissostichus 
spp was revised in view of concern expressed that a significant amount of fish 
might be taken without triggering the research requirement.  
Assessment of Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas which 
include Marine Areas 
29. In accordance with Article 6(2) of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection, “no marine area shall be designated as an ASPA or ASMA without the 
prior approval of CCAMLR”. Although Annex V has not yet come into force, two 
proposals were submitted to CCAMLR XIX for consideration in accordance with 
Annex V. 
30. At CCAMLR XVIII, New Zealand had submitted a proposal for an enlarged SPA 
No. 4, encompassing the Balleny Islands and the surrounding marine area in the 
northern Ross Sea, to be designated under the Antarctic Treaty and in accordance 
with Annex V of the Protocol.  An amended proposal was presented at CCAMLR 
XIX, following consideration at WG-EMM and advice from SCAR Group of 
Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC). 
31. The Commission noted the request of the Scientific Committee for further advice 
on how to consider proposals for marine protected areas forwarded by the ATCM 
or by nominating Parties in accordance with Annex V of the Protocol, particularly 
where that marine component is significant. 
32. The Commission recommended that the ATCM consider the creation of an 
ASMA to augment SPA No. 4 for the Balleny Islands.  It also requested the 
 
 
 
Scientific Committee to develop scientific advice on steps to be undertaken to 
determine: 
i. whether a site proposed for designation as a marine protected area affects 
actual or potential harvesting of marine resources in relation to Article II of the 
Convention; 
ii. whether the draft management plan for the proposed site might prevent or  
restrict CCAMLR-related activities. 
33. The Scientific Committee noted that it would be premature to consider a proposal 
by Italy to establish a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) at Terra Nova Bay 
until comments from SCAR-GOSEAC are received, and without further 
development of a methodology for assessment. 
