CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-38  
Agenda Item 4g 
Norway 
Original: English 
 
 
ANTARCTIC HISTORIC RESOURCES 
 
 
 
Purpose of this paper 
This paper is presented to advise the Committee on Environmental Protection and Treaty 
Parties generally of the formation of an international committee of polar heritage protection 
professionals.  The committee, with its secretariat currently based in Norway, provides a 
resource to anyone associated with protection of historic sites of Antarctica and may also be 
useful as a resource to the Antarctic Treaty System and it’s member parties. 
 
 
The International Polar Committee 
The committee is known as the International Polar Committee (IPC).  It is a subcommittee of 
the International Committee on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS), which is a worldwide NGO 
composed of cultural heritage experts.  ICOMOS is used by UNESCO for the evaluation of 
sites on the World Heritage list. The headquarters of ICOMOS is in Paris, France. Further 
information on ICOMOS is found at http://www.icomos.org. 
 
The IPC was formed recognizing that the practical issues associated with the preservation of 
human heritage in polar regions are often common to both the Antarctic and Arctic, and that 
work and research being done in both polar areas can raise problems, including possible 
duplication, which could be avoided with better collaboration. 
 
The aims of the IPC include ;  
• promoting international cooperation in all aspects of protection and conservation work 
concerning the non-indigenous heritage of the polar areas, the Antarctic and Arctic, 
• advising on the development of activities in this field, 
• providing a forum for the interchange of experience, ideas, knowledge, and the results of 
research between administrators, archaeologists, conservators, historians, legislators and 
other professionals, 
• promoting or coordinating international studies or projects, by extending technical 
cooperation and by establishing links with specialized institutions in appropriate fields. 
 
All nations known to have an active interest in polar heritage have been invited, through their 
local ICOMOS organizations, to nominate a representative to the IPC.  Members have now 
been appointed to represent; Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Russia, 
France and the United Kingdom.  Appointments from other nations are awaited. 
 
The IPC is forming links to relevant Arctic agencies and in particular the International Arctic 
Science Committee (IASC). 
 
 
Relevance to the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) 
The ATS has long recognized the value of the historic heritage of the continent.  This is 
reflected in the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
and the provisions in Annex V on special protection and management of historic sites. 
 
Several sites in Antarctica have already been listed as Historic Sites and Monuments by the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, and are as such protected against damage, removal 
and destruction. Some historic sites and their environs have been afforded additional 
protection through designation as Specially Protected Areas. It is noted that the Committee on 
Environmental Protection (CEP) has continuing responsibility for this aspect of Antarctic 
activity. 
 
 
The role of the IPC 
The IPC can be a resource to the Antarctic Treaty system and to any other national or 
international heritage protection agency working in association with the ATS. It could for 
example be that the CEP (or any of its members) would find it useful to draw upon advice 
from the IPC, in specific questions relating to i) listing of sites and monuments on the HSM-
list and ii) management plans for protected or managed areas containing historic sites and 
monuments.  
 
 
International Polar Committee contacts;  
 
President;   
 
 
 
 
 
Susan Barr (susan.barr@ra.no) 
 
 
Directorate for Cultural Heritage 
P O Box 8196 Dep. 
N-0034 Oslo 
NORWAY 
 
Secretary General;   
 
 
 
 
Paul Chaplin (pchaplin@online.no)  
Fjellveien 14 
1914 Ytre Enebakk 
NORWAY 
