 
 
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA 
SEASON 2000- 2001 
This Report has been prepared in compliance with Article 17 of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
1. NOTIFICATION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 17 OF PROTOCOL ON 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
1.1 Notification of the measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the 
Protocol 
The Republic of Bulgaria acceded to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty on May 21, 1998. By its Decision No. 11 of 
March 16, 1998 the Council of Ministers assigned to the competent ministries and 
institutions the task to prepare for adoption the respective legal acts for 
implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. 
The Ministry of the Environment and Waters prepared draft Regulations on 
the Terms and Procedure of Implementing the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. According to the procedures of the Bulgarian 
legislation the Regulations have to be adopted by the Council of Ministries. 
By Decree No. 37 of 15 February 2001 the Council of Ministers adopted 
Regulations on the Terms and Procedure of Implementing the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The Regulations are 
promulgated in the Official Gazette, issue 17 of 23 February 2001. In compliance 
with the requirements of the Bulgarian legislation the Regulations entered into 
force on 26 February 2001. 
The Regulations are issued on the grounds of article 4a of the Law on 
Environmental Protection. The Regulations define the terms and procedure of 
implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 
the cases when the activity is organised by or with the participation of Bulgarian 
natural persons or legal entities. Activities in Antarctica, depending on their 
character, are submitted to the following procedures of assessment of their impact 
on the environment: preliminary environmental impact evaluation; initial 
environmental 
impact 
evaluation; 
comprehensive 
environmental 
impact 
evaluation. 
The Regulations determine the terms and procedure for the issue of a decision 
by the Minister of the Environment and Waters at a stage of preliminary, initial or 
comprehensive environmental impact evaluation, depending on the character and 
 
 
volume of the activity for which an evaluation is required. The application for the 
issue of a decision should have a strict content provided for in the Regulations. 
After concluding the stay in Antarctica the organiser within a term of 60 
days should submit to the Ministry of the Environment and Waters a detailed 
report of the activities including their environmental impacts. 
The implementation of the Regulations is assigned to the Minister of the 
Environment and Waters. 
According to Article 21 of the above mentioned Regulations the Minister of 
the Environment and Waters shall issue regulations setting the safety rules on the 
territory and/ or the aquatory of the Antarctic. 
1.2 Contingency plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol The 
Bulgarian station has a maximum capacity of 15 persons and its fuel supply per year does not 
exceed 2 000 L. An Oil Spill Contingency Plan has been prepared. 
2. REPORT PURSUANT TO ANNEX I, ARTICLE 6 (1) OF THE 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL . 
 
2.1 Procedures to consider the environmental impacts of proposed activities in 
Antarctica / Annex I, Article 6 (la) / 
 
All activities in Antarctica, undertaken by the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute as well as by 
other organisations or individuals shall be in compliance with the requirements of the 
Regulations on the Terms and Procedure of Implementing the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection. / Adopted by Decree No. 37 of 15 February 2001 the Council of Ministers/ 
2.2 List of Initial Environmental Evaluations developed in accordance with 
Article 2 and decisions taken /Annex I, article 6 (1b) 
 
During the period 1 September 2000 to 1 July 2001 no Initial Environmental 
Evaluations have been prepared. 
 
2.3 Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, 
from procedures put in place in accordance with Annex I, Articles 2(2) and 5, of 
the Protocol (Annex I, Article 6 (lc)) 
During the period 1 September 2000 to 1 July 2001 no significant information has been 
obtained in accordance with the provisions of Annex I. 
 
3. REPORT PURSUANT TO ANNEX II, ARTICLE 6 OF THE 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL 
 
 
 
3.1 Number and nature of permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol 
during the period 1 September 2000 to 1 July 2001 /Annex II, Article 6 /2/ of the 
Protocol/ 
During the period 1 September 2000 to 1 July 2001, no permits have been 
issued under Annex II. 
 
4. REPORT PURSUANT TO ANNEX III, ARTICLE 9 OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTOCOL 
 
4.1 Waste Management Plans prepared in Accordance with Annex III, Article 8 of 
the Protocol / Annex III, Article 9 /!/ of the Protocol/ 
The waste management strategy of the Bulgarian Antarctic Programme is that all waste, 
with the exception of gray water is carried out from the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
4.2 Report on implementation of waste management plan /Annex III, Article 9 /1/ of the 
Protocol/ 
 
All waste, with the exception of gray water is carried away from the Antarctic 
Treaty area for proper disposal. 
Waste generated during the Bulgarian expeditions is separated into the following 
categories for handling and disposal: 
- Sewage and domestic liquid wastes 
- Solid wastes 
- Other solid wastes 
Glass and plastic are separated from the remaining solid wastes. 
4.3 Inventory of past activities in accordance with Annex III, Article 8 /3/ of the 
Protocol / Annex III, Article 9 /1/ of the Protocol/ 
No inventory of past activities has been drawn up at present time. 
 
 
