Monitoring marine debris and its impact on marine living resources  
in Antarctic waters 1 
 
E.N. Sabourenkov (Science Officer, CCAMLR Secretariat)2 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper has been prepared by the Secretariat of the Commission for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) in 
response to a request from CEP-IV for information on actions taken by 
CCAMLR on marine debris from fishing vessels, especially in relation to 
compliance with Annex IV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty (CEP-III Final Report, paragraph 19).  
 
A number of measures have been adopted and implemented by CCAMLR 
to monitor and assess the level of marine debris and its impact on marine 
living resources in Antarctic waters. Long-term programs have been 
initiated at a number of sub-Antarctic and Antarctic sites. These programs 
include surveys of beached marine debris, surveys of fishery-related marine 
debris associated with colonies of marine mammals and seabirds, ingestion 
by seabirds of plastic materials and entanglement of marine mammals in 
fishery-related debris. During recent years surveys of beached marine 
debris have been conducted in accordance with a standard method. 
Standard forms have been created for the collection and submission of data 
from other marine debris studies. All data collected are submitted to the 
CCAMLR database for analysis. As the number of long-term marine 
debris programs established by CCAMLR Members is still relatively small, 
the amount of information collected at present is insufficient to ascertain 
trends in the accumulation of debris and of its impact on marine animals.  
 
A special conservation measure was adopted by CCAMLR to regulate the 
use and disposal of plastic packaging bands on fishing vessels. In order to 
prevent pollution from marine debris in the CCAMLR Convention Area, a 
large proportion of which appears to originate from fishing vessels, 
CCAMLR launched an educational campaign aimed at fishermen.  
 
CCAMLR keeps the issue of marine debris under annual review. 
                                                 
1  This paper is presented by CCAMLR for consideration by CEP and may contain unpublished data, analyses, 
and/or conclusions subject to change.  Data contained in this paper should not be cited or used for purposes 
other than the work of CEP without the permission of the originators/owners of the data. 
2  PO Box 213, North Hobart 7002, Tasmania, Australia (ccamlr@ccamlr.org) 
2 
 
Introduction 
 
Large-scale fishing in the Convention Area began in the early 1970s in waters off South 
Georgia. In the second half of the 1970s, the trawl fishery for finfish and krill expanded to more 
southerly grounds, such as the South Orkney Islands, Elephant Island and the lower South Shetland 
Islands and the Indian Ocean coasts of the Antarctic Continent. Longline fishing vessels arrived in the 
mid-1980s to catch Patagonian toothfish (CCAMLR, 2001). 
 
2. 
Fishing in the Southern Ocean remained fairly unrestricted until 1982 when the Convention 
on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources came into force. 
 
3. 
The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) 
considers protection of the Antarctic environment to be a matter of the utmost importance.   
 
4. 
CCAMLR has adopted and implemented a set of measures to monitor and evaluate the 
impact of anthropogenic debris and waste on marine living resources in the Convention Area. At 
present CCAMLR measures include the following: 
 
• collection at sea and reporting of derelict marine debris from vessels operating in the 
Area;  
 
• reporting by fishing vessels of lost or discarded fishing gear; 
 
• periodical surveys of marine debris on beaches and in seal and penguin colonies near 
coastal stations; 
 
• reporting of accidental entanglement in, or ingestion of, marine debris by birds, marine 
mammals, fish, and other animals; and 
 
• recording of observations of marine mammals and seabirds soiled with hydrocarbons, e.g. 
with oil. 
 
5. 
Surveys of beached marine debris, maintaining records of lost or discarded fishing gear and 
the collection of derelict marine debris at sea are aimed at monitoring the level of marine debris and 
its impact on marine living resources in the Convention Area. In particular, beach surveys should 
yield information to determine how effectively measures related to the prevention of pollution of 
Antarctic waters adopted by CCAMLR, the Antarctic Treaty (Annex IV to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection), MARPOL 73/78 (Annex V) and London (Dumping) Convention, 1972, 
have been implemented. 
 
6. 
Studies of the impact of marine debris on Antarctic marine living resources include surveys of 
fishery-related marine debris associated with colonies of marine mammals and seabirds, ingestion by 
seabirds of plastic materials and entanglement of marine mammals in fishery-related debris. 
 
7. 
Observations of marine mammals and seabirds externally contaminated with hydrocarbons  
(e.g. soiled with oil) were started only recently, mainly because of previous incidents of oil spillage 
happened in Antarctic waters. 
 
3 
 
8. 
The CCAMLR website at www.cccamlr.org contains a brief description of CCAMLR 
activities on marine debris and its impact on marine animals, and can be found in the section 
describing activities of the Scientific Committee. In particular, it contains the CCAMLR standard 
method for surveys of beached marine debris and a list of all papers on the subject 
submitted by CCAMLR Members. 
 
 
Loss or discard of fishing gear, observations at sea 
 
9. 
Loss of fishing gear has been reported from time to time by a number of CCAMLR 
Members over several years. However reports received were mainly anecdotal and therefore not 
suitable for any quantitative analysis. 
 
10. 
General concern has been expressed about problems posed by the loss of fishing gear, 
especially hooks. CCAMLR noted estimates that about 100 000 hooks are lost annually in the 
Patagonian toothfish fishery in Subarea 48.3, and that the loss of sections of line and hooks 
remaining in fish heads thrown overboard poses a threat to marine life, especially seabirds (SC-
CAMLR, 1996). Loss of fishing gear is a problem which has probably been underestimated to date 
(Kock, in press).  
 
11. 
Taking this concern into account, CCAMLR recently decided to review the objectives and 
feasibility of vessels collecting data on lost and discarded gear. This topic was included for 
discussion at the forthcoming meeting of CCAMLR in October-November 2001. 
 
 
Surveys of beached marine debris 
 
Establishment of long-term surveys 
 
12. 
Monitoring of beached marine debris in Antarctica is only feasible in those areas where the 
coastline and surrounding waters are free from ice, at least during the Antarctic summer. Even in 
these places, however, monitoring is not always an easy task because large breeding colonies of 
marine mammals and birds occupy a number of the beaches suitable for monitoring during the short 
summer season. 
 
13. 
On the other hand, some features of Antarctic waters make the interpretation of survey 
results a more straightforward task here than in other parts of the world. These features are: 
 
• Antarctic waters are distant from major industrial and urban sources of pollution; 
 
• the presence of a very distinctive natural boundary, the Antarctic Convergence, which to 
some extent prevents the transport of marine debris from the north; and 
 
• major sources of local pollution are known: fisheries, research and transport vessels and 
Antarctic stations. 
 
4 
 
14. 
The first results of marine debris surveys in the Convention Area and adjacent waters were 
reported to CCAMLR in 1988, although some surveys were conducted by CCAMLR Members as 
early as in 1984. 
 
15. 
A comparison of survey methodologies used by CCAMLR Members has indicated a lack of 
standardisation in the timing, duration and frequency of surveys, length and width of the selected 
surveyed units (beaches), classification of objects and presentation of data. Although surveys are 
generally aimed at monitoring the accumulation of marine debris by type and its change over time, the 
sampling effort and the amount of data collected do not justify the planning of assessment studies 
which require statistically planned survey designs. It was therefore proposed that current studies 
should be designed as baseline studies to be carried out until a baseline required for the planning of 
assessment studies is established. It was also proposed that the planning of surveys should meet 
certain minimum data requirements in order to ensure the collection of statistically comparable data 
and the establishment of a baseline for conducting future assessment studies.  
 
16. 
The Standard Method for Surveys of Beached Marine Debris was prepared and adopted 
by CCAMLR in 1993. The method establishes a set of standard requirements for conducting 
surveys while allowing Members to do more intensive work if felt necessary. In fact, more intensive 
work is required because the sites being surveyed are few and widely spaced, and in some areas 
with active fisheries no debris surveys are being undertaken. 
 
 
Current surveys 
 
17. 
At present, CCAMLR Members carry out monitoring of beached marine debris at several 
locations (see Figure 1).  Long-term monitoring programs have been established by Australia, Brazil, 
Chile, Norway, South Africa, UK and the USA. Details of these programs are given in Table 1.    
 
18. 
Surveys of beached marine debris have been carried out in accordance with the standard 
method at the following sites: Bird Island (South Georgia Is), Signy Island (South Orkney Is), 
Westwindstrada (Bouvet Is), Puerto Paraiso (Antarctic Peninsula), Ardley Island, Bahia Sepultura 
and Cape Shirreff (South Shetland Is), Candlemas Island and Saunders Island (South Sandwich Is).  
 
19. 
All data collected at these sites have been submitted to the CCAMLR Data Centre. 
 
20. 
The CCAMLR Marine Debris Database now holds 168 sets of data for the period from 
1993 to 2000 (Table 2). 
 
 
Preliminary results 
 
21. 
There is a general perception that the level of marine debris found in Antarctic waters is 
relatively low in comparison with other parts of the world. This perception has been substantiated by 
the findings of several comparative studies presented at the 1994 Third International Conference on 
Marine Debris (Miami, Florida, May 1994). 
 
5 
 
22. 
In the Southern Hemisphere, to the north of 50–60°S, i.e. above the Antarctic Convergence, 
debris densities from 76 to 4 120 items per kilometre of coastline have been reported (Gregory and 
Ryan, 1997). Beach surveys have been conducted in a number of industrially developed countries of 
the Southern Hemisphere such as Australia, Argentina, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa. 
 
23. 
However, it is still far too early to conclude that Antarctic waters are less polluted than 
elsewhere. Datasets collected so far by CCAMLR Members for most of the sites are still not 
sufficient for the evaluation of trends in the accumulation and composition of marine debris and its 
impact on marine animals. Further systematic collection of data is required.  
 
24. 
Members annually present results of their surveys in working papers for consideration by 
CCAMLR. These papers were discussed by the Commission and the Scientific Committee and 
reflected in their reports. A complete list of papers submitted to CCAMLR is available on the 
CCAMLR website. Some results of surveys have been published in journals dealing with matters of 
marine debris and pollution. 
 
25. 
Because further collection of data is required, the data submitted so far to the CCAMLR 
database have been processed only in order to obtain some general description of the amount 
(density) and composition of marine debris accumulated on beaches in the Convention Area. 
 
26. 
Lengths of the individual survey sampling areas vary between 85 to 14 000 m, with the 
density of debris items collected ranging from zero to 1 291 items per 1 km. The total density for 
each site over entire sampling periods to date is given in Table 2. 
 
27. 
Major categories of beached marine debris found in the Antarctic waters are plastic and 
fishing gear. In general, an amount of beached marine debris found in the Antarctic is small in 
comparison with other parts of the World Ocean. However, some persistent plastic objects, such as 
strapping bands and fragments of fishing gear, represent a threat to marine mammals and birds. The 
composition of marine debris varied between sites (Figure 2, all data for each site were combined 
for all years of surveys). 
 
28. 
The total composition of debris on Antarctic beaches at all sites shows packaging material 
(comprising styrofoam, packaging and plastic packaging straps) to be the most commonly observed 
items (74%), followed by fishing gear (13%, including gear made of plastic), wood (6%), glass 
(3%), metal (3%) and paper, rubber and fabric materials (less then 1% each). 
 
29. 
The most commonly observed items at each site were (Figure 2): 
 
Bouvet Island - 
 
 
Westwingstrada (wood, packaging material - mainly plastic)  
 
South Georgia - 
 
 
Bird Island (fishing gear) 
 
South Sandwich Islands -  
 
 
Candlemas Island (fishing gear, packaging material - mainly plastic) 
 
 
Saunders Island (wood) 
 
6 
 
South Orkneys -  
 
 
Signy Island (packaging material – mainly plastic) 
 
South Shetlands -  
 
 
Ardley Island (wood and glass) 
 
 
Bahia Sepultura (packaging material - mainly plastic) 
Cape Shirreff (packaging material - mainly plastic) 
 
Antarctic Peninsula - 
 
 
Puerto Paraiso (metal) 
 
30. 
As fisheries constitute one of the major sources of marine debris pollution in Antarctic 
waters, it would not be unreasonable to suggest that there is a correlation between fishing effort and 
the amount and type of marine debris produced.  In a study conducted by British scientists, the 
increase in marine debris observed at Bird Island, South Georgia, during the winter of 1995 was 
related to the new longline fishery for Patagonian toothfish which has developed around South 
Georgia since 1991 (Walker et al., 1997). A three-fold increase in the amount of debris was 
recorded in 1994/95 as compared with 1993/94 (CCAMLR, 1996). Most debris clearly originated 
from fishing vessels fishing around South Georgia. Nylon lines, mainly identical to those used in the 
longline fishery, comprised 80% of debris items. 
 
 
Impact of marine debris on marine animals 
 
Fisheries-related debris observed in association  
with colonies of seabirds and marine mammals 
 
31. 
Only a limited number of observation programs have been established so far on fisheries-
related marine debris associated with colonies of seabirds and marine mammals.  
 
32. 
At Bird Island (South Georgia) such observations have been conducted since 1994. In 1996 
it was reported that the incidence of marine debris, especially fishing gear, associated with breeding 
albatrosses at Bird Island had returned to the high levels of 1994. Many fishing hooks, all identical to 
those used in the longline fishery for Patagonian toothfish, were recorded from pellets regurgitated by 
wandering albatrosses; four adult and two chick wandering albatrosses and one adult black-browed 
albatross were observed with ingested or impaled hooks with fishing line attached (SC-CAMLR, 
1996 and 1997). 
 
33. 
In 1999 and 2000 an unprecedented quantity of lines originating from fishing vessels was 
recorded in association with wandering albatrosses at Bird Island (SC-CAMLR, 1999 and 2000). 
 
34. 
Observations conducted at Marion Island (Prince Edward and Marion Islands) since 1996 
showed that the levels of fisheries-related marine debris associated with seabirds decreased slightly 
since 1997/98, but remained much higher than in 1996/97 (SC-CAMLR, 1999). 
 
7 
 
35. 
CCAMLR agreed that standardised and systematic surveys were required to collect data for 
the evaluation of trends in marine debris associated with colonies of seabirds and marine mammals. It 
was therefore decided that, in the future, during such surveys data should be recorded in accordance 
with standard guidelines which enabling quantitative analysis of data. 
 
 
Ingestion of plastic material 
 
36. 
So far little systematic work on the ingestion of plastic materials by seabirds and marine 
mammals has been conducted within the framework of CCAMLR. 
 
37. 
Floating plastic debris did not seem to present the same problem in the Southern Ocean as it 
did in northerly waters. It is unknown to what extent floating plastic material in Antarctic waters 
originates from fisheries.  
 
38. 
Birds may mistake plastic particles for food and then regurgitate them when feeding their 
young, leading to serious blockages of the intestine, starvation and even death. Penguins, gulls, 
shearwaters and shags also use plastic fibres, bands and other debris to construct or line their nests.  
 
39. 
The ingestion of plastic material by seabirds was recorded during studies of the diet of 
seabirds at sea conducted from 1976 to 1988 (Prince 1980; Ryan, 1987; van Franeker and Bell, 
1988; Ainley et al., 1990; Nel and Nel; 1999). Stomach contents of seabirds that feed below the 
sea surface contained little plastic material because of their entire dependence on live prey. Among 
species that feed on the surface, the incidence of plastic ingestion was highest among the smaller 
ones and those which were omnivorous or feed on zooplankton.  
 
40. 
Surveys conducted at Bird Island (South Georgia) for the seventh consecutive year include 
observations on the ingestion of fishery-related debris by seabirds. In 2000 an analysis of 
regurgitated material from wandering albatross chicks indicated that 79% of them received food 
contaminated with line and/or hooks (SC-CAMLR, 2000). Ingested plastics were also reported for 
giant petrels and white-chinned petrels (SC-CAMLR, 1999). 
 
 
Entanglement in marine debris 
 
41. 
Since the early 1990s, there have been regular observations of entangled Antarctic fur seals 
by a number of CCAMLR Members (Brazil, Chile, Korea, UK, USA). They documented the 
considerable impact of plastic packaging bands and remains of fishing nets on marine mammals. 
These may form collars around animals’ necks, strangling them or causing severe injuries. In most 
cases the plastic collars do not stretch as the animals grow, so even if the seals do not die, the 
damage to skin and muscles makes movement on land difficult, restricts their ability to catch food at 
sea and may also lead to infection and death. Affected male seals cease to take part in breeding, 
while females have difficulties in feeding and rearing their pups.   
 
42. 
Taking into account Members’ reports on the entanglement of fur seals, CCAMLR adopted 
a special conservation measure which prohibited the use on fishing vessels of plastic package bands 
to secure bait boxes (Conservation Measure 63/XV, as adopted at CCAMLR-XII in 1993 and 
amended at CCAMLR-XV in 1996). The use of other plastic packaging bands is also prohibited on 
8 
 
fishing vessels which do not have on-board incinerators. Any packaging band, once removed from 
packages, should be cut, so they do not form a continuous loop, and be burned in the on-board 
incinerator. 
 
43. 
The first survey at Birds Island (South Georgia) during the 1988/89 pup rearing season gave 
estimates of an annual rate of entanglement of fur seals in marine debris from 0.5–1% of the 
population, i.e. from 5 000–10 000 animals (CCAMLR, 1989). 
 
44. 
In the following years, the rate of entanglement of fur seals at South Georgia has fallen 
substantially. The lowest ever rate was recorded in 1995 (CCAMLR, 1995). There are indications 
that this decreasing trend in entanglement has not been sustained in subsequent years (CCAMLR, 
1996 and 1997). 
 
45. 
The fourth annual surveys at Signy Island (South Orkneys), conducted in 1999/2000, 
reported only five entangled fur seals, the lowest total yet (SC-CAMLR, 2000). 
 
46. 
In general, reports received by CCAMLR in 2000 indicated continuing low levels of 
entanglement of fur seals both at Bird and Signy Islands, albeit with considerable interannual 
variations (CCAMLR, 2000). 
 
47. 
The overall incidence of entanglement of fur seals at Marion Island (Prince Edward and 
Marion Islands) for the period from 1991 to 1995 was estimated to be between 0.014% and 
0,016% of the population (SC-CAMLR, 1995) 
 
48. 
Reports received for Cape Shirreff (South Shetlands) since 1994 showed that in some years 
there were observed some cases of fur seals entangled in marine debris. 
 
49. 
In general, observations of entanglement of fur seals in marine debris indicated that levels of 
entanglement in the Convention Area are relatively low.  However, CCAMLR is concerned that 
reports received so far showed no sign of these levels decreasing despite measures adopted to 
prevent marine debris pollution.  
 
50. 
Reports received indicated that seabirds and marine mammals continue to be entangled in 
debris which had clearly originated from fishing vessels. CCAMLR noted that, despite the ban on 
the use of plastic packaging bands aboard fishing vessels introduced in 1996 (Conservation Measure 
63/XV), considerable numbers of packaging bands are still being washed ashore. It was agreed that 
Contracting Parties must take further steps to ensure that fishermen are aware of, and comply with, 
regulations preventing the disposal of debris in Antarctic waters. CCAMLR also agreed that 
appropriate in-port inspections of vessels prior to departure for fishing grounds might assist vessels in 
complying with this conservation measure (CCAMLR, 1997) 
 
51. 
CCAMLR has also intensified its campaign to educate crews of fishing vessels on proper 
use, storage and disposal of plastic waste material.  
 
52. 
Data collected by Members on entanglement of fur seals are reviewed annually by 
CCAMLR. 
 
  
9 
 
Impact of Oil Spills on Seabirds and Mammals 
 
53. 
There was only one known case of a fishing (longline) vessel being associated with oil 
pollution in the Southern Ocean. The South African longliner Sudur Havid sank off South Georgia in 
June 1998 and some of the crew were lost. However, no oil was reported to have spilled (Kock, in 
press).  
 
54. 
All other known events of oil spills concerned tourist or supply vessels, the most important of 
which was the casualty and subsequent loss of the Argentinean supply vessel Bahia Paraiso close to 
Palmer Station, west of the Antarctic Peninsula, in January 1989. The example of the Bahia Paraiso 
provided one of the few (if not the only) case study for environmental clean-up activity in the 
Antarctic (CCAMLR, 1990; Penhale et al., 1997). 
 
55. 
An oil spill was reported on Marion Island in 1980 when several hundred rockhopper 
penguins were oiled due to a near-shore leak of diesel oil (Cooper and Condy, 1988).  
 
56. 
At South Georgia, small numbers (usually less than 10–20) of oiled birds, such as chinstrap 
and gentoo penguins, wandering albatross and snow petrels, have been found from 1993/94 
onwards in most years (Huin and Croxall, 1996; Hill, 1998 and 1999). It is unknown, however, 
whether recent reports of oiled birds at South Georgia represent a fairly new phenomenon or were 
merely increased awareness being recorded and reported (Reid, 1995; Huin and Croxall, 1996; 
Humpidge and Croxall, 1996). 
 
 
CCAMLR educational campaign 
 
57. 
In order to counteract the current trend of increasing pollution from marine debris in the 
CCAMLR Convention Area, most of which appears to originate from fishing vessels, CCAMLR 
undertook a number of initiatives to educate fishermen and fishing vessel operators on marine debris 
pollution and its impact on marine animals.  
 
58. 
Since 1989, each fishing and fishing research vessel operating in Antarctic waters has on 
board a copy of a marine debris placard describing proper procedures with respect to handling, 
storing and discarding different types of refuse. In 1989, a leaflet ‘Marine Debris – Potential Threat 
to Antarctic Marine Animals’ was also published and widely distributed. 
 
59. 
A new set of educational materials, published in 1998, consists of a poster and a mini-
poster. These posters explain the international (including CCAMLR) regulations in force, the 
ecological and environmental reasons for avoiding marine debris pollution, and provide advice on all 
appropriate procedures to avoid the discharge of such debris at sea. 
 
60. 
With the assistance of CCAMLR Members, posters were distributed to all national fishing 
companies, Antarctic research and tourist organisations. At present, each fishing, research, supply or 
tourist vessel in Antarctic waters will now have on-board copies of CCAMLR posters on the 
prevention of marine debris pollution. Posters were also provided to all international fishing 
organisations responsible for the conservation of marine living resources in the Southern Hemisphere. 
 
61. 
A special ‘Marine Debris’ page is being created on the CCAMLR website. 
10 
 
Conclusions 
 
62. 
For a number of years CCAMLR Members have conducted periodical and long-term 
programs for monitoring the accumulation rate and composition of marine debris in the Convention 
Area and its impact on marine living resources. These programs yield information which is required 
to determine how effectively measures related to the prevention of pollution of Antarctic waters 
adopted by CCAMLR, the Antarctic Treaty (Annex IV to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection), MARPOL 73/78 (Annex V) and London (Dumping) Convention, 1972, have been 
implemented. 
 
63. 
Currently, CCAMLR measures include reporting derelict marine debris collected at sea and 
lost or discarded fishing gear; conduct of surveys of beached marine debris; collection of data of 
accidental entanglement in, or ingestion of, marine debris by birds, marine mammals, fish, and other 
animals; and reporting observations of marine mammals and seabirds soiled with hydrocarbons, e.g. 
with oil. 
 
64. 
Conservation Measure 63/XII prohibits the use on fishing vessels in the Convention Area of 
plastic package bands to secure bait boxes. The use of other plastic packaging bands for other 
purposes on fishing vessels which do not use on-board incinerators is also prohibited.  
 
65. 
Long-term surveys of beached marine debris are conducted in accordance with the standard 
method. Standard forms have been created for the collection and submission of data from other 
marine debris studies. All data collected are being submitted to the CCAMLR database for analysis. 
 
66. 
As the number of long-term marine debris programs established by CCAMLR Members is 
still relatively small, the amount of information collected at present is still insufficient to ascertain 
precisely trends in the accumulation of debris and of its impact on marine animals. 
 
67. 
CCAMLR annually reviews the topic of marine debris pollution.  The evaluation of the 
incidence of marine debris and its impact on marine biota is a permanent item on the agendas of the 
CCAMLR Commission and Scientific Committee.   
 
68. 
Recognising that under Annex V to MARPOL 73/78 Antarctic waters south of latitude 
60°S are designated as a Special Area, where the disposal of all plastics is prohibited and 
restrictions apply to the disposal of other waste and garbage from vessels, CCAMLR encouraged all 
its Members to ratify and implement Annex V to MARPOL 73/78. 
 
69. 
The complementary nature of the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and 
those of CCAMLR in protecting the marine environment was enhanced by the coming into force of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the establishment of the 
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). CCAMLR agreed that the link between itself and 
the ATCM, particularly in terms of the Protocol for Environmental Protection, has established a 
unique environment protection system for Antarctica. 
 
11 
 
70. 
CCAMLR is looking forward to the task of preventing pollution by ships to become more 
achievable since the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and especially its 
Annex IV ‘Prevention of Marine Pollution’, came into force. 
 
71. 
At its meeting in 1999 CCAMLR urged all Contracting Parties to comply with the 
requirements of Annex IV to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In 
accordance with the license provision of Conservation Measure 119/XVIII, Parties were also urged 
to ensure that their fishing vessels intending to operate in the Convention Area had adequate storage 
capacity for the retention of garbage aboard if vessels are not equipped with incinerators. 
 
72. 
All proposals received from CEP regarding the coordination of marine debris programs 
undertaken by ATCM Parties and CCAMLR, including the exchange of data, will be considered by 
CCAMLR at its forthcoming meeting in October–November 2001.  
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
References to a number of papers on the impact of lost fishing gear and oil spills on seabirds and 
mammals, and on the ingestion of plastic material by seabirds are given according to a review 
prepared by K.-H. Kock (in press). 
 
 
References 
 
Ainley, D.G., W.R. Fraser, L.B. Spear. 1990. The incidence of plastic in the diets of Antarctic 
seabirds. In: R.S. Shomura, M.L. Godfrey (Eds).  Proceedings of the Second International 
Conference on Marine Debris, 2–7 April 1989, Honolulu, Hawaii. US Dept Comm. NOAA 
Tech, Memo. NMFS, NOAA-TF-NMFS-SWFSC-154. 
 
CCAMLR. 1989 to 2000. Reports of the Annual Meetings of the Commission (CCAMLR-VIII 
to CCAMLR-XIX. CCAMLR, Hobart, Australia. 
 
CCAMLR, 2001. CCAMLR’s Management of the Antarctic. CCAMLR, Hobart, Australia. 
 
Cooper, J., P.R. Condy. 1988. Environmental conservation at the subantarctic Prince Edward 
Islands: a review and recommendations. Environm. Conserv., 15: 317–326. 
 
Croxall, J.P., S. Rodwell and I.L. Boyd. 1990. Entanglement in man-made debris of Antarctic fur 
seals at Bird Island, South Georgia. Mar. Mammal Sci., 6: 221–233. 
 
van Franeker, J.A., P.J. Bell. 1988. Plastic ingestion by petrels breeding in Antarctica. Mar. Poll. 
Bull., 19: 672–674 
 
Gregory M.R. and P.G. Ryan. 1997. Pelagic plastics and other seaborne persistent synthetic debris 
– a review of Southern Hemisphere perspective. In: J.M. Coe and D.B. Rogers (Eds). 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Marine Debris, 8–13 May 1994. Miami, 
Florida. Springer-Verlag, New York: 49–68. 
 
12 
 
Hill, C. 1998. Oil, paint, marine debris and fishing gear associated with seabirds at Bird Island, 
South Georgia, 1997/98. Document SC-CAMLR XVIII/BG/10. CCAMLR, Hobart, Australia: 
12 pp. (mimeogr.). 
 
Hill, C. 1999. Anthropogenic feather-soiling, marine debris and fishing gear associated with seabirds 
at Bird Island, South Georgia, 1998/1999. Document SC-CAMLR-XVIII/BG/7. CCAMLR, 
Hobart, Australia: 18 pp. (mimeogr.). 
 
Huin, N., Croxall, J.P. 1996. Fishing gear, oil and marine debris associated with seabirds at Bird 
Island, South Georgia during 1993/94. Mar. Ornithol., 24: 19–22. 
 
Humpidge, R. J.P. Croxall. 1996. Oil, marine debris and fishing gear associated with seabirds at 
Bird Island, South Georgia, 1995/96. Document SC-CAMLR-XV/BG/4. CCAMLR, Hobart, 
Australia: 13 pp. (mimeogr.). 
 
Kock, K.-H.(in press). The direct impact of fishing and fishery-related activities on marine life in the 
CCAMLR Convention Area with particular emphasis on longline fishing and its impact on 
albatrosses and petrels – a review. 
 
Nel, D.C. and J.L. Nel. 1999. Marine debris and fishing gear associated with seabirds at sub-
Antarctic Marion island, 1996/97 and 1997/98: in relation to longline fishing activity. CCAMLR 
Science, 6: 85–96. 
 
Penhale, P.A., Coosen, J., Marschoff, E.R. 1997. The Bahia Paraiso: a case study in environmental 
impact, remidiation and monitoring. In: Battaglia, B., J. Valencia, D.W.H. Walton (Eds) 
Antarctic Communities. Species, Structure and Survival. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 437–444. 
 
Prince, P.A. 1980. The food and feeding ecology of the grey-headed albatross Diomedea 
chrystostoma and black-browed albatross D. melanophris. Ibis, 122: 476–488. 
 
Reid, K. 1995. Oiled penguins observed at Bird Island, South Georgia. Mar. Ornithol., 23: 53–57. 
 
Ryan, P.G. 1987. The incidence and characteristics of plastic particles ingested by seabirds. Mar. 
Environ. Res., 23: 175–206 
 
SC-CAMLR. 1989 to 2000. Reports of the Annual Meetings of the Scientific Committee (SC-
CAMLR-VIII to SC-CAMLR-XIX). CCAMLR, Hobart, Australia. 
 
Slip, D.J. and H. Burton. 1990. The composition and origin of marine debris stranded on the shores 
of sub-Antarctic Macquarie Island. In: R.S. Shomura and M.L. Godfrey (Eds). Proceedings of 
the Second International Conference on Marine Debris, 2–7 April 1989, Honolulu, Hawaii. US 
Dept Comm. NOAA Tech, Memo. NMFS, NOAA-TF-NMFS-SWFSC-154: 403-415. 
 
Walker, T.R., K. Reid, J.P.Y. Arnould and J.P. Croxall. 1997. Marine debris surveys at Bird 
Island, South Georgia, 1990-1995. Mar. Poll. Bull., 34 (1): 61–64. 
 
 
Table 1.  Long-term and periodical/pilot surveys of beached marine debris in the Convention Area and adjacent waters (one-off opportunistic surveys are not included) 
 
 
 
CCAMLR 
Member 
 
Location 
 
Survey Period 
 
Survey Unit 
 
Survey Periodicity 
 
Parameters Measured 
Australia 
Heard Is  
 
Macquarie Is 
1986/87 
 
1987/88, 1992-94 
Aug 1994, 2000-> 
Coastline (˜ 28 km) 
 
Coastline (˜ 100 km) 
Beach (˜ 3 km) 
Once a year in summer 
 
Once a year in summer 
Monthly 
Accumulation rate 
(number of objects/km/ 
year) and composition of debris. 
Brazil 
Admiralty Bay, 
King George Is (S. Shetland Is) 
1985 -> 
Beaches near Commandante Ferraz 
station (˜ 2 km) 
Annually (Dec-March) at 
15-day intervals 
Number and composition of debris. 
 
Chile 
 
Cape Shirreff 
(Livingston Is, 
South Shetland Is) 
 
1984/85, 1987/88, 
1990/91, 1993-> 
 
36 beaches along the entire cape’s coastline 
 
 
Once a year in summer 
Accumulation rate 
(number and weight per month) and 
composition;  
Survey baseline established  
in 1994. 
Norway 
Bouvet Islans 
1996/97 -> 
Annual surveys to be conducted in accordance with the CCAMLR Standard Method 
S. Africa 
Prince Edward Island 
 
 
Marion Island 
1984, 
1993/94 
 
1995 -> 
 
 
 
Two sections of coastline (1.1-1.2 km) 
each) 
Once a year 
At ˜ 1.5 month interval 
 
Monthly 
Recent surveys: 
Accumulation rate 
(number and weight/month) and 
composition; 
Survey beaches cleared annually. 
 
UK 
 
Bird Is (South Georgia); 
 
Signy Is (South Orkney Is) 
 
1990 -> 
 
1990 -> 
 
Beach (150 m); 
 
Originally coastline of two coves, currently 
of three coves (about 500 m each). 
Winter and summer surveys; 
monthly  
 
Monthly (Nov/Dec-
Mar/April) 
 
Accumulation rate 
(number and weight/month) and 
composition. 
URUGUAY 
King George Is (S. Shetland Is) 
Antarctic peninsula 
1996-1997-> 
 
1999-> 
Coastline of Artigas Station 
 
Coastline of Ruperto Elichiribehety station 
Monthly (December-June) 
Fortnightly (January-March) 
Accumulation rate (number per month) 
and composition. 
 
 
 
USA 
 
Anvers Is  
(Antarctic Peninsula) 
 
Seal Is (S. Shetland Is) 
 
Half Moon Is and  
Livingston Is. (S. Shetland Is). 
 
1988 -> 
 
 
1988 -> 1995 
 
1992 
 
Most beaches around Palmer Station 
 
 
Most beaches 
 
Two beaches (1 km each) 
 
 
Once a year (in March) 
 
 
Annually (Dec-March) 
 
Once a year (in March) 
 
 
Number (weight) and composition of 
debris. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Total density of marine debris (all items) by site for all years combined. 
 
Site 
Survey Period 
Number of 
Surveys 
Total Number of 
Items Collected 
Density 
Items/km 
Ardley Island  
(South Shetland Is) 
January 1996 
1 
89 
36 
Bahia Sepultura  
(South Shetland Is) 
January 1996 
1 
7 
3 
Bird Island 
(South Georgia Is) 
October 1994 to 
September 1999 
32 
1777 
179 
Candlemas Island 
(South Sandwich Is) 
February 1997 
1 
33 
33 
Cape Shirreff 
(South Shetlands) 
December 1993 to 
February 1997 
104 
8398 
249 
Puerto Paraiso 
(Antarctic Peninsula) 
January 1996 
1 
210 
15 
Saunders Island 
 (South Sandwich Is) 
January 1997 
1 
57 
285 
Signy Island 
(South Orkney Is) 
February 1996 to 
March 1999 
26 
142 
Exact length 
of survey areas 
not reported 
Westwindstranda 
(Bouvet Is) 
December 1996 to 
February 1997 
1 
153 
76 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Location of long-term and periodical/pilot surveys of beached marine 
debris in the Convention Area and adjacent waters (for details see 
Table 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2:   
Marine debris composition for each survey site within the CCAMLR Convention Area 
(all data for each site were combined for all years of surveys). 
Bahia Sepultura
FABRIC
14%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
86%
Ardley Island
GLASS
25%
METAL
7%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
17%
WOOD
51%
Westwindstranda
METAL
10%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
37%
WOOD
45%
FISHING GEAR
8%
Signy Island
RUBBER
1%
WOOD
30%
GLASS
3%
FISHING GEAR
2%
METAL
1%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
63%
Saunders Island
FISHING GEAR
19%
METAL
4%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
5%
RUBBER
2%
WOOD
70%
Puerto Paraiso
METAL
39%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
16%
RUBBER
10%
WOOD
15%
GLASS
19%
FABRIC
1%
Cape Shirreff
FISHING GEAR
2%
GLASS
4%
METAL
2%
WOOD
5%
PAPER
1%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
86%
Candlemas Island
FISHING GEAR
49%
METAL
3%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
39%
WOOD
9%
Bird Island
FISHING GEAR
68%
PACKAGING 
MATERIAL
30%
RUBBER
1%
WOOD
1%
