CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-57  
Agenda Item 4e 
Chile 
Original: English 
 
 
 
NEW ENVIRONMENTAL PRACTICE FOR THE INSTALATION OF A 
PORTABLE SUMMER, STATION PATRIOT HILLS, WEST ANTARCTICA. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Chilean Air force in collaboration with Technical University F. Santa Maria 
designed and installed a temporary summer station in P.Hills (80° 18´ 07” S, 80° 
20´39” W), named "Polar Station Lieutenant Arturo Parodi", during 1999-2000 
season. This station was build to support all Chilean activities in the high plateau of 
blue ice 885 m elevation, 1000 km from South Pole and to comply with environmental 
regulations of the Madrid Protocol. 
The main objectives of this design were to minimize environmental impact, achieve a 
high degree of fitness to the severe environmental conditions and high efficiency in 
the use of resources, for 20 people during summer. 
 
II. 
CRITERIA FOR ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN. 
The following criteria were applied to the development of the station structure. 
a) Low weight modular structures plastic and fiberglass to be transported by C-130 planes 
in a single flight. 
b) Use of snow accumulation as barrier to cathabatic winds and thermal isolation. It is a 
200 m aerodynamic tunnel open at both ends with seven isolated fiberglass modules 
inside. 
c) Energy for water production from snow or ice supplied by solar panels (Photovoltaic 
cells) and eolic generators. Extra water supply was obtained using a 2.5 KVA 
generator. 
 
3
 
III. 
WASTE DISPOSAL. 
a) Kitchen waste. 
Precooked  frozen food and disposable table ware were used to minimize kitchen waste 
volume. All kitchen waste was compacted and  returned to P.Arenas. 
b) Liquid waste. 
Bath room and  personal hygiene residual  water was stored in 24 l plastic containers, 
allowed to freeze and removed from the area. 
c) Organic waste. 
All human waste was stored in separate  containers without use of additional water, sealed 
and removed from the area. The amount of waste generated per person was  1.2 to 1.5 l. 
a day.  
 
IV. 
Water management, volumes used per person. 
Drinking water: 1.5 l /day 
Bucal hygiene: 25 cc  
Body hygiene: 1l/day/person 
Maximum average water allowance: 2.75 l / day / person  
No water used for laundry,  kitchen table ware and toilets. 
 
V. Conclusions derived from direct experiences 
• Water production for human daily uses has to be generated using solar or eolic 
energy, avoiding use of fossil fuels.  
• All liquid and human waste production shall be minimized, then stored and removed 
from the area. Detergents used must be of low phosphate contents. 
• Recover all condensation water produced inside closed installations and recycle. 
• Use as much as possible solar energy that is available 24 h a day. 
 
Conclusion 
Station building and operation in Patriot Hills or other Antarctic inland  locations under the 
new regime of the Madrid Protocol must consider the best environmental practice. From 
 
4
our direct experience the most important  factors are energy supply and management, 
water economy and waste disposal. All structures must be light and resistant to facilitate 
transport and removal after use. Environmental conditions must be used in favor of the 
structure design and operations. 
 
