 
      
 
1 
IV CEP/XXIV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-24  
Agenda Item 4a/16 
Czech Republic 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CZECH SCIENTIFIC STATION 
IN THE  ANTARCTICA 
 
 
 
 
Paper to give reasons for the construction of a Czech scientific 
station in the Antarctica 
 
Epitome of project documentation, drawn up for needs of an evaluation  
at the level of Antarctic Treaty and SCAR 
 
 
                                                            May 2001  
 
 
 
Content: 
A.  Accompanying report 
B.  Graphic enclosures 
 
 
 
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic 
 
      
 
2 
A. Accompanying report 
 
 
Content: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.1   Identification  data of the construction ..…………………………….. p. 3 
 
 
A.2   Basic data and justification of the construction......………………….. p. 4 
 
 
A.3   Technical structure of the station …………………………………… p. 11 
 
 
A.4   Conclusions from the reconnaissance on site ………………………. p. 23 
 
 
A.5   Initial data and information........ …………………………………… p. 25 
 
 
A.6    Environmental impact of the construction  ....………………………p. 26 
 
 
A.7    Conclusion.....…………………………………………………….… p. 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.1  Identification data of the construction 
 
 
      
 
3 
 
Construction name:        Czech scientific station in the Antarctica 
 
 
Sumbitted by         :         Masaryk University Brno and Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs   of the Czech Republic 
 
 
Construction site   :          maritime Antarctica, archipelago South Shetlands 
                                       King  George Island, Cape  Turret  Point ( φ = 62o 05´ S, 
                                       λ = 57o 55´ W)  
                                 
 
Investor                 :      
Masaryk University in Brno, Faculty of science 
                                         Kotlářská 2, CZ – 611 37 Brno, in commission of the 
                              
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the 
Czech Republic 
 
 
Project engineer    :    
INVESTPROJEKT, Ltd. Zlín 
                                       Bratří  Jaroňků  4079, CZ – 760 01 Zlín, Czech Republic 
              
 
 
 
A.2  Basic data and reasons for the construction 
 
 
A.2.1  Reasons for the construction and for the choice of the      
           locality 
 
 
The significance of long-term-drawn-up and of interdisciplinnary Antarctic 
researches is growing, in the last years. Antarctica is a worlds climate stabiliser, an 
area the vegetation and fauna of which are best acclimated to the extremely cold 
climate, it is a territory with unique conditions for number of observations, 
experiments and terrain investigations (astrophysics, geophysics, geology, 
meteorology, research of high atmosphere etc.). It is a continent, the stratosphere 
of which was the first and is the biggest space of ozone depletion and, at the same 
 
      
 
4 
time, the only continent, where people live together free of conflicts and under the 
active participation of Czech scientists create conditions for application of basic 
research, the results of which are in many spheres applicable to other parts of the 
Earth, as well.  
 
 The idea to built up an own and official Czech scientific station on the Antarctica 
emerged due to several moments. Primarily, there were the research activities of 
Czech scientists in the Antarctic area, realised since the first half of fiftieths until 
the end of sixtieths, practically entirely on the Soviet and Ameri-can Antarctic 
bases (astrophysics, geophysics, meteorology, geology). After a roughly twenty 
years-long break, the more systematic executed researches on the King George 
Island (South Shetlands) followed those first activities, realised in ninetieths on the 
stations of Henryk Arctowski (Poland) and Machu Picchu (Peru), in the refuge 
Pieter J. Lenie (USA) and on the station Engenheiro Wiltgen on Elephant Island 
(Brazil). Pursuant to the recommendation of scientists from meaningful scientific 
institutions, e.g. Dr. Bernard Stonehouse from Scott Institute for Polar Research by 
the University of Cambridge, and based on own experience from own research 
programs of the ninetieths, a group of workers of  Czech scientific institutions 
decided to formulate a program of a construction of the first official Czech 
Antarctic station, which is an important conditions for further successful  
development of the Czech research activities in the Antarctica. The proposed 
locality for the construction of the station should be the Cape Turret Point in the 
east-part of the King George Island (South Shetlands).  
 
 
Through its localisation and technical solution, the Czech station should serve 
following aims: 
 
- it should be localised in a place, which by its accessibility enables to utilise 
fully the seasonal function of the station, i.e. which will provide conditions for 
several-moths systematic scientific work in the period of the austral summer,  
 
- by its localisation, building conception and outfit, it must enable to solve such 
scientific activities, which would make possible their integration  into the 
international scientific programs and, in connection with this, it must be open 
for the international co-operation, mainly in a way and direction, which would 
enable interconnection of its activity with other bases in the area of South 
Shetlands, especially of the King George Island.  
 
 
      
 
5 
- the station should be built-up in a locality, which in the summer time is easily 
accessible from the point of view of logistic provision of traffic (as regards 
transports of persons and of materials and as regards the resolutions of 
emergency cases, e.g. acute diseases etc.), by means of  transportation from the 
neighbouring stations, 
 
- it must enable to realise a complex scientific program, including biological, 
geographical, geological and chemical disciplines of science, focused on the 
solution of ecological problems of the coastal Antarctic oases from several 
angles of view. The orientation on this theme is motivated by the fact that until 
now, there are not sufficiently recognised the internal bindings (especially in 
the area of vegetative components of biota) of the subsystems of coastal 
Antarctic oases  (rocks, geests, soil, water, ice, snow and the atmosphere on one 
side and biota on the other one), mainly from the point of view:  
            -    of transport and transformation of substances in their frame, 
   -   of the regime of supply (from outside), losses (outwards) and/or    
       of  the transfer and modification of energy (inside), 
            -    of influence of external factors (e.g.  atmosphere, substrate, fresh-         
                  water systems), 
            -     of responds of plants to the environmental conditions and to the   
                  dynamics of their evolution 
 
For a sufficiently detailed recognition of these processes it is necessary to obtain  
information from above mentioned disciplines of science. It is mainly a matter of: 
 
           - monitoring of contemporary geomorphological, hydrological, pedolo-gical 
and in case of need also glaciological processes (including their 
dynamics) as result of influence of petrographic pre-disposition and of 
mailny climatic factors (with the target to recognise the mechanisms of 
erosion, transport and accumulation of material with the accentuation of 
the studies of periglacial processes and of the dynamics of evolution of 
the permafrost), 
    -  systematic monitoring of climatic relations on the level of macroclimate 
(standard measurements as such, evaluation of possible climatic chan-ges 
since the beginning of XX. century by means of data from outland 
archives), of the local climate and microclimate (special activities with 
application of automatic ways of data obtaining) including a complex 
monitoring of energy exchange between the Earth surface and the 
atmosphere (including UV and FAR radiation), 
 
      
 
6 
    - studies of pedogenetic processes and of their chemism (chemical analyse of 
humus, characterisation of humic acids), determination of biogenetic and 
essential elements in the substrate or in water (snow) and of their transport 
from the inorganic environment to the biota and the other way around 
(cycles of nutrients), studies of pedogenetic processes in the newly 
deglaciated territories, 
    - monitoring of species diversity and succession (including their reasons) 
and a primary production of plant communities, monitoring of stress 
influences of the environment on the vegetation (stress physiology) and 
the way of the fixation of nutrients in the plants including the balance of 
nutrients - all that with the aim to predict possibly the further evolution, 
- monitoring of anthropogenetic influences on the biota, esp. in the sphere 
of chemical impacts (monitoring of chemical contamination of substrate, 
monitoring of contamination of plants and eventually of ani-mals). 
 
The submitters of the intention to realise a Czech scientific station on the King 
George Island are very well aware of the fact, the it is an island, on which alrea-dy 
8 permanent stations are built-up and thus the area has the highest density of 
stations in the Antarctica. The main argument for their decision for that locality is 
the fact, that the Czech Republic as a continental country does not dispose of its 
own marine, which could be used for a logistic securing of the station opera-tion. 
In this situation, it will be necessary to utilise foreign shipping companies, most 
logically from those countries, the bases of which are operating on the King 
George Island  for a longer time, already, eventually the tourist ships, (for transport 
of persons or small freights), which have on program a visit of the Pinguin Island. 
Through the localisation of the station on mentioned place, the east part of the 
island will be opened for the activity of scientists from other stations located in its 
west part. 
 
In the effort to avoid an excessive concentration of stations in the west part of the 
island and to enable a scientific activities in its hitherto only little syste-matically 
monitored east part at the same time, the locality of the Cape Turret Point was 
chosen. There is a rather large vegetation oasis there and at the same time it is 
possible to study therefrom the insular ecosystems of the near Pinguin Island.  
 
A transparent terrain of Turret Point, sloping southwards as a forefield of the 
covering glacier in the length of 2 km, enables as an interspace of two essen-tially 
different environments (glacier, sea) to observe closely enough the space 
variability of their impacts on the living nature of the oasis. Concurrently, it 
 
      
 
7 
provides very good conditions for line oriented monitoring of the microclimate. 
 
Another professional argument, which has influenced the choice of the locality is a 
sufficiency of systematic and non-systematic climatic data, which can be used for a 
reconstruction of the climate of the island in the XX. century.  
 
Except the already mentioned professional readiness of the Czech scientists (ob-
tained a.o. also during several expeditions to Spitsbergen, to Canadian Arctic as 
well as to Antarctica), on the side of the erection of a separate Czech base spe-aks 
also the experience, obtained by the knowledge of function of several polar 
stations, of their technical solution as well as of the logistic provision. A 
significant factor is also a good general knowledge of the area of assumed 
localisation of the station, not only in a wider context of South Shetlands or of the 
King George Island, but regarding the locality of the construction as such. A 
preliminary reconnaissance of the construction site as well as of its surrounding 
was carried out in February 2001. 
 
The Czech scientific institutions which are oriented on a more permanent scien-
tific activities in Antarctica (see below) have systematically prepared them-selves 
for these activities not only by gaining experience during their work on the stations 
of other states, especially of Poland, but also by completing the tech-nical means 
for the research. Except the standard ones, mainly meteorological measuring 
systems and devices for monitoring of physical processes in soil substrates and in 
fresh water, it have been mainly the automatic monitoring systems for various 
measurements of physical and chemical properties of the einvironment of flora and 
fauna in the coastal vegetation oases (especially climatic, microclimatic, 
hydrologic, hydrochemical and pedologic ones) and devices for monitoring of 
impacts of the simulated conditions on living organisms as well in situ as in the 
laboratory conditions. 
 
Of the most significant scientific institutions, which have participated and do 
participate on researches in the mentioned areas (in an absolute majority of cases 
they had a form of grant projects or projects of Ministry of Education, Youth and 
Sports of the Czech Republic), we can mention foremost the Masaryk University in 
Brno, where on the Faculty of Science the physico-geographical and botanical 
problems of the polar areas are systematically solved. It concerns in particular the 
departments of geography, plant physiology and plant anatomy, zoology and 
ecology and of analytic chemistry, where a five-year research programme of the 
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic is being solved 
 
      
 
8 
since 1999, with the title: Ecology of the coastal Antarctic vegetation oasis. 
 
    A permanently co-operating institution is the Botanical Institute of AV ČR in 
Průhonice (including its branch in Třeboň), the Biological Faculty of the South-
Bohemian University in České Budějovice, department of environment of the 
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering of ČVÚT Praha (Czech Technical University 
Prague) as well as several further specialised institutions. 
 
 
A.2.2    Building site 
 
A.2.2.1    General information 
 
The proposed locality for the construction of a scientific station is on the south-
east shore of the King George Island on the cape Turret Point, running out to South 
towards the Pinguin Island and closing the east side of King George BBaayy  ((sseeee  
eenncclloossuurree  BB..11,,  BB..22  aanndd  BB..33))..      
 
The exact position of the whole complex was chosen due to an inspectional 
reconnaissance in February 2001. Based on hitherto findings about the site, the 
conditions can be described as identical with those in other coastal oases of the 
King George Island, where polar station of other states are built up. The diffe-
rence consists in a detailed morphology of the shore, first of all, as well as in the 
formation of the terrain in a recent geological history.  
 
The site is situated in an area of sea terraces, sloping slightly to south till south-
west, risen after the recession of the forefront of glacier, which still covers about 
95 % of the area of King George Island. 
 
The surface of the ground in the proposed site is formed by coast sediments of 
varying thickness, arisen from the parent rock (first of all granite and basal meta-
morphites). 
  
The surface of the terrace, which is the base area for the assumed site (here and 
there with still evident serge edges), consists of coarse gravel of size between 30 - 
60 mm, interlarded with flat cobbles of various sizes, up to 300 mm long (direct 
axis). The surface is compact, stabile and intact. It has a character of a "stone 
pavement" with spaces filled by a fine sand, 10 - 50 mm wide and up to 100 mm 
 
      
 
9 
deep, i.e. with a substrate, which has enabled clusters of the grass Deschampsia 
antarctica to take hold there. 
 
 
A.2.2.2    Conditions for the choice of building site. 
 
From the facts, recognised and proved on the building site, following conclusions 
result: 
 
For the establishing of practically all objects, a placing of the objects upon a re-
latively stabile subsoil must be taken in consideration and the found building site 
meets this requirement. For the main project of the station, dimensioned 
approximately  11 x 26 m, an area directly in the  terrain with a flat and only a little 
lengthwise sloping profile was found as building site, with the direct axis oriented 
east-west  (E-W), with a minimal need of ground shaping. The chosen location is 
the highest point of the terrace in the surrounding terrain. From the point of view 
of threat by the near brook during a snow-melt at the beginning of the summer, 
there is now risk of a flooding. The longitudinal E-W-axis of the main object was 
determined so that the main front face is oriented towards the Sun, to provide the 
maximal accumulation of the solar energy. The location of corners of the main 
object was directly in the terrain marked and fixed with stone men approx. 4 m 
high and the marked area covers roughly the outer dimensions of the main object. 
The location of other objects is conformed to the purpose and to the relationship to 
main object, only. It is assumed, that the conditions for founding of objects of 
container design will be favourable and the existing subsoil will be acceptable, 
after some insignificant adjustments. 
Compared to the previously considered location of the main site, a shifting of the 
station complex some 60 m northward was decided on, right on the site. The 
reasons for it were the actually verified findings about a possible floatation of the 
terrain in consequence to an overflow of the local water course in the period of 
snow melt.  
 
 
A.2.3  Accessibility of the site 
 
The site in the locality Turret Point is practically accessible from the sea, only. It is 
necessary to orient the particular choice of the site and the system of constructions 
as well as individual elements of the construction with reference to this fact. This 
 
      
 
10 
condition results from the logistic requirements when solving the loading, 
transport and basic erection on site. The site was localised with respect to the 
disembarkation needs, i.e. to the possibility to anchor the transportation ship as 
closed to the shore as possible, to the local conditions, to the place on the coast 
which the disembarkation will be aimed to and to the accessibility of the place for 
transfers of material.  
 
The beach of the western coast of the Cape Turret Point appears suitable. Particular 
conditions of disembarkation and the following transport of material to the site will 
be consulted with experts in those operations (consultations with Polish station are 
suggested). 
 
    According to preliminary negotiations with the management of Department of 
Antarctic Biology PAS, operating the station of H.Arctowski, a participation of 
technical aids from the Polish station as well as a collaboration of the personnel 
trained for local conditions cut be envisaged for the first disembarkation of 
material and of station parts. Details must be resolved in form of an official agree-
ment during the further preparation period of the construction. 
 
 
 
 
A.2.4  Supposed extent of site, build-up conception, structure of 
objects  
 
The building site of the proposed complex of objects will cover an area of approx. 
78 x 30 m. The reason is the need of the area scatter of the objects partly with 
regard to the location in the terrain and partly with respect to the safety of 
operation. The goal is a positional separation of the objects, where a potential 
mutual threat occur, e.g. by fire or other security risks, and a separation of those 
objects, the operations of which are not mutually related. The conception of the 
arrangement of building plan respects these requirements. 
 
The centre of the station is the main operational and the accommodation object,  
conceived as a firm building , which fulfils 3 basic functions, namely: 
 -  conditions for work of scientific as well as of other workers, 
-   conditions for accommodation, essential human and social needs, 
-  a centre of the technical complex for provision of thermal engineering and of     
the hygienic conditions, 
 
      
 
11 
 
The main object contains in maximal extent all equipment, necessary for provi-
ding those functions.Other objects are proposed in containers, designed on 
conventional containers with a more perfect and more careful surface finish and 
with preassembled technology and equipment for special functions, mainly by 
virtue of transport and of functional conditions.  
 
The mutual interconnection of the objects will be made by cable lines only, and 
only there, where it has functional reasons. As for communication ways, the 
objects will be connected by marked paths only, without a need of any adaptations.  
 
 A.3   Technical structure of the station 
The basic conditions for the preparation of the construction of the station must be 
adjusted to the supposed realisation possibilities (as well as to the seasonal 
character) of the project, production, transport and erection on site. 
This corresponds with the basic segmentation of the construction to building 
objects and operational sets, first of all for methodical reasons and for provision of 
the concept complexity.  They can be modified, if needed.  
 
 A.3.1  Station objects (see enclosure B.4 and B.5 ) 
 
    SO 01  
Central unit incl. accommodation facilities 
  
 
02  
Waste processing 
  
 
03  
Aggregate store 
  
 
04  
Power supply system to engine room 
  
 
05  
Diesel aggregate 
  
 
06   
Cold stores 
                          06/1      Intermediate store 
                          06/2      Fuel store 
                          06/3      Spare parts store 
                    07  
Water intake and service pipe 
  
 
08  
Waste water treatment 
  
 
09  
Watercraft garage 
 
 
10  
Takeoff ramp 
11 
 External cable distribution system 
 
      
 
12 
 
A.3.2   Brief description of the objects (see enclosure B.5 and B.6) 
SO  01 Central unit incl. accommodation facilities 
It concerns the main building of the scientific station. The building is designed as 
single-storey construction, fully assembled out of the construction system K-
Kontrol, based on sandwich panels, consisting of an inner insulation layer, made of  
self-extinguishing polystyrene, covered from both sides with wooden-chips-plates 
OSB. For climatic reasons, the building is designed as a simple construction with a 
minimal height over the surrounding ground. The design was chosen with 
reference to the thermally technical properties, with the requirement of minimal 
heat losses and with respect to the transport and erection aspects. 
 
The floor and roof panels have a thickness of 320 mm, the external walls 265 mm. 
In the part of installation of the collector wall, the sandwich will be 170 mm thick. 
The object is statically considered as a quasi-three-tract with two internal 
longitudinal carrying walls. The object will act compactly, due to the box-
arrangement of the vertical and horizontal elements, mutually firmly connected. 
The building has a rectangular ground plan with dimensions 10 530 x 26 530 mm. 
It is covered with a pent roof with a slope of approx. 5 %.  
 
The location in the terrain is suggested with respect to the prevailing wind 
directions  and with the aim to provide the maximal sun energy collecting area by 
orientation the longitudinal axis in the direction east-west with the higher front 
face towards north. Typologically, the disposition is conformed rather to the 
expected operations than to the cardinal points. From the point of view of E-W 
orientation, a maximi-sation of solar radiation collecting areas of the collectors is 
preferred. 
The building foundation is proposed with reference to the location of the station at 
the circumlittoral place, exposed by winds, contiguous to the terrain and - due to a  
recommendation of foreign experts - upon a wooden pier grill. This will minimise 
the draught of air under the floor.  
The building construction as such will be subsequently assembled upon the 
conditioned floor area from prefabricated elements, which are to be slightly 
modified on site. The fillings of openings in the panels- for windows and doors - 
will be prepared and pre-tested for assembly. The roof will consist of a sandwich 
with a thickness of 320 mm and will be covered by a rubber membrane, prepared 
 
      
 
13 
in strips on reels with a thickness of approx. 5700 mm, mechanically anchored and 
glued to the base. Drainage without spouts, on the ground. 
The surface treatment of outer walls is suggested in alternatives. The preferable 
alternative is the providing the surfaces of outer walls with a coating of waterproof 
plywood, 6 mm thick, on a lath grill, which will only serve for protection against 
corrosion by aerosols of sea salts, wafted with the wind, or against the mechanical 
abrasion by over-frozen snow in combination with a fine sand. The expected life-
time is approx. 10 - 15 years, at least. Subsequently it would be renewed. The 
surface would be provided just with a colour acrylate paint of a glazing type. This 
solution enables a simple repair, when the outer treatment will gradually wear off. 
All painting systems are proposed based on water diluted materials and materials 
without carbohydrate diluters. 
A hot air heating is suggested, a system of  air conditioning equipment provides 
the heating of air with heat recovery from hot air collectors, heat pump and heat re-
covery from the warm air from the interior in the frame of air exchange / 
ventilation. 
 
Sanitary installations will be based on the standard installation of fixtures and 
fittings, made mainly of plastics, plastic pipelines will be insulated by cavity 
blocks. The internal sewerage will also be made out of plastics. All conduits will 
be drawn on the surface, to be controllable, the sewerage outlet from the object 
will be provided with inspection shafts with covers. 
  
The electrical system - lightning, appliances distribution systems - the internal 
system of the object for electric power supply includes the distribution net for 
lightning, for sockets and the main switchboard. The distributors for securing the 
operation of technological facilities are part of PS 101 (see part A.3.2). The station 
will be supplied with electrical energy in a combined way.  
  
The laboratory equipment contains except the classical furnishing of working 
benches a table with a stainless sheet covered working surface, a fume chamber, a 
table for scales and complementary furniture. The instrumentation will be variable, 
according to needs and character of the scientific work. 
  
Other furniture will be standard. For the specification of the complete outfits, a 
project part of documentation of interiors is worked up separately. 
Built-up area with object SO 01:      280 m2 
Built-in volume:                            1 033 m3. 
 
      
 
14 
 
 
SO 02   Waste processing 
 
The object is situated in a direct relationship to the main object of the station. It is 
accessible through the technical entry from the eastern front, directly from the 
ramp (see enclosure B.6). The object consists of an adapted transport container, 20 
ft long  (6055 x 2438 x 2591 mm). 
 
In the object, there will be placed a waste management, in accordance with the 
requirements for waste treatment and disposal, eventually for the adjustment of 
wastes prior to their transport from the area, consistently with the Madrid Protocol 
AT. Due to its location, the object will be also utilised for heating of service water. 
The system of hot water processing is based on the solar warm-water collectors 
with the primary circuit filled with an anti-freeze mixture.  
 
It is proposed to place in the container the equipment for disposal of solid wastes 
incinerator OG 120 SW, product of  TEAMTEC  Norway , some of which are 
already working in the area. The container will be equipped with means for 
storing, manipulation with and preparation of wastes for incineration and storage 
of wastes, intended for removal from the Antarctic area.  
Built-up area:     
 
14,78 m2 
Built-up space:   
 
38,30 m3 .  
  
SO  03   Store for aggregates 
 
It is a modified transport container 20 feet. The object will serve as a store of 
aggregates during the winterising break. Wind-aggregates, means of a small mani-
pulation technique and spare parts for the complex of aggregates are supposed to 
be stored there. The object will be connected to the system of electric distributions, 
lightening and sockets. Upon the container, a wind aggregate will be erected. 
Built-up area:        
14,78 m2 
Built-up space:   
 
38,30 m3. 
 
 
SO  04  Machine-room for electric equipment 
 
The base is a trasnport container 20 feet in a basic execution, which will be 
equipped with the necessary equipment in the CR, already. It will serve for 
 
      
 
15 
operation of the production and distribution and will be provided with a thermal 
insulation. Upon the container, a mast for the wind aggregate will be installed.  
Built-up area:        
14,78 m2 
Built-up space:   
 
38,30 m3. 
 
 
SO  05   Diesel-electric aggregate 
 
The base is a transport container 20 feet with a firmly inbuilt and a mobile installed 
diesel aggregate for the production of electric energy. The aggregates will be 
anchored to the floor of the container, complementary elements for the completion 
of the diesel central will be fitted in the container space. From within, the system is 
insulated with a sandwich layer of thermal and acoustic insulation for redcution of 
noice emissions to the ambient and to the lodgings. Upon the container, a wind 
aggregate will be installed . 
Built-up area:        
14,78 m2 
Built-up space:   
 
38,30 m3. 
 
 
SO  06  Cold stores 
 
Storage objects complementing the nest of single-purpose technical container 
objects.  
 
SO  06/1   Sales stock 
 
It serves mainly for storage of preserved foodstuffs reserves, which have to be kept 
in a cool place. Bulk packages of foodstuff are placed on shelves or free in the 
container. During the primary transport, it will already be used for transport of 
durable dry foodstuffs, the rest of the space for the transportation of 
unobjectionable material. The container is of a standard execution, without thermal 
insulation and upon it, a wind aggregate will be installed.  
Built-up area:        
14,78 m2 
Built-up space:   
 
38,30 m3. 
 
 
  SO 06/2  Fuel stock  
 
It will serve for storage of fuels - diesel oil and petrol. The execution of the con-
 
      
 
16 
tainer from which the fuel stock is evolved is adapted to the safety a ecological 
requirements for storage of oil products. The container has a double floor, 
consisting of storage reservoirs for 200 l volume. These are placed on the whole 
floor area and equipped with a pore-grill-boards from zinc-coated steel. On the 
floor area, steel barrels with a volume of 200 l will be stored. The location of the 
object is on the most distant place from the accommodation object, with respect to 
the necessary manipulation during the periodic supply with fuel and as closed as 
possible to the disembarking place on the coast. Upon the ob-ject, a wind 
aggregate will be installed.  
Built-up area:        
14,78 m2 
Built-up space:   
 
38,30 m3. 
 
 
SO  06/3   Spare parts stock  
 
It will serve for storage of parts and material, which will be used gradually accor-
ding to the needs, eventually for storage of treated and wrapped wastes, intended 
for back transport etc. The object will be equipped with collapsed assembly-ready 
shelves, prepared for assembly in case of need. It is assumed, that the container 
will be utilised also for storage of wrapping materials (wooden profiles, box-
boards etc.) for a possible treatment of mixed waste for incineration. On the edge 
of the object a wind aggregate will be installed. 
 
Built-up area:        
14,78 m2 
Built-up space:   
 
38,30 m3. 
 
 
SO  07   Accumulation of water and the connection  
 
For a current hygienic needs as well as for cooking the water is supposed to be 
taken-off from natural resources. On this way, the water is obtained in all other 
station on the island of King George, as well. For drinking needs and for refilling 
of the daily amount of mineralised water in a proper way, bottled water imported 
from the extra-Antarctic area will be used . 
 
The water resource will be the local freshwater (glacial) stream, which flows down 
from the forefront of the glacier on the NE-side from the station area and flows to 
the sea in such a way, that it flows around the  supposed building place  and enters 
the sea on the NW-coast, north from a nameless cliff. The base of the object will be 
 
      
 
17 
an accumulation basin with an area of approx. 3 m3, which will be obtained by 
deepening of the stream bed to the depth of approx. 80 cm. Prior to the proper 
accumulation a zeolite filter will be installed, placed in a perforated PE-vessel, 
dived in the deepest place. By a preservation of the station for the winter period, 
the pump will be dismounted, the basin will be emptied by removal of slide gates 
and the filter will be washed and stored. 
Back water surface:   
 
3 m2 
Connection length:     approx   50 m 
 
  
SO  08 Cleaning of waste water 
 
The object solves the basic treatment of sewage waters from the operation object. 
Since the waste water will have a character of biological sewers only, without any 
chemical admixtures, the disposal is rather easy. The disposal of waste water will 
respect the requirement on draining the sewage under the sea level, to secure an in-
stant dilution and to avoid any loading the freshwater systems of the station. The 
proposed route of waste pipeline works with gravity arrangement, the drain 
without treatment, with regard to the amount. With respect to the need to minimise 
the content of solid particles, also the repumping and grinding of sewage will be 
applied.  
Total amount of house sewage will be 2,25 m3 /day. 
Total length of the pipeline approx. 200 m. 
 
SO  09   Garage for water crafts 
 
The object is used for storage of water crafts, which will be 2 inflatable boats of 
the type e.g. GRANT RAID MK III. One of them will be for storage hung under 
the ceiling of the container, the other one on an undercarriage and on the floor. 
Upon the container, a wind aggregate can be installed. 
Built-up area:        
14,78 m2 
Built-up space:   
 
38,30 m3. 
 
 
SO  10    Launching ramp 
 
The object solves the construction works, enabling to set up a sufficiently safe and 
controllable device for sinking the water crafts upon the sea level and the 
conditions for supply unloading of material (foodstuff, fuels etc.) during the 
 
      
 
18 
working opening of the season an by leaving and preserving the station. The object 
foundation is a flat shaped plain of the existing terrain for descent and ascent way 
to and from the coast, which can be modified just by levelling with coarse gravel 
and aggregates from the coast to the maximal possible flat surface. Due to the 
construction of the launching cart it is not assumed to create a guiding groove (as 
long as not inevitable), but rather a movement on the conditioned surface. An exact 
position and dimension will fix the reconnaissance on the spot. The mentioned data 
are preliminary. 
Built-up area        - trimming of the ramp plain:   
150 m2 
                             - plank platform:              
  20 m2. 
 
 
SO   11   External cable distributions 
 
They solve the external cable connections among the individual objects. Consi-
dering the character of operation of the station, which assumes only a foot motion 
of persons with a knowledge of the conditions, the external cable distributions are 
designed in shallow trenches, allowed by the character of the ground. The cable 
routes are lead along the walkways, which will be marked just by marks. 
 
 
 
A.3.2  Operation groups of the station 
 
These are installed in the individual building objects and their solution corres-
ponds with 
  
 
PS 101   production of electric energy 
  
 
PS 102   heat production  
  
 
PS 103   water management 
  
 
PS 104   waste disposal 
  
 
PS 105   stock holding 
  
 
PS 106   maintenance 
  
 
PS 107   means of transportation 
                    PS 108   laboratories 
                    PS 109   light current devices 
                    PS 110   measuring and controls  
                    PS 111   basic outfit of the operation object 
 
 
 
      
 
19 
A.3.2.1  Brief description of operation groups, securing the main functions of 
the station  
 
Scientific research station is drawn as an insular system, in which all needs are 
covered by sources, being either locally available (water) or working by virtue of 
utilisation of solar radiation and wind power and being backed up by energy 
systems for production of electric energy or heat by means of diesel-aggregates 
with a defined capacity with 100% reserve.  Methodically, the whole problem is 
divided into following blocks, the solution of which is described in corresponding 
sections. 
  
 
 A.3.2.1.1     Supply of electric energy  
 
The operation group solves the source and the distribution part of supply an con-
sumption of electric energy, which utilises two dispensable potentials, namely the 
wind energy as the primary source and diesel-aggregates  as a secondary one.  
 
A meaningful part of the proposed consumption of electric energy, i.e. 20 - 25 kW 
can be covered by the wind aggregates. As long as the conditions on site will be as 
similar as on the Polish of H. Arctowski, station we may expect during the 
antarctic summer approx. 60% of exploitable wind velocities with a dispensable 
power 1400 kWh per 1 aggregate. 
 
We propose to use 8 wind aggregates with a nominal capacity 1 400 W each, 
which are able to secure 50 - 60 % of the seasonal consumption of electric energy. 
The wind aggregates will supply electric energy to the distribution system through 
a block of accumulators and converters and from there to the distribution systems 
3PEN AC 50Hz 230/400 V/TN-C, 3 NPE AC 230/400 V/TN-S and 2 DC 48 V. 
The distribution systems are separated, with respect to the type and importance of 
the appliances. 
  
      
 The accumulators of electric energy fulfil an important task in compensation the 
disproportion between the supply and consumption of the electric energy during 
the current operation. Under the conditions of a serious failure of supply of electric 
energy, the capacity of them after a full loading is designed for a full coverage of 
the expected average consumption for two hours  (i.e. in this case approx. 10 
kWh). The time 2 hours is considered sufficient for a remedy of current failure, 
refilling  of fuel into the tanks or start-up of the spare resource. With regard to its 
 
      
 
20 
properties, accumulators Ni-Cd with a nominal voltage 24 V are suggested.  
 
The whole supply system of electric energy is duplicated also by sources utilising 
liquid fuels so that energy is secured in case of an absolute fall out of the wind 
energy. As a source with a sufficiently stabile capacity 10 kW was preliminarily 
chosen an diesel-aggregate HONDA EXT 12 (2 pieces, one as 100 % reserve for 
extreme conditions) for low-solidifying oil, 3 x 230/400 V, fully body-supported, 
with a sound damper, with transport cart and a pull eye, with an automatic 
regulation and a remote start, total weight 380 kg. 
 
For an instant need of the mobile source of electric energy, portable sources with a 
manual starting-up, with capacities up to 6 kW  for petrol (which is not a problem 
in this case, as petrol must be in the store of fuels for the ship engines) will be 
used.  
 
 
A .3.2.1.2   Heat supply 
 
The expected and/or real consumption will decide on the production of heat.The 
calculated external temperature was chosen - 15 °C, by which the heat losses of the 
object are 8,4 kW. According to the meteorological data from the surrounding 
stations, the average temperature during the summer from beginning of November 
until the end of March oscillates around + 1,5 °C. If the average temperature inside 
the object will be 23 °C, the temperature difference to be covered by heating will 
be in average 21,5 K. This corresponds with an average heat loss 4,52 kW. Under 
such conditions, the consumption of the heat energy for heating within 120 
days of the Antarctic summer amounts 13 020 kWh. 
 
For heat supply, 3 independent sources are available, namely: 
- electric energy 
- solar equipment 
- heat pump 
 
Solar equipment is divided in 2 parts - a hot-water and a hot-air system. The 
first part is intended for to support the heating of the accommodation object, the 
system of which was preliminarily chosen as a hot-air one, so that the solar part 
will serve in the day-time for a preferential preheating of air, circulating through 
the hot-air heating system. The other way around, the hot-water part of the solar 
equipment is to be used preferably for preheating of the hot service water. 
 
 
      
 
21 
Thermal pump is an organic part of heating system of the accommodation object. 
The proposed capacity, sufficient for the needs of the heating system, is 9 kW. It 
forms the basic part of the heat source for heating the accommodation object. Its 
expected heating factor in the Antarctic conditions is estimated about 2,5, but in 
frosty days it will be lower. In the warmer days of the summer, it will be higher, 
thus. It is accepted to use as few as possible ecologically harmful heat carriers, i.e. 
R 134a,  R 407c and similar. Trough their utilisation, the consumption of the 
electric energy for heating will be reduced form originally assumed 13 020 kWh 
per season down to approx. 5 300 kWh per season (i.e. 41 %). On the same way, 
the consumption of fuel in the sources of electric energy could by lowered. In other 
words, by uniform occurrence of wind and a sufficient capacity of the 
accumulators the production of electric energy from the wind aggregates (7200 
kWh/season)  together with the solar energy could be sufficient for covering the 
need as well for heating by heat pump (5300 kWh only) as the one for heating-up 
the hot service water. 
 
 
 
A.3.2.1.3  Water supply 
 
In the station, the water will be used for: 
- drinking and hygienic needs ( max. 15 persons) 
- cooking ( 30 meals/day) 
- needs of the research (laboratories) 
- fire safety. 
 
Water for drinking and cooking will have a quality of a potable water. The water 
for laboratories will be prepared according to the requirements of the research. For 
hygienic needs, a bacterilogically unexceptionable service water will be  used. The 
source of water will be the existing stream. It is a water from the melting glacier, 
flowing by gravity down to the sea. 
 
The water will be transported to the station: 
a) by gravity from reservoir, if the configuration of the terrain will make it 
possible (recommended rise min. 15m) 
b) by pumping from the accumulation object. 
 
In the accumulation object, a mechanical pre-cleaning and settling of possible 
suspended solids will occur. For the gravity water supply, the necessary water 
 
      
 
22 
accumulation and a hygienic security of the water will be provided. The 
accumulation will serve as well for the external as for internal fire safety of the 
station. The water supply will be made of a PET pipes. In the lowest place, a 
desludging with a possibility of a full emptying of the line will be provided. 
 
By a permanent occupation of the station with 15 persons, the water need 
according the guideline 9/73 MLVH will be: 
Qd = 15,0 x 15 = 2 250 l/d   tj. 2,25 m3/d 
qaver. = 0,03 l/s 
qmax = 0,25 l/s 
 
 
A.3.2.1 4  Disposal of waste waters 
 
Sewage waste water - it is the waste water from the hygienic facilities and from 
the preparation of foods. The amount of waste water is given by the need of water 
and represents: 
 
 
Balance 
Q yearly  
 
Q daily  
 
q average 
 
q max 
 
m3 per year  
m3/d  
 
l/s 
 
 
l/s 
675 
 
 
2,25  
 
0,03  
 
0,25 
 
    It is a matter of current municipal waste waters. The balance of production of 
contaminants is calculated per one equivalent inhabitant (EI). For the calculation, 
15 EI are assumed in the station. 
 
By a daily water amount 2,25 m3/d, the production of contaminants is 
 
 
kg/d 
kg/year 
mg/l 
BOD5 
0,90 
270 
400 
DS 
0,83 
248 
367 
COD 
0,67 
203 
300 
pH 
 
6,0 – 8,0 
 
dissolved 
matter 
1,88 
563 
834 
N total 
0,18 
54 
80 
 
      
 
23 
P total 
0,02 
7 
10 
Where: 
BOD 5 – biological coefficient of oxygen                              N  -   nitrogen 
DS       -  disolve solids                                                            P  -   phosphorus 
COD    -  chemical coefficient of oxygen 
 
After the completion of the next project stage, the requirements will be corrected 
and completed and the project solution will be adapted.   
 
 
A.4   Conclusions from the reconnaissance on site 
 
In the course of February 2001, a reconnaissance was made on site, focused on: 
A.4.1 - appreciation of the particular locality of the station (of localisation of 
objects and  of conditions for construction), 
A.4 2 -  appreciation of the water source, 
A.4.3 -  informative estimation of the impacts on ambient.  
 
 
A.4.1  Appreciation of locality of the station 
 
The locality of the station has been considered directly in the terrain and the main 
object of the station was traced, which was shifted further from the coasts (on 
which the local fauna is concentrated) by approx. 65 m to the north, compared with 
the project. The site is conditionally suitable for the proposed type of building 
objects. 
From the point of view of a maximal need of solar radiation,  the main object was 
oriented towards the Sun. The construction position is documented by a 
topographic depiction with a fixation to distinct orientation points in the terrain 
(see  enclosure B.4). 
    The check of disembarkation conditions from the side of the western coast will 
be especially reviewed, still. 
 
 
A.4.2   Appreciation of water source 
 
For the needs of future station, the assumed water source in the place, where the 
main stream of the glacial brook passing along the construction site traverses little 
 
      
 
24 
rocky ridge east of the site, was checked with a positive result. In this place, it will 
be possible to arrange a level storage up to the service volume of approx. 1 m3 
water by a a small dam of the rocky material with a bottom provided with a sealing 
film.  
The water accumulation for setting-up the water taking is approx. 4-5 m higher 
than the construction site and approx. 170 m outside of it. The water inlet will be 
by gravity, ending in the object of the station by compressive station with a simple 
additional purification. 
  
The drainage of sewers will be provided in accordance with the needs directly into 
the sea. The sewerage pipeline, which will drain the sewers after crushing of solid 
components away, will be lead by gravity SW-wards to the so called western coast. 
The pipeline will end behind the low tide line, so that the sewers are diluted 
immediately. With regard to the amount, no special treatment is assumed. With 
respect to the possible pinnipedians moving around, the pipeline must be imbedded 
into a groove. 
 
 
A.4.3 Introducing estimation of environmental impact of the  
           construction 
 
After a visual inspection of the terrain and after a short monitoring the local fauna 
(pinnipedians) in the surrounding of the coast, the construction site was moved to a 
locality, where it will annoy the ambient as little as possible and which will be 
relatively safe against weather and water attacks. 
    From the point of view of the erection, the place is connecting to the 
disembarking coast almost on the level line so that the transport impacts can be 
minimised. This aspect will make itself felt also by transport needs in the future, 
during the operation of the station. 
    With regard to the expected traffic and localisation of the construction, the en-
vironmental impact will be minimal and its assumed effects will not exceed the 
limits, decreed in The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty.  
 
 
A.5    Initial data and information  
 
Map sources: 
 
      
 
25 
 5.1  A coarse map of Turret Point Peninsula K.G.I. South Shetland Islands 
        Project  of Antartic Conservation by Kenneth V. Blaiklock and Bernard    
Stonehouse according to mapping by Paulo and Tokarski (1982), 
 5.2  Kit of panoramatic photographs by Dr.Bernard Stonehouse, Scott Polar    
Reserch Institute,  University of Cambridge (1997), 
 5.3  Kit of photographs from the stay of a worker of Botanic institute of CAS 
(Czech Academy of Sciences) in Třeboň (1999), 
 5.4  Digital model of the terrain, processed by Dpt. of geography of Masaryk 
University Brno.   
 
Otherl sources: 
 5.5  Rakusa-Suszczewski, S., ed. (1993): The Maritime Coastal Ecosystem of   
Admiralty Bay. Dept. of Antarctic Biology PAS, Warsaw, 216 pp.  
5.6     Rakusa-Suszcewski, S. (1999): Ekosystem morskiej Antartyki (Ecosystem of 
Maritime Antarctica), PWN Warsaw, 136 pp. 
5.7   Reconnaissance results (will be utilised for completion of a production and   
assembly documetation, mainly). 
 
 
5.8   Waste disposal in the Antarctic, Report SCAR Panel of Experts (ATCM 
XIII4), Australian Antarctic Division 1989. 
5.9  The Protocol on Enviromental Protection to the Antactic Treaty (1991),   
Madrid, Reprint of SCAR Cambridge, May 1993, 67 pp. 
5.10 Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in  
Antarctica, SCAR , COMNAP, 1996 
 
Personal findings and information: 
5.11  The findings and experience gained by stays of workers of MU in Brno, 
Botanic institute of ČAV in Třeboň and others on the stations: H.Arctowski 
(Poland), Ferraz (Brasil), Belingshausen (Russia), PDTE. E. Frei (Chile) and 
the Machu Picchu (Peru). 
5.12   Findings obtained by the reconnaissance travel and by the stay of persons re-
sponsible for the project of station construction in the days 10.- 4.2.2001 
directly in the construction locality and by consultations on the bases in the 
area of Fieldes Peninsula. 
 
 
A.6   Environmental impact of the construction 
 
 
      
 
26 
A.6.1  Basic starting points of environment care 
 
The complex of the Czech scientific station on the Antarctica is designed with 
aspect to minimalization of its impact on the area ecosystem. The preparation and 
processing of the project respects at least The Protocol on Environmental 
Protection  to the Antarctic Treaty which was a result of a special consultation 
meeting SCAR and of the states of Antarctic treaty in Madrid on 3.- 4.10.1991. 
This so-called Madrid Protocol was signed by the representative of Foreign 
Ministry of the Czech Republic on 14.6.1962. 
By checking of environmental impacts of the station activities also the analyse of 
impacts of the anthropogenic influences in the region of Antarctic was taken into 
consideration, issued by SCAR and COMNAP in the year 1996 under the title 
Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from  Science and Operations  in  Antarctica  
 (see Part A.5 - Initial data and information). Beyond the analyse, this material 
brings also the monitoring program, which will be applied  by estimating the 
quality of activities of the stations and their environmental impact. 
By expected traffic of the station, the environmental care has two aspects. The 
main one is the conception of the station and the program of its exploitation, which 
is maximally respected by the conception of the station as seasonal object. In 
respect of energy, it is based on utilisation of available and really utilisable, 
renewable energy sources. This conception has for its subject partly to restrict the 
environmental impacts and partly to confirm the objectivity of the application of 
technical solutions for comparably demanding climatic conditions. The other 
important aspect is, that the station will not be operated in the winter periods, when 
the high energetic demands would lead to a massive consumption of liquid fuels. It 
is therefore realistic to assume, the overall environmental impact of the station will 
be minimised. 
 
 
A.6.2     Occurrence of wastes  
 
A.6.2.1  Wastes arisen by the construction of the station 
 
By the preparation of the site, wastes of two kinds will arise: 
a.  Wastes of the municipal kind in the assumed amount of approx. 300 kg,  
which will have to be filled into barrels ("hoboks") and either taken away 
from the Antarctic Treaty area by the transport of assemblers, or disposed in 
one of the permanent stations, 
 
      
 
27 
b.  Wastes arisen by own assembly and building activity. 
 
b.1. Building waste 
It is a matter of trimmings and dimension stocks of wooden materials which 
constitute the basic building material. By the production and the pre-assembly 
operations prior to dispatch, this amount will be optimised from the point of  
view of a maximal usability. The usable dimension stocks can be utilised for 
fabrication of waste bins or of shelves in containers, intended for operational 
utilisation etc. Proper parts of construction elements will also be stored for 
possible repairs etc.  
 
b.2. Wrapping materials 
The y will be of two kinds - wood and paper as safely disposable and PET 
foils. 
 
As regards the wooden wraps (boxes, pieces of wood etc.) their storing for 
later utilisation is intended. Card-boards and  PET foils will be sorted and can 
be utilised by additional fabrication of a heat insulation layer, e.g. for 
insulation of the inner walls of the containers. Unused wastes will be banded 
and deposited by maximal exploitation of the space and prepared for transport 
from the station. 
  
To secure the maximal exploitation of wrapping material on the spot is a 
presumption of a minimal hauling and of elimination of incineration in the 
phase of preparation for energising the station.  
 
The detailed amounts will be figured out in the next period of preparation, as 
soon as the questions of expedition will be clarified with the manufacturers 
and suppliers of individual components, objects and parts of the station. In 
principle, all proceedings will be realised in accordance with corresponding 
provisions of the Enclosure No. 3 of The Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
 
A.6.2.2   Wastes arisen by operation of the station 
 
 
      
 
28 
 For the reasons of estimation of their occurrence and of their disposal, the 
wastes arisen by operation of the station are divided as follows: 
 
 
A.6.2.2.1 Solid wastes 
 
 Solid wastes, having a character of a municipal waste, which will be sorted as 
combustible and non-combustible, as soon as during the collection. 
 
The mixed combustible waste, i.e. remains of bond paper, wrapping paper, 
wrapping foils of foodstuffs and consumables, PET bottles, PET wraps etc. will be  
separated and placed in designated boxes in the container.  
 
 In accordance with the requirement of the Madrid protocol, the non-combustible 
wastes, e.g. battery elements, glass, rubber etc. will be deposited in special boxes 
and prepared for concentrated  transport from the area. 
   
To this category also belong the ash matters from the incineration, which are 
considered a waste to be transported away from the area of Antarctic Treaty. 
 
The solid wastes, arisen during the research operations of the station, first of all 
those of the biological and physically-chemical laboratory, can be defined as 
unexceptionable, as long as we mean e.g. remains of biomass, which will be 
incinerated. 
 
The disposal of solid wastes in the station will be provided by an incineration 
process in a special equipment, placed in the object 002 Waste incineration plant in 
a direct connection to the main object of the station. 
 
The incineration cycle will be based on experience from a particular plant. 
According to the obtained information from other stations, we assume a cycle at 
intervals of 2 weeks with the amount of approx. 200 kg.  
 
In the space of the container, the collection and sorting of wastes into prepared 
bins will be done. The combustible wastes will be incinerated as mixed waste of a 
municipal type.  
 
    The proposal of incinerator was consulted with a specialised manufacturer 
TEAMTEC Norway, who suggests to use an incinerator of the type GOLAR 120 
 
      
 
29 
Marine  . 
 
The incineration plant consists of following four main parts: incineration chamber, 
electric control panel, exhauster of combustion gases and controller (damper) of 
exhaustion of waste gases . 
 
The atomising pressure burner Fremo of the type HF-210-R for vacuum 
incineration, modified for our purposes, has a capacity 5,7 kg/h. For special 
purposes and conditions, nozzles with other capacities and/or with an automatic 
program and a photoresistoric sensing can be delivered. 
  
This incineration equipment can incinerate all types of solid wastes, according to 
their heating value: 
Classified material     
17.270 kJ/kg (dry paper) 
Wastes of type II  
  9.901 kJ/kg 
 
The wastes of type II, of which this incineration equipment can process 200 l in 
one batch with a frequency 3 – 5 hours, are defined as follows: wastes consisting 
of roughly uniform mixture with moisture content up to 50% by weight and up to 
7% content of non-combustible residue. 
 
The high temperature in the combustion chamber (in some areas up to 1400 oC) 
secures a smokeless and full combustion. 
 
The solid wastes in the gas stream get neutralised (disposed) by the burner so that 
the process is ecologically safe. As soon as the waste gases pass the zone of the 
burner, they get mixed with the cooling air prior to the exhauster of spent gases 
and leave the plant through a chimney. 
 
The wastes should be prepared to a heating value of approx. 10 000 kJ/kg. For the 
mixing an informative manual will be prepared for the operators, so that the 
combustion process proceeds perfectly with a consumption of support fuel (diesel 
oil) as small as possible. 
 
The incinerator is completed with boxes for sorting of wastes into groups: 
combustible, glass, plastics, metals, rubber, AKU batteries. 
 
The non-combustible wastes will be prepared for safe adjustment for transport 
away from the Antarctic area. For the transport, the sorting of the wastes according 
 
      
 
30 
to SCAR is crucial. 
 
It is assumed that those wastes, for which such a way of disposal will be pre-
scribed by the plan of waste management, will be concentrated in PE transport 
barrels with a closure. After a filling up to the manipulation weight, they will be 
put on ship and shipped to a country, where their disposal will be executed. 
 
With regard to the distance from Europe, a contractual treatment in one of the 
South-American ports. 
 
 
A.6.2.2.2 Liquid wastes 
 
The standard liquid wastes like domestic sewers in a maximal amount of roughly 
2,5  m3 will be drained directly into the sea. Further liquid wastes will consist of: 
 
-  physically-chemical solutions from laboratory works. The kind of those wastes 
will be specific, according to the types of carried out laboratory works. It is 
assumed, that for picked laboratory works, which come in question and which will 
be accompanied by such wastes, the expected amount, the way of primary 
neutralisation (if necessary) and the way of their wrapping, adjustment and placing 
into trans-port box of them will be specified.    
 
- liquid fuels from oil products which can be from the point of view of expected 
occurrence mainly used oils from engines or foreshots from fuel transfuses. The 
will be collected in separated kinds of canisters and returned to the supply ship 
either for incineration outside of the area of Antarctic Treaty or for application in 
the fuels for ship engines. 
 
 
A.6.2.2.3.  Gaseous wastes 
 
They will consist of:   
- exhaust gases of diesel-electric aggregates the amount of which in the objective 
case are to be possibly minimised by utilisation of renewable energy sources, 
-  combustion gases, rising during the disposal of solid combustible wastes from 
the operation of the station. 
  
With respect to the complex solution of the energy management and to the extent 
 
      
 
31 
of activities the occurrence of gaseous wastes can be defined as less meaningful .  
 
  
A.6.3      Plan of waste management 
 
Further to the regulations which are being prepared on an initiative of SCAR, the 
procedure for waste management will be elaborated. 
  
In accordance with the Article 8, Enclosure No. 3 of Madrid protocol, the plan will 
be processed in the next project stage and it will observe following structure and 
categorisation of wastes: 
    Group 1.  Sewers and domestic liquid wastes, 
    Group 2.  Other liquid wastes and chemicals incl. driving fuels and lubricants, 
    Group 3.  Solid substances, intended for incineration, 
    Group 4.  Other solid wastes. 
 
Pursuant to this structure, a realistic production of wastes will be gradually 
quantified in the next stages of preparation. The production should be monitored 
during the first working season and evaluated according to the conditions 
mentioned in the Enclosure No. 3 of Protocol and to the expected requirements.  
    A technical solution of particular waste producing systems is described in the 
corresponding items, incl. a proposal for their disposal .  
 
  
A.7.   Conclusion     
 
The project of the Czech Antarctic station is the output of several years en-deavour 
of that part of the Czech scientific community, which is engaged in the problems of 
the polar environments for a number of years and which achieved respected results 
in some branches of the basic research of those areas. 
The target of the station is to create conditions for further work, which would 
enable a deeper integration of the Czech science into the international reasearch 
activities. 
 
The project proposal draws the station as a possibly most optimal ecological 
system, which should answer with its technical solution the question for the 
possibilities of general systematic influence on permanently sustainable live 
development. 
 
      
 
32 
 
 
Brno,  May  2001                Submitted by :      Prof. Dr. Pavel  Prošek  
                                                                               project manager 
                                                                             Dept. of Geography 
                                                                              Faculty of Science 
                                                                         Masaryk University Brno 
 
                                                                              Ing. Alois Suchánek 
                                                                                  chief designer 
                                                                           INVESTPROJEKT, Ltd. 
                                                                                         Zlín 
 
 
       B.     Graphic enclosures 
 
         B.1   Map of King George Island (with marking of  Turret Point) 
 
         B.2   Schematic map of  Turret  Point 
 
         B.3   Turret Point – digital model of terrain 
  
         B.4   Building plan of the station 
 
         B.5a - c   Solution of the operation bulding 
 
         B.6a - b   Schematic solution of selected container objects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
