 
1.2. 
 
IV CEP  
Information Paper IP-67 
Agenda Item 4g 
Poland 
Original: English 
 
 
 
Importance of south-eastern shores of King George Island 
for the biodiversity of this region 
 
Concentration of siting of stations on King George Island 
As stated in the Antarctic Treaty Handbook (1990, part 2, 2.1.3 Siting of stations) "...The 
South Shetlands, being the easiest place to get to in the Antarctic Treat Area, has attracted 
a large number of Antarctic scientific stations. This relative concentration of stations has 
given rise to questions of environmental consequences, scientific productivity and the need 
for cooperation...".  
The concentration of stations is particularly high on the King George Island, the largest 
island of the South Shetland Archipelago. There are currently 11 stations located on the 
King George Island, which were listed below in an alphabetical order: 
1. 
Arctowski, Poland,  
 
 
 
 
year-round station 
2. 
Artigas, Uruguay,  
 
 
 
 
year-round station  
3. 
Bellingshausen, Russia,   
 
 
 
year-round station  
4. 
Eduardo Frei, Chile,  
 
 
 
 
year-round station 
5. 
Teniente Marsh, Chile,   
 
 
 
year-round station 
6. 
Ferraz, Brazil,  
 
 
 
 
 
year-round station 
7. 
Great Wall, Chinese People's Republic,  
 
year-round station 
8. 
Jubany, Argentina and Dalman, Germany,  
 
year-round station 
9. 
King Sejong, South Korea,  
 
 
 
year-round station 
10. 
Machu Picchu, Peru. 
 
 
 
 
summer station 
11. 
Peter Lennie, United States of America,  
 
summer station  
and a few refuges of: Argentine, Chile, Czech Republic, Equador and Poland. 
 
 
2
The above stations occupy two of the three large bays of the southern side of King George 
Island. These stations are located in the: Maxwell Bay, Marion Cove, Potter Cove and 
Admiralty Bay which are all on the western part, and on the Bransfield Strait side of the 
island. 
 
The Protected Areas on King George Island 
King George Island has a richness of diverse biota and geological features and therefore is 
an object of keen interest of many scientist, and also tourists. There are currently four Sites 
of Special Scientific Interest on the southern part of King George Island (No's 5, 8, 13, 34) 
(Map B XII SATCM/WP9) and one in its close vicinity on the Ardley Island (No. 33).  
The SSSI No. 5 is located on Fildes Peninsula on the western side of Maxwell Bay, in the 
proximity of the Chilean, Russian, and Chinese stations. It was designated to protect the 
unique fossil sites and geological research.  
The SSSI No. 13 is located on the eastern side of Maxwell Bay, next to Potter Cove where 
the Argentinean - German station is located. The reason for its designation was to protect 
the diverse fauna and rich vegetation. There are large breeding colonies of Southern 
elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) within this SSSI. It is also visited by Antarctic fur seals 
(Arctocephalus gazella).  
The SSSI No. 33 comprises the entire Ardley Island located next to the Fildes Peninsula, 
on the western side of the Maxwell Bay. This is the site of exceptional biological interest 
with the largest in the area colony of Gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua).  
Two SSSIs: No. 8 and 34, were designated after the proposal by Poland, and their 
management plans were recently accepted by the SATCM in Hague (XII SATCM/WP9, 
XII SATCM/WP10). SSSI No. 8 is located in the vicinity of the Polish Antarctic Station 
Henryk Arctowski, on the western shore of Admiralty Bay. The US summer station P. 
Lennie lays within the boundaries of this SSSI. Numerous scientific programs have been 
run here for the last 25 years by Polish, American, Brazilian, Canadian, German, 
Netherlands, Russian, Belgian, Hungarian, Czech and other nation scientists with the 
support of the Arctowski Station. 
SSSI No. 34 is located on the Lions Rump in the King George Bay. It lays away from any 
station and their activities, moreover it has been established as a reference point for the 
intensively studied and under anthropogenic influence SSSI No. 8. Rare visits to SSSI No. 
 
 
3
34 aim to continue a long-term monitoring which will enable comparison of the two areas 
(Ciaputa and Sierakowski 1999). 
Additionally, jointly proposed by Brazil and Poland, in co-ordination with Ecuador and 
Peru, area within the glacial drainage basin of Admiralty Bay as well as part of the present 
SSSI No. 8 was designated as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA). The purpose of 
ASMA is to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities within this area, avoid 
possible conflicts, improve co-operation between ATCPs and minimise environmental 
impacts. The Management Plan for the area was voluntarily adopted by the ATCPs at the 
ATCM XX (Utrecht, 1996). 
 
Need to protect the south-eastern shore of King George Island 
The Antarctic Treaty together with the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty, encapsulate a set of environmental standards for all parties undertaking 
activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The aim of the above was to protect the 
environment from any harmful interference including a cumulative effect of stations' 
functioning and tourism. The southern shore of the King George Island is already a very 
crowded Antarctic location. The cumulation of stations in this area threatens the local 
ecosystem and its equilibrium. One of the first changes that should be avoided is a 
desertion of the area by birds and true and fur seals, keeping in mind shortage of breeding 
and moulting ice-free areas in Antarctica. The southern shore of King George Island is a 
particularly important site for breeding, moulting and resting seals, whilst the northern 
shore is used mostly by birds (Jabłoński 1984). Therefore the Polish initiative has been 
going towards the protection of this vulnerable area, and in the last uninhabited large bay 
of the King George Island - King George Bay - the SSSI No. 34 was designated.  
Yet there are still areas of unique value that are unprotected. In King George Bay there is 
one more priceless site - the Penguin Island. Penguin Island is located 50 m from the 
Turret Point, at the side of the King George Bay which is opposite to the SSSI No. 34. It is 
unique from both: geological and biological points of view. Penguin Island was formed by 
a volcanic activity and the two craters are still well defined with one of them transformed 
to a lake (Rakusa-Suszczewski and Lipski 1980). The island has large colonies of Southern 
Giant Petrels (Macronectes giganteus) whose populations in Antarctica are declining. This 
decline in was attributed to the cumulative effect of presence of numerous stations and 
 
 
4
tourism (XII SATCM/IP22). As the name suggests there are large colonies of Pygoscelid 
penguins on Penguin Island: Adelie (Pygoscelis adeliae) and chinstrap (P. antarctica) (Jabłoński 
1984). The shore of King George Island adjacent to Penguin Island is a site where 
numerous Elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), and Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) 
were observed.  
Both on the Penguin Island and on the shore of King George Bay there are well developed 
communities of plants: lichens and grass which are vulnerable to trampling. 
On the North - East tip of King George Island Cape Melville is located. This is a site of 
particular interest to geologists with the pre-quaternary fossiliferous glaciomarine deposits 
Birkenmajer 1982). 
Conclusion 
We suggest that in order to protect the already designated areas of SSSI; for the unique 
value of the region itself, its fauna and flora; to avoid the overcrowding of the King 
George Island with new stations; and to control in a more comprehensive way the tourist 
operations in the area; there is need for specially careful consideration of any activities in 
the area of south-eastern shore of King George Island. 
References 
Antarctic Treaty Handbook 1990. part 2, 2.1.3 Siting of stations: 2111-2113 
ASOC 2000. An evaluation of progress towards implementation of the Madrid Protocol.. XII 
Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Hague. XII SATCM/IP22. 
Birkenmajer K. 1980. Age of the Penguin Island volcano, South Shetland Islands (west 
Antarctica), by lichenometric method. - Bull. Acad. Pol. Sci., Terre, 27: 69-76. 
Birkenmajer K. 1982. Pre-Quaternary fossiliferous glaciomarine deposits at Cape Melville, King 
George Island (South Shetland Islands, West Antarctica). - Bull. Acad. Pol. Sci., Terre, 29: 
331-340. 
Ciaputa P. and Sierakowski K. 1999. Long -term population changes of Adelie, chinstrap, and 
gentoo penguins in the regions of SSSI No.8 and SSSI No.34, King George Island, 
Antarctica. Pol. Polar Res. 20 (4): 355-365. 
Poland 2000. Management plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 34. XII Special Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting in Hague. XII SATCM/ WP10. 
Poland 2000. Management plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 8. XII Special Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting in Hague. XII SATCM/ WP9.  
Rakusa-Suszczewski S. and Lipski M. 1980. A new lake type on Penguin Island, South Shetlands. 
Pol. Arch. Hydrobiol. 27 (2): 253-257. 
