 
 
 
 
-15 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-19  
Agenda Item 4g 
New Zealand 
Original: English 
 
 
 
AIDE MEMOIRE 
 
 
The Balleny Islands and its surrounding marine area is a site of outstanding biodiversity 
both within the Ross Sea region and in the circumpolar context.  The Balleny Islands 
area contains special values which New Zealand believes are worthy of protection.  The 
area is highly significant ecologically and contains examples of unique terrestrial and 
marine communities and ecosystems.  New Zealand seeks to develop a form of 
protection that: 
 
• 
Preserves the unique marine and terrestrial habitats, ecosystems and species from 
impacts arising from human activities; 
• 
Maintains biodiversity, genetic resources and the integrity of ecosystems; 
• 
Protects the intrinsic values and uniqueness of the area, including aesthetic and 
wilderness values; 
• 
Provides for the preservation of an area not modified by human impact as a 
potential baseline for scientific studies and environmental monitoring. 
Over the past 3 years, New Zealand has put forward various proposals to achieve such 
protection through meetings of both the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP 
at ATCM) and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine 
Resources (CCAMLR).   
 
In both ATCM and CCAMLR forums, Treaty Parties have recognised that the Balleny 
Islands contain values worthy of protection. Most recently, CCAMLR has asked for 
more work to explore appropriate measures of protection for marine areas and in the 
meantime has prohibited toothfishing within 10 nm of the Ballenys Islands (CM 
210/XIX).  New Zealand’s proposals have not yet achieved consensus support and the 
process for designating marine protection within the Antarctic Treaty System is not 
clearly established. 
 
New Zealand seeks to work co-operatively with other Treaty Parties to:  
 
• 
Further describe the values to be protected and the risks that threaten those 
values; 
• 
Develop a consensus about how best to protect the area around the Balleny 
Islands; 
• 
Establish protection consistent with the objectives of CCAMLR; 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
-15 
• 
Establish protection which recognises the legitimacy of other normal activities 
(such as scientific research, free passage for shipping, and other activities 
undertaken consistent with international law). 
New Zealand hopes that through a fully consultative process a new proposal which 
represents the best method of protecting the important values of the Balleny Islands 
would be developed for future presentation to CCAMLR.  New Zealand also supports 
continued work on the processes for designating marine areas under both the CCAMLR 
and the Environmental Protocol regimes. 
 
Further information may be obtained from the New Zealand Co-ordinator: Emma 
Waterhouse, 
Environmental 
Manager, 
Antarctica 
New 
Zealand, 
(e.waterhouse@antarcticanz.govt.nz). 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade  
WELLINGTON 
27 June 2001 
 
 
 
 
