 
 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-8  
Agenda Item 4a) 
Netherlands 
Original: English 
 
ANNUAL REPORT UNDER THE PROTOCOL  
ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
 
The Netherlands 
2000/2001 SEASON 
 
1. Notification pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty 
 
1.1 Notification of the measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs 1 and 2, of 
the Protocol 
 
a) The legislation 
 
The Wet bescherming Antarctica of 5 March 1998 provides for the protection of the Antarctic 
environment with rules to implement the Protocol on Environmental protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. The Decree on the protection of Antarctica of 26 August 1998 (see also 
XXII ATCM/IP33) provides the procedure for permit applications under the Act. The Act was 
translated into English as the Protection of Antarctica Act and, accompanied by an 
explanatory memorandum, was circulated during the XXII ATCM, Norway (1998)/IP 31 and 
IP 32. Although the Act and the Decree were drawn up in 1998, it was not possible for the 
Netherlands to implement this regulation at the time. The Act was the first Dutch legislation 
on activities in Antarctica, and preparations for effective implementation of the rules required 
considerable effort. On 16 January 2000 the Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the 
Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries mandated 
LASER, a Ministry of Agriculture agency, to undertake the implementation of the Act 
(including the issuance of permits). The Act and the Decree came into force on 1 April 2001. 
 
On 2 November 2000 the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment and the 
Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries officially approved the application 
form for a permit under the Act. This application form was published in the Official Gazette 
of 6 December 2000 and was also translated into English. (See Annex). 
 
This year one permit was issued to a Dutch researcher travelling to Antarctica on a German 
research ship. The Dutch permit was issued in addition to the permit issued by the German 
Government for the ship. 
 
 
 
Adaptation of the relevant maritime legislation to ensure implementation of Annex IV to the 
Protocol - Prevention of Marine Pollution- is in an advanced stage of preparation.  
 
b) Interim procedure for the 2000/2001 season 
 
While preparing for the introduction of the Act and in order to implement article 13, section 2 
of the Protocol of the Environmental Protection, an initiative was taken to prevent any 
negative impacts on the Antarctic environment from activities in Antarctica in the mean time. 
Organisers of activities in Antarctica which took place before 1 April 2001 were requested, on 
a voluntary basis, to sign a declaration of intent. This was co-ordinated by LASER. The 
purpose of this declaration of intent was threefold: 
• Firstly  the organiser was made aware of the effects that the activities could have; 
• Secondly the organiser declared that in anticipation of the introduction of the Act, he or 
she would commit himself or herself  to causing as little damage as possible to the 
Antarctic environment, by adhering  to the provisions included in the declaration of intent; 
• Thirdly the organiser received an official confirmation of this intention.  The declaration 
would be countersigned by the Director of International Environmental Policy of the 
Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment. 
 
The relevant scientific institutes and a number of travel organisations which organise the trips 
to Antarctica were informed of the interim procedure and of the obligation to apply for a 
permit after 1 April 2001 when the Act came into force. 
 
c) Other instruments (e.g. education, self regulation) 
 
LASER published a brochure entitled Dutch Antarctic Legislation, which includes an outline 
of the Antarctic Treaty System and the consequences of this legislation for those who want to 
organise or participate in Antarctic activities. The brochures are available for everyone 
concerned. 
 
The Guidance for visitors to the Antarctic as adopted in the Antarctic Treaty Meeting in Kyoto 
in 1994 is included in the brochure. For general information about Antarctica and tourist 
activities, references to the CEP- and IAATO-websites are included.  
 
d) Supervision and enforcement 
 
Under sections 27-29 of the Act it is possible for the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning 
and the Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries to 
charge civil servants with enforcing the provisions laid down by the Act. The actual 
inspections by Dutch officials will take place sporadically. The Act imposes an obligation to 
lend every assistance to international observers.         
 
e) Co-operation (article 6 of the Environmental Protocol) 
 
Research on Antarctica is usually performed in cooperative ventures between various Dutch 
university research schools and Dutch and foreign research institutes. For example in the year 
2000 the Netherlands continued to contribute successfully to the European Project for Ice 
Coring in Antarctica (EPICA). This was carried out by the Institute for Marine and 
 
 
Atmospheric Research (IMAU) of Utrecht University, the Institute for Earth Sciences and the 
Free University of Amsterdam (VU).  
Other projects were a British -Dutch program on the “Biotic responses to UV-B radiations in 
Antarctica” at Rothera Base and a project on “A historical molecular record of Holocene 
environmental changes from Antarctic sediments of stratified fjords and lakes” carried out by 
the NIOZ and the SCIRO Marine Resarch from Tasmania, Australia at Ace Lake.         
 
1.2  Contingency plans drawn up in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol 
 
As the Netherlands does not operate a research station in Antarctica, contingency plans in 
accordance with Article 15 are not necessary. For activities involving ships, in line with the 
Protocol and the relevant IMO regulations, a contingency plan is required under the permit. 
As only one permit was issued, and it concerned activity on a German ship, no contingency 
plan was issued. 
 
2. Report pursuant to Annex I, Article 6 (1) of the Environmental Protocol 
 
2.1 Procedures for considering the environmental impacts of proposed activities in 
Antarctica (Annex I, Article 6 (1a)) 
 
The implementation of  the provisions of the Protocol on environmental impact assessment 
for activities which are not likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact are covered 
by the requirements with regard to the permit application.   
 
If LASER determines that the activity may proceed, a draft of the permit is prepared. An 
official notification of the provisional decision is published in the Official Gazette and in a 
national newspaper, giving the parties concerned the opportunity to submit objections to the 
provisional decision. The whole procedure for such a permit takes approximately 6 months.    
 
The comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) set out in Annex I of the Environmental 
Protocol is very similar to the environmental impact assessment (EIA) embodied in the Dutch 
Environmental Management Act of 1993. The procedures of this law can therefore be 
followed in case of  activities that are likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on 
the Antarctic environment.  
 
After presenting the declaration of intent with a brief description of the proposed activity by 
the proponent, and after a public consultation period of 4 weeks, the competent authority 
draws up the guidelines which define the environmental effects and alternatives to be 
discussed in the environmental impact statement (EIS). The proponent is responsible for 
drawing up the EIS. As soon as the EIS is ready, the proponent sends it with the permit 
request to the competent authority. The procedure given in Annex I, article 3 (3) and 3 (4) of 
the Environmental Protocol will then be followed.  
 
2.2 List of Initial Environmental Evaluations developed in accordance with Article 2 and 
decisions taken (Annex I, Article 6 (1b) and also ATCM Resolution 6 (1995))  
 
If the assessment of an initial environmental evaluation, which should be added to the 
application form of the permit, indicates that a proposed activity is likely to have no more than 
 
 
a minor or transitory impact, a final check will take place according to the permit procedure to 
see if the activity can take place and under which conditions. As the Dutch Act did not come 
into force before 1 April 2001 only one permit was granted. With regard to activities that took 
place before the Protection of Antarctica Act came into force, preliminary assessments (PA) 
were carried out after which the letters of intent were signed by the Government. 
 
During the 2000/2001 season, the following Initial Environmental Evaluations were prepared 
in accordance with Annex I, Article 2, of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty.  
 
Date of 
IEE 
 
Brief description of 
the Development or 
Activity 
Location of 
activity 
Organisation  Decision taken 
following 
consideration of 
the EIA 
 
  
21/11/00 
 and 
15/2/01 
 
Scientific research on the 
Antarctic food web of top 
predators (seabirds,etc)  
 
Near Margaritha Bay  
(western side of 
Antarctic Peninsula) 
 
Alterra BV 
J.A. van 
Franeker 
 
Permit 
Date of  
Prelim. 
Assess-
ment 
(PA) 
Brief description of 
the Development or 
Activity 
Location of 
activity 
Organisation  Decision taken 
following 
consideration of  
PA (before Act 
came into force ) 
6/10/00 
 
6/10/00 
21/11/00 
21/11/00 
 
Adventure expedition 
 
 
Tourist Activity with old 
sailing ship (Bark Europa) 
 
Scientific research; 
Epica  
Tourist Activities  
 
 
 
 
From Patriot Hills to 
South Pole and back  
 
From Ushuaia to 
Ushuaia 
 
Dronning Maudland 
 
From Ushuaia to 
Ushuaia Wendell 
Sea/Antarctic Peninsula 
and from Ushuaia to 
Cape Town  
Sasquatch 
 
 
Smit Tall Ship  
BV 
 
IMAU 
 
Oceanwide 
Expeditions  
 
Signing Letter of 
Intent 
 
Signing Letter of 
Intent 
 
Signing Letter of 
Intent 
Signing Letter of 
Intent  
 
 
 
2.3 Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, from 
procedures put in place in accordance with Annex I, Articles 2(2) and 5, of the Protocol 
(Annex I, Article 6 (1c)) 
 
During the 2000/2001 season, no significant information was obtained from monitoring 
procedures put in place in accordance with the provisions of Annex I. 
 
 
 
2.4  Information referred to in Article 3 (6) on Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluations (Annex I, Article 6 (1d)) 
 
During the 2000/2001 season, no draft CEEs or final CEEs were prepared for Dutch 
activities in Antarctica. 
3.  
Report pursuant to Annex II, Article 6 of the Environmental Protocol 
 
3.1 
Number and nature of permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol during the 
1999/2000 season (Annex II, Article 6 (2) of the Protocol) 
 
The following permits were issued under Annex II of the Protocol during the  2000/2001 
season.  
 
Date  
issued 
Species 
Location 
Purpose 
Number/ Amount 
Actually taken 
23-2-01 
seabirds and 
seals 
Margaritha 
Bay 
Research on the Antarctic 
food web of top predators 
by  J.A. van Franeker. 
Counting of seals from 
helicopter and research on 
stomachcontent of seabirds, who 
where captured and set free.   
 
4. Report pursuant to Annex III, Article 9 of the Environmental Protocol 
Waste Management Plans Prepared in Accordance with Annex III 
 
As the Netherlands does not operate a research station in Antarctica, no waste management 
plans in accordance with Annex III, article 9 of the Protocol were made.  A waste 
management plan is required for a permit. However, as the one permit issued concerned 
activity on a German ship, a waste plan was noet necessary.  Dutch tourist activities to 
Antarctica by ship in 2000 according to their declaration of intent stored their waste in 
containers and delivered the waste at Ushuaia.   
 
5. 
Report pursuant to Annex V, Article 10 of the Environmental Protocol 
 
5.1 Number and nature of permits issued under Annex V of the Protocol during the 
1999/2000 season (Annex V, Article 10 (2) of the Protocol) 
 
No permits under the Dutch legislation implementing Annex V (see under 5.3) were issued for 
the 2000/2001 season. 
 
5.2 Summary descriptions of activities conducted in ASMA or ASPA (Annex V, Article 
10 (3) of the Protocol) 
 
During the 1999/2000 season, no activities were undertaken in areas designated as 
SSSI’s/ASPAs or ASMAs. 
 
5.3 Measures taken to implement the provisions of Annex V (Annex V, Article 10 (4) of 
the Protocol) 
        
The Act requires one single permit to cover all activities in Antarctica; there are no 
separate permit requirements for certain activities, such as entry into Antarctic Special 
 
 
Protection Areas. The Act does however recognise the internationally agreed Antarctic 
Special Protection Areas (ASPAs). Consequently, on the basis of Article 15, g, extra 
provisions can be included, if for example if the permit concerns an activity for which the 
entry into a Special Protection Area is permitted. The Netherlands did not conducted any 
inspections in SSSIs/ASPAs or ASMAs. 
