CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-16  
Agenda Item 4a) 
Sweden 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental exchange program 
between Sweden and Australia 
November – December 2000 
SUBMITTED BY 
SWEDEN AND 
AUSTRALIA 
Introduction 
 
In November – December 2000 Anders Modig, Environmental Officer at the Swedish Polar 
Research Secretariat (SPRS), visited Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and participated in 
a voyage which visited a number of Australian bases and field camps. The reason for the visit 
is a part of what could be called ”exchange of environmental experience”. Article 6 in The 
Antarctic Treaty states: ”The Parties shall co-operate in the planning and conduct of activities 
in the Antarctic Treaty area.  To this end, each Party shall endeavour to ... promote co-
operative programmes of scientific, technical and educational value, concerning the protection 
of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.” Article 9, Annex III 
states that ”The Parties may exchange information and provide advice on, inter alia, available 
low waste technologies, reconversion of existing installations, special requirements for efflu-
ents, and appropriate disposal and discharge methods.” 
 
As a consequence of this, it is important that experience and knowledge in environmental is-
sues are exchanged between parties. To participate in other parties programs and visit other 
parties’ stations is a useful and efficient method for exchanging experience. At earlier occa-
sions similar exchange has been performed between i.e. USA and Argentina and between 
Australia and Argentina. Australia and Sweden have discussed an exchange for a while and 
the austral summer 2000/2001 this exchange program started with the Environmental Officer 
in the Swedish Polar Research Secretariat visiting the headquarter for Australian Antarctic 
Division and participated in a voyage to a number of Australian bases. This information paper 
is aimed at informing about this exchange and hopefully inspires more exchange programs to 
be performed. 
 
 
Exchange program 
 
Initially some time was spent at the AAD headquarter in Kingston, Tasmania, before the voy-
age. During this time a number of meetings were organised, which gave good opportunities 
for exchange of experience and knowledge, regarding i.e. environmental impact assessments, 
environmental management, management plans, project applications, mapping/GIS, human 
impact studies, logistics, etc. A seminar was held for personnel at AAD about Swedish polar 
activities, with the focus on Antarctic activities. 
 
During the voyage two large stations (Mawson and Davis), one small station (Atlas Cove at 
Heard Island), one field hut (Bandits Hut at Davis) and one large fuel depot (Samson Island) 
were visited and of course the ship (Aurora Australis). At each location pre-selected types of 
information were collected (where applicable). 
 
 
The outcome 
 
The exchange program does so far consist of Sweden visited AAD in Australia and Australian 
bases in Antarctica. The next step is Australia visiting the two Swedish bases in Antarctica 
and/or SPRS in Sweden, which is planned to occur in a near future. 
 
There is no doubt that it is very useful and rewarding to visit other parties organisations, and 
stations in Antarctica, and to experience different solutions on waste management, energy 
sources, etc. The Australian stations are larger than the Swedish stations and managed in a 
different way, but there are still many similarities. The visits, which included guided tours 
around visited stations, gave many good opportunities for discussions and exchange of expe-
rience. 
 
A report was written and will soon be available on the internet at www.polar.se. 
