 
 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-48  
AGENDA ITEM 4C 
Russia 
Original: English 
 
 
Nature Protection Measures at the Russian Antarctic stations 
(XXIV ATCM, July 9-2001, IP, submitted by the Russian Federation) 
 
The nature protection measures undertaken at the Russian Antarctic stations are determined 
by the strategy and long-term planning of RAE activity in respect of nature protection set 
forth in the Subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” of the Federal Program 
“World Ocean”. The “Environmental Protection” direction of the Subprogram presents a 
comprehensive approach for a successful introduction and implementation of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
The measures on waste management in 2000 comprised an arrangement of a continuous 
process of the disposal of waste of ongoing activities and an assessment of the scope of the 
forthcoming nature protection measures to liquidate the consequences of the past activity of 
the stations.  
 
In 2000-2001, nature protection efforts were continued including the assessment and 
preventive activities under the long-term program of environmental improvement. 
 
During the expedition period of the 46th RAE (2000-2001), the following wastes were 
removed from the Antarctic with the assistance of the research expedition vessel the 
“Akademik Fedorov”: 
- 
 
- 
From MIRNY station - used equipment and empty gas cylinders – a total of 72.4 tons. 
- 
From PROGRESS station - 59 drums of below-standard aviation-kerosene, 55 drums of 
below-standard gasoline – a total of 22,800 liters of hydrocarbons. 
- 
From MOLODEZHNAYA station - 8 tons of unused equipment and materials. 
- 
From NOVOLAZAREVSKAYA station - 7 units of damaged transport vehicles with a 
total weight of 130 tons. 
 
The work at the BELLINGSHAUSEN station is actively underway. Beginning from 1998, the 
British non-governmental ecological organizations “One Step Beyond Expedition” 
participates in these nature protection activities supplying the necessary materials and 
equipment. The first priority nature protection activities at the Bellingshausen station 
including cleaning the territory of the station and removal of the accumulated waste from the 
Antarctic is to be completely finished prior to 2002.  
 
During the reporting period, in accordance with the Protocol requirements and based on 
experience of other national Antarctic Expeditions, the general procedures of the “Planning of 
waste management at the Russian Antarctic stations and vessels” were developed. The waste 
management plans for all RAE stations and field bases will be introduced into practice instead 
of the obsolete instructions before 2002. 
