 
 
CEP IV 
Information Paper IP-46  
AGENDA ITEM 4A 
Russia 
Original: English 
 
 
 
Report of the Russian Federation on implementing the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (in compliance with Article 17) 
(XXIV ATCM, 9-20 July, ID, submitted by the Russian Federation) 
 
PROTOCOL on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
1. Legal and administrative actions to provide observance of the Protocol 
Since 1977, the Russian Federation has issued the following documents to ensure the 
observance of the present Protocol: 
- 
Federal Law on ratification of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty (May 24, 1997, No. 79-F3). 
- 
Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation of December 18, 1997 No. 
1580 “On ensuring the implementation of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty”  
In accordance with this Decision, the Federal Service of Russia for Hydrometeorology 
and Environmental Monitoring (Roshydromet) was entrusted with the functions for ensuring 
the coordination and organization of work of the Federal executive bodies on fulfilling the 
obligations of the Russian Federation. Roshydromet was authorized to issue permits for the 
activity in the Antarctic for the Russian individual persons and legal entities as agreed with a 
number of Ministries and Agencies based on the Conclusion of Environmental Impact 
Assessment of this activity in the Antarctic and on the dependent and associated ecosystems. 
The Government of the Russian Federation requested Roshydromet and other interested 
federal executive bodies to develop a draft procedure for issuing permits. 
- 
Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation of December 11, 1998 No. 
1476 “ On the adoption of the Procedure for consideration and issuance of 
permits for activities of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area”. 
This Decision served as a further step in the implementation of the Protocol. The 
adopted Procedure determines the terms necessary to obtain a permit for the proposed 
activity; processing of applications and the necessary documents for the activity including an 
environmental impact assessment; control for observance of the requirements to the activity in 
the course of its fulfillment and penalties. 
- 
Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation of May 10, 1999 No. 518 
“On the Recommendations and Measures adopted by the Consultative Meetings of 
the States-Participants to the Antarctic Treaty”.  
The government of the Russian Federation has approved the Recommendations and 
Measures adopted at the XV-XXI Consultative Meetings of the States-Participants to the 
Antarctic Treaty  of 1959 aimed at the practical  implementation of the principles and goals of 
the Treaty. 
 
 
- 
Order of Roshydromet of December 7, 1999 No. 139 on adoption of the normative 
documents for considering the applications for activity of the Russian individual 
persons and legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area and conclusions on them. 
This package of documents contains: 
- 
Application to obtain a permit for the activity in the Antarctic. 
- 
List of evidence to be included to the data on the impact assessment of the activity 
planned. 
- 
Provision about the Commission on the consideration of applications for activity 
and issuance of conclusions on them. 
- 
Regulations of the Commission on the consideration of applications for activity of 
the Russian individual persons and physical entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.   
- 
Procedure for restriction and suspension of the permits for activity. 
- 
Provision on the order of designating observers of the activity and fulfilling the 
functions they are entrusted with. 
- 
Provision on the order of designating responsible representatives of the Russian 
Federation and fulfilling the responsibilities they are entrusted with. 
- 
Permit form.  
Handbooks, instructions and other normative documents on the activity in the 
Antarctic are currently being developed in accordance with the aforementioned adopted 
documents. 
 
2. Plans of actions in emergency  
The research expedition vessel “Akademik Fedorov” and the research vessel 
“Akademik Aleksandr Karpinsky” have the Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plans 
corresponding to the  requirements of MARPOL 73/78. 
The plans of action in emergency for the Russian Antarctic stations are presented in 
the form of the approved instructions. The plans recommended by the Madrid Protocol are at 
the stage of development. 
 
ANNEX 1 
3. Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
After the issuance of the Decision of the RF Government of December 11, 1998 No. 
1476 “ On the adoption of the Procedure for consideration and issuance of permits for 
activities of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area” all 
types of activity in the Antarctic have to undergo the corresponding procedures before its 
implementation. They are presented in the Regulations of the Commission on the 
consideration of the applications for activity of the Russian individual persons and physical 
entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Based on the submitted documents (Preliminary EIA 
stage), the Commission makes a decision on granting a permit for the activity or the need for 
making the Initial or Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations. 
In order to obtain a permit for the next 46th Russian Antarctic Expedition (2000-2001) 
in compliance with Article 1 of Annex 1, the Preliminary EIA stage of the ongoing expedition 
 
 
activity was performed (Russian Antarctic expedition activities. Preliminary Stage, EIA), 
2000. 
4. List of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEE) 
1. Initial Environmental Evaluation. Compacted Snow Runway in the Larsemann 
Hills area, 1999. Presented at the ATCM –XXIII, IP-79 by the Russian Federation. 
5. Information of interest 
The RAE has prepared  the following documents related to EIA and monitoring: 
1. Deep Borehole 5G-1. Current Environmental State and perspectives (Vostok 
station, East Antarctica, 1999. Presented at the ATCM –XXIII, IP-73 by the 
Russian Federation. 
2. Environmental Impact Assessment of the Project of Penetrating the Subglacial 
Lake Vostok. 
 
ANNEX II 
6. Exchange of information on flora and fauna 
In compliance with Article 6, Annex 2: 
a) During the period 1995-2001, no takings of animals or plants by RAE were 
undertaken. 
7. Quantity and character of permits relating to flora and fauna 
During the period of validity of the Procedure for issuance of permits for activity in 
Antarctica (from December 1999), no permits relating to flora and fauna were requested and 
issued. 
 
ANNEX III 
8. Preparation of the Waste Management Plans 
The document on waste management planning at the Russian Antarctic stations was 
prepared for adoption. 
The Russian research expedition vessel “Akademik Fedorov” and the research vessel 
“Akademik Aleksandr Karpinsky” have the Shipboard Garbage Management Plans 
corresponding to the  requirements of MARPOL 73/78. 
The garbage disposal at the stations and onboard ships is made in strict compliance 
with the existing instructions that temporarily replace the Waste Management Plans. 
The waste management plans for the Russian Antarctic stations are being developed. 
9. Introduction of Waste Management Plans 
It is planned to introduce the Waste Management Plans at the RAE stations during the 
period 2001-2003. 
10. Inventory of past activities  
The creation of the database on the areas of past RAE activity is at the preparation 
stage. It is planned to finish this work in 2003. 
 
 
 
ANNEX V  
11. Quantity and character of permits relating to the protected areas 
During the period 1995-2001, no permits for the activity in the Antarctic Specially 
Managed and Specially Protected Areas were issued. 
12. Brief description of activities in the protected areas 
During the 44th RAE (1999), the inventory of mammals and birds (determination of 
the species composition, counts and sampled banding) of the Site of Special Scientific Interest 
# 7 (SSSI #7) “Haswell Island” was carried out. 
13. Introduction of provisions of Annex 5 
A Joint Management Plan of the Larsemann Hills area is being prepared at present 
jointly with the Australian and Chinese Antarctic Programs.  
 
  
 
