ANTARCTIC TREATY 
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

ANT/INF/21
20 June 1975
Original: English

CLOSING ADRESS BY THE CHAIRMAN, MR. E. HAMBRO

Fellow delegates,

Our meeting is drawing to a close and our thoughts go out to all those who have helped us in endeavours. I should first like to thank all our staff for their devoted, energetic and intelligent work. I will ask our able Secretary General to bring our warmest greetings to every one of the women and men from many nations who have toiled for us during these two weeks. Without their assistance we could not have fulfilled our tasks. Their work has been of the highest order and is very, very highly appreciated.

May I also thank my fellow delegates for their wisdom, patience and comradeship.

I say comradeship because I think we all feel that we are members of a brotherhood of co-workers for a common cause. And it is particularly gratifying to feel the bonds between scientists and diplomats who bring the best of their two professions to our common endeavour to achieve a unique task in world organization.

And let us now praise famous men. There are four men in our company who should be singled out as the founding fathers. Two of them present here during this session are among the signatories of our Treaty, namely Enrique Gajardo of Chile and Pierre Charpentier of France. Two others of our band have participated in all the work from the very beginning and are even today among the most active workers, namely
.2.

Alfred van der Essen from Belgium and Brian Roberts of the 
United Kingdom. I think you will agree with me to express 
a special, a very special tribute to them.

-- oOo --

They are with us today as a living token of the 
continuity of our collaboration, but we are all here to prove 
the importance of our work for the future. Each year shows 
more clearly that we are facing new tasks, more important and 
more difficult tasks. Today more than ever we look to the 
future and not to the past.

Some of us see in the future a more perfect union 
of our countries in the Southern Continent and we all have a 
feeling that new trends in world organization are of vital 
importance for the development of our treaty system.

We may be called upon even before our next Consul-
tative Meeting to consider the possible effects on Antarctica 
of new concepts of ocean space.

Our loose and pragmatic Treaty organization may be 
in need of strengthening and modernization.

Like all organic life it is not static. It will 
either grow and develop or stagnate and decay.

"There is a tide in the affairs of men,
which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.

On such a full sea we are now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our venture."
