ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

ANT/INF/7
18 June 1975
Original:Spanish

OPENING SPEECH BY MR. CARLOS L. BLANCO
REPRESENTATIVE OF ARGENTINA

Mr. Chairman,

In the first place I wish to express the pleasure felt
by the Argentine Delegation at finding themselves in this
hospitable country with a famous Antarctic tradition and
well-merited prestige resulting from its work of scientific
investigation in the region. It is my earnest wish that
this record of outstanding activities will be enriched by
further successes in the future.

I should also like to add that the Argentine Delegation
welcomes your election as Chairman of the Eighth Consultative
Meeting since it is a fitting acknowledgement ... - of your
personal qualities and a tribute to the country acting as
host to this Meeting.

We are assembled once again at a Consultative Meeting,
thereby setting our seal of approval on the harmonious and
smooth functioning of the mechanism created by the Antarctic
Treaty, which for fourteen years has enabled us to confront
in the sphere of Antarctic activities. During those fourteen
years, peaceful use of Antarctica and scientific investi-
gation in the region have progressed without incident, there-
by demonstrating that the provisions of this realistic and
far-sighted Treaty are both reasonable and wise.

The Antarctic Treaty came to birth only after arduous
negotiation and intense efforts to unite or reconcile
standpoints and overcome momentary disagreements. But from this
emerged a spirit of co-operation that still characterises
these Meetings, however controversial the issues for
discussion.
- 2 -

I am saying this because it is realistic to draw attention 
to the fact that one of the items on our Agenda would seem 
to be particularly important and fraught with difficulty. 
My Delegation is confident that when we come to debate this 
item we shall display the same outstanding capacity for 
mutual agreement and tolerance of the views of others that 
has always been a feature of these Meetings. Calm, unhurried 
and dispassionate study will certainly aid us to reach 
solutions to this thorny problem which will to some degree meet the interests of all the States 
gathered on this occasion.

Part of the territory of Argentina lies in Antarctica, 
and for the past 71 years, since 1904, my country has been 
uninterruptedly engaging in scientific and allied activities 
in Antarctica, a continent to which we feel bound both 
geographically and emotionally. This is why Argentina believe 
that in the best interests of the States represented here, 
and ultimately of all mankind, this Meeting is duty-bound 
to take up resolutely and calmly the challenge implicit in 
these controversial issues. By so doing, we shall succeed in 
preserving the mechanism and philosophy of the Treaty which 
brings us together, and in maintaining as keynote the cordial 
atmosphere and ability to reach and adopt viable solutions 
after searching and comprehensive study.

In this way we shall contribute to the undertaking in 
Antarctica to which mankind must attach supreme importance, 
namely, continued pursuit of peaceful investigation, devoid 
of conflict, within the Antarctic region, which the Treaty 
first made possible through its efficient application from 
the moment it came into force until the present day.

In the conviction that these principles will prevail and 
that this Consultative Meeting, like its predecessors, will 
be marked by mutual understanding, cordiality and sound 
common sense, I need only add that I wish it well.
