ANTARCTIC TREATY           
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           

TRATADO ANTARTICO           
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA           

OSLO           

ANT/INF/23           
20 June 1975           
Original: french           

CLOSING SPEECH BY MR. ALFRED VAN DER ESSEN,           
REPRESENTATIVE OF BELGIUM.           

Mr. Chairman,           

May I on behalf of all the delegations represented           
here, convey our warm congratulations and our sincere appreciation           
of the manner in which you have guided our discussions.           

We realised even before the opening of the Eighth           
Consultative Meeting how fortunate we were in having you as           
our Chairman.  We knew your ability and your qualities - you           
are a jurist, a lecturer at several universities, a former           
member of Parliament, and have carried out important diplomatic           
missions.  In addition, you have presided over many meetings,           
particularly, as everyone knows, the twenty-fifth session of           
the United Nations General Assembly.  The privilege of having           
you to guide our deliberations has therefore been both an honour           
and a source of profound satisfaction.           

Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General, Mr. Storhaug           
who has performed an onerous task with a devotion that commands           
our respect.  We have all been deeply impressed by his effeciency,           
composure and unfailing courtesy.  We wish also to express our           
gratitude to all Mr. Storhaug's colleagues who assisted him in           
making this Meeting a success, and we would ask you, Mr. Chairman,           
to convey our appreciation of their magnificent support to all           
the translators, secretaries, and other members of the staff           
whom we may have met on few occasions, if at all, during our           

/2           



ANT/INF/23 was not extracted as it was not on the same page, the text is already extracted. The page number /2 is at the bottom right. The whole text is already extracted.
- 2 -

sessions. We are aspecially indebted to the interpreters, who 
acquitted themselves of arduous duties in a manner which left 
nothing to be desired. What would we do without these talented 
linguists who are called upon to begin translating our sentences 
before we have finished uttering them, and quite often when 
we ourselves are not sure which words we shall select?

Mr. Chairman,

We have been deeply impressed by the magnificent 
welcome accorded to us by the Government of Norway in Oslo, which 
must surely be the most distant capital from the South Pole - 
first reached by a Norwegian.  If there had been an Arctic Treaty 
we would now be in its zone.  This welcome has enabled many of 
us to discover your beautiful country and has certainly made us 
wish to return to it.  The excursion to Sandefjord revealed to 
us the charms of the countryside, the small towns and the kind-
ness of the Norwegian people.  We would be grateful, Mr. Chairm?n 
if you would convey to the Norwegian Government on our behalf 
our pleasure and our appreciation and the happy memory we shall 
always keep of our stay in Oslo.

Our pleasurable memories are further enhanced by an 
awareness that the Eighth Consultative Meeting represents a 
landmark in the history of the Antarctic Treaty.  For the first 
time we came to grips with an issue that was particularly delicat 
because it raised problems concerning exercise of sovereignty 
over Antarctica.  I may say that we have managed this without 
impairing what has come to be called the spirit of the Treaty.

I am perhaps in a position to define what exactly this 
spirit means, because I have had the privilege of being present 
during the negotiation of the Antarctic Treaty and all the eight 
Consultative Meetings held so far.

I must confess that I was once tempted to attribute 
this spirit simply to the fact that we had long been a group 
of friends.  A few years ago, during one of the pleasant 
excursions in the company of other delegates that take place

/3
- 3 -

during, and add so much to, our Consultative Meetings, I found 
myself sitting next to Roberto Guyer, the long-standing 
representative of Argentina.

        We both asked ourselves: What would happen if the 
coach fell into a ravine?  Would we still talk of the Antarctic 
Treaty spirit?  Would the governments still recall that spirit? 
Today I am reassured.  Delegations change - that is normal, but 
the spirit of the Treaty lives on.  We are still a meeting of 
friends and yet much more than that.  We are representatives 
of States which recognise their responsibilty towards a unique 
continent, and we are infused with a sincere desire to under-
stand one another despite the difficulties inherent in our 
respective attitudes as to our links with this continent.

Mr. Chairman,

        For more than two years your qualities and endeavours 
have contributed in an exemplary manner to consolidation of 
this spirit.  On behalf of all the delegations present, I would 
like once again to express our profound gratitude.
