ANTARCTIC TREATY           
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           

TRATADO ANTARTICO           
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTATIVA           /Inf/13
OSLO                                   
18 June 1975           
Original:English           

Opening Statement by the Japanese Delegate           

June 9th, 1975           

Mr. Chairman,           

May I commence by congratulating you on your unanimous election as Chairman of the Conference. My delegation does not doubt that, under your guidance, the Eighth Antarctic Consultative Meeting will prove to be as fruitful as all the previous meetings.           

In expressing the appreciation of the Japanese delegation for the outstanding preparations, on the part of the host Norwegian Government, for the conference facilities and amenities, I venture to draw attention to long associations Norway has had with the Antarctic over generations. The name of Roald Amundsen is known all over the world, but not so well known is that of Lars Christensen who financed and indeed took part in scientific expeditions to the Antarctic. It is highly gratifying to note that arrangements have been made for an excursion to Sandefjord and the Whaling Museum where documentation of Christensen's expeditions are preserved. In this age of computors and instant communications, I believe it fitting that provision has been made for perusal of the work done by those pioneers who courageously opened the way for modern science.           

The Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty have hitherto solved many difficult problems in various fields in a traditional spirit of cooperation, mutual trust and accommodation. I believe that from now on the main duty of the Consultative Parties lies in taking"measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty", in close mutual co-operation, to protect and conserve this unique area and its natural resources for the future generations of mankind. I am convinced that the Consultative Parties at this Meeting will, in the traditional Antarctic spirit, be able to solve many difficult problems in a realistic manner.           

This Meeting has before it comprehensive items on the agenda, among which are included many proposals for further strengthening of measures for the protection of the Antarctic environment. This is quite natural in view of the fact that it is indispensable for scientific investigation to keep its environment intact. Also in view of the fact that, nowadays,           

/es           
- 2 -

as access to the Antarctic Area has become by far easier,
more and more people in the world have come to pay increasing
attention to the protection of the Antarctic environment.
The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna
and Flora (Recommendation VII - VIII) are still not in force.
In order to expedite an early entry into force of this Recom-
mendation, I would like to suggest to all the delegations to
devise some realistic and substantial means so that several
Parties including Japan, which have still been unable to accept
this Recommendation, may make effective arrangements for approval.
In this connection, the Japanese Delegation intends, after consultation
with other Delegations in this Meeting, to take steps toward this goal."

Speaking of Japanese Antarctic activities, since
the despatch of the First Antarctic Expedition within the
framework of the International Geophysical Year, Japan has
continued scientific investigation in Antarctica, and, in
November the 17th Antarctic expedition team will be despatched.
This expedition will, as one of the priority projects in its
observation programs, make observation of the auroral substorms
by launching seven rockets into the upper atmosphere over SYOWA
station and the MIZUHO advanced station during the winter period
in 1976.  This project is to be continued for three years as
one of Japan's contributions to the IMS (International Magneto-
spheric Study) which will start in 1976. Certainly, other
scientific programmes such as meteorology, glaciology, geology,
geophysics, geochemistry, biology, and human medical science also
will be continued on their routine research basis.  Japan will
also continue to participate in the geo-scientific project in
McMurdo Sound area which has been undertaken jointly with the
USA and New Zealand. We earnestly hope to be able to contribute
to the international cooperation in scientific investigation
in the Antarctic Area.

In conclusion, I should like to express my confidence
in the successful conclusions of the works to be undertaken at
this Meeting.
