-ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                                      HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
                                                                      TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                                      OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                                      OSLO             ANT/INF/17
                                                                                       18 june 1975
                                                                                       Original: English

OPENING SPEECH FOR HIS EXCELLENCY MR.C.P. SCOTT,
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE UNITED KINGDOM

Mr. Chairman,

First, I must add my congratulations to those of earlier speakers on your election as Chairman for this Meeting. With your long
experience of international affairs and your understanding of the Antarctic Treaty, I know that we are in the best of hands. Next,
may I say, on behalf of my Government and delegation, how grateful we are to the Government of Norway for inviting us all to meet this
year in Oslo, and to the Foreign Minister of Norway for his welcome to us this morning.

Norwegians have long been one of the great exploring peoples of the world. It gives me great pleasure to pay homage in Norway's
capital to two great Norwegian polar explorers; to Nansen, the distinguished scientist, who revolutionised the techniques of polar
exploration, and to Amundsen, who successfully applied with such tremendous drive and initiative the methods which Nansen had pioneered.

And then came those who followed in the footsteps of the explorers and opened up Antarctic waters to commerce. Pre-eminent amongst them 
were Carl Anton Larsen, Consul Lars Christensen, Haakon Mosby, Hjalmar Riiser-Larsen. All of them were men who combined with new
whaling activities an intense curiosity about this strange part of the world.

Nearer to our time another Norwegian, John Giæver led the Norwegian British-Swedish expedition of 1949-52, the first international
expedition to Antarctica. This enterprise showed how much more could be achieved by collaboration than by competition, and it provided
valuable experience which a few years later bore fruit during the International Geophysical Year.

Those were simpler times. Your predecessor, Mr. Chairman, so I read at the close of the last Consultative Meeting, warned us that time
was not on the side of our Treaty deliberations. ¶ The entrepreneur
he said, " the developer, the exploiter, the man of affairs, is casting his first glance in our direction". The shadows in 1972 might be, as Frank Corner said, no larger than a penguin's in December but he went on to ask us, and I quote, " not to take refuge in the probability that dreams of money-making are likely to be proved mere dreams; what is important is that dreams are dreamed. And such dreams do not co-exist easily with the open regime envisaged in the Antarctic Treaty."

The shadow of Frank Corner's penguin has got larger since the last Consultative Meeting, and now has an air of foreboding about it.

If mineral wealth is discovered in the Antarctic, its lure could bring large numbers of men swarming into the continent and such an unregulated invasion could be chaotic, strife ridden and dangerous. We ought to prevent this happening if we possibly can and if prevention is impossible postpone it for the longest feasible time. The Antarctic Treaty gives us the opportunity both to regulate the exploitation of finds in the Antarctic and to set a timetable for such operations. My Government belive that we should seize that opportunity now, and allow the Treaty to develop to meet these new possibilities.

We have a wide-ranging Agenda to dispose of. Almost every item on it can be viewed as part of the first substantive item; Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment. We are all gathered here to consider the impact of man on the Antarctic, and it is important that we should be seen to be taking adequate steps to discharge our responsibility to protect and make wise use of the Antarctic Treaty Area.

My delegation hope that we shall endeavour to advance in respect of all the items on our Agenda, but we should not hold up the disposal of other business by trying vainly to make progress on questions where only a limited advance is possible. We need full discussion of the difficult issues, but I submit that if no conclusion can be reached we should agree to go on to other subjects.

If we spend our time on problems which are for the time being insoluble, we risk finding ourselves increasingly unable to control
- 3 -

what happens in the Treaty Area. To paraphrase Ralph Emerson just 
a little we may find " that events will be in the saddle riding 
mankind" instead of the other, the more desirable,way round.

Finally, Sir, may I offer the congratulations of my Government to 
the two Governments which have acceded to the Antarctic Treaty 
since the last Consultative Meeting, namely Brazil and The German 
Democratic Republic.
