ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING     HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  OSLO
                                  ANT/INF/10
                                  18 june 1975
                                  Original: Spanish

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR. FERNANDO ZEGERS SANTA CRUZ,
REPRESENTATIVE OF CHILE.

Mr. Chairman and Delegates,

The Chilean delegation takes pleasure in congratulating
you on your election as Chairman of our meeting, which promises
to be one of great importance. We would also like to assure you
of our fullest confidence and support.

We are sure that our deliberations will be guided with the
same skill and impartiality with which you have presided over
many important international meetings.

May I ask you to convey our thanks to the Government of Norway
for the hospitality they are extending to us, and our appreciation
both of the excellent organization of this Eighth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting and of the inspiring words addressed to us a
moment ago by the Norwegian Minister of Foreign Affairs.

The geographical situation of Chile in the most southerly
part of the South American continent makes it the closest country
to Antarctica. Only a little over 400,000 nautical miles separate u
from the nearest Antarctic land-mass, and the city of Punta Arenas
on the Strait of Magellan is the nearest to the Antarctic continent
in the whole Southern hemisphere.

The geography and climate of Chile bring it into association
with the Antarctic because they are linked with the latter, and
wind and ocean currents from the region affect our shores. The
Humboldt current, for example, touches nearly 3,000 kilometres of
Chilean coastline, thus endowing us with rich fishing grounds.

However, Chile may be considered an Antarctic land not merely
because it is in close geographical proximity and unity and answers
the requirements of the sector theory, but because we hold title-
deeds dating from colonial times and have inhabited the region for
hundreds of years. The Spanish monarchs, Charles V and Phillip II
invested the governors of the Captaincy-General of Chile with
authority by Royal letters-patent over what was at the time known
-2-

as "Terra Australis", and in 1810 the Chilean Republic inherited
this entitlement to sovereignty by virtue of the "utis possidetis"
principle. Throughout the whole period we can point to an uninter-
rupted series of acts of legal possession and a record of physical
presence on the part of Chilean nationals.

Chile signed the Antarctic Treaty of 1 December 1959 as an
Antarctic Power and acquiesced by sovereign decision in the con-
strictions which its provisiqns imposed because she was aware that
she was becoming a party to the agreement while at the same time
expressly maintaining her rights in full. It will therefore be
understood that my country regards article IV of the Treaty, which
froze, without affecting them, all claims to sovereignty in the
form in which they existed at the time it came into force, as a
guarantee of its sovereign rights in the Chilean Antarctic Sector.

During the fifteen years of its existence, this Treaty has
furnished proof of the correctnessof its provisions, under which
Antarctica is to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes, is open
to unhampered scientific investigation, and has its resources placer
under protection. Antarctica has always been and remains a zone of
peace, international co-operation and environmental conservation.
It must also be treated as an ecological reserve and a scientific
laboratory for the use of mankind. In this way we shall comply with
the noble aims that inspired the Contracting Parties to the
Washington Treaty.

Mr. Chairman, in the view of my Government, we must not only
safeguard the Treaty but reinforce it, and the Contracting Parties
are in duty bound to ensure that all activities in Antarctica are
carried out within the framework of its provisions and that no
measures are adopted which may undermine its spirit and effectivness
thereby creating various problems for the Signatory Powers.

I do not need to emphasise the importance my country attaches
to the Antarctic environment in view of the profound geographical
affinity which links Chile with that region and the marked universa
concern being shown for maintenance of its ecologial equilibrium.
-3-

At all the Consultative Meetings Chile has made continuons and 
unflagging efforts in defence of the Antarctic environment and 
its living resources.

Mr. Chairman, the Consultative Meetings are the means which 
the members of the Antarctic Treaty have used to implement and 
give     meaning to its provisions. The seven meetings held so far 
have produced a set of wise and sound recommendations which have 
given form and life to the system established in 1959.

I am confident that the present - the eighth - Consultative 
Meeting, which is being  held in a country with a long and brilliant 
record in the polar region, will strengthen the Antarctic Treaty 
and make for closer co-operation between its members.

That is the sincere desire of my Government and the firm 
purpose of my delegation.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
