ANTARCTIC TREATY				
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING				

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE 				
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE				

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ				
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ				

TRATADO ANTARTICO				
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA				

OSLO				

ANT/INF/14				
18 june 1975				
Original: English				

OPENING STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR. C CRAW,				
REPRESENTATIVE OF NEW ZEALAND				

Mr. Chairman,				

On behalf of the New Zealand delegation, I should				
like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman.				

I should also like to take this opportunity,				
Mr. Chairman, to thank you and the Norwegian Government				
for the very good arrangements which have been made for				
this meeting. The preparatory meetings in October last				
year and in February this year concentrated on important				
and difficult matters of substance rather than the more				
routine and administrative matters usually dealt with at				
such meetings. I am sure that I speak on behalf of us				
all when I express our appreciation, Mr. Chairman, for your				
able chairmanship of these preparatory meetings and for				
the generosity of the Norwegian Government in hosting them.				
Needless to say we are all most grateful for the hospitality				
shown by the Norwegian Government in receiving us here				
in Oslo.				

Norway and New Zealand have a good deal in common both				
in the nature of our countries and the spirit of our peoples.				
In international affairs we share similar views on a wide				
range of problems facing the international community.  Yet,				
for a great many years, the distance that separates us -				
we could hardly be further apart - limited the contact				
between our two countries.  In the first half of this				
century our principal point of contact - perhaps our only				
substantial contact - related to the Antarctic.				

More recently the Antarctic Treaty and the consultative				
machinery established under it have increased this earlier				

/2.
-2-
ANT/INF/14

cooperation. I should like to stress, Mr. Chairman, in this 
connection that the Antarctic Treaty continues to demonstrate 
its remarkable versatility. It brings together, because of a 
strong common interest, countries from every continent of the 
world, countries with very different political systems and 
countries which otherwise might have little in common except for 
a commitment that the Antarctic should continue forever to be 
used for peaceful purposes and that its unique environment should 
be preserved in the interests of all mankind. In this connection 
my Delegation shares the view already expressed by the Australian 
Delegation about the need to ensure that there is no dumping of 
radioactive waste in Antarctica.

We have before us a draft agenda which gives healthy testi-
mony to the continued vigour of the treaty and its process of 
cooperation in scientific research and the preservation of the 
Antarctic environment. I am confident that the challenging 
questions which are now before us can be met and will be overcome. 
Let us not underestimate these challenges, especially that relat-
ing to the question of the exploration and exploitation of mineral 
resources. We must ensure that the great white continent is not 
desecrated and despoiled. But it is our hope that a further demon-
stration of the same spirit of goodwill and cooperation which in 
1959 brought about the Antarctic Treaty itself, will now enable 
us to embark upon a new era in relations in the Antarctic.
