ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING   HUITIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ   OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                  Original: French
OSLO

SPEECH  BY  THE  REPRESENTATIVE  OF  FRANCE.

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the French delegation, I would like
first of all to congratulate you on your election as Chairman
of the Eighth Antarctic Consultative Meeting. We are certain -
for we have already seen you in action - that our work will
be guided most expertly and that we will achieve the best
possible results.

May I, Mr. Chairman, convey our warmest thanks to the
Government of Norway for the cordial hospitality extended
to us in Oslo.

In 1959, more than 15 years ago, twelve states embarked
on an experiment in international relations. Today, after seven
Consultative Meetings, we are entitled to congratulate
ourselves on the progress we have made with co-operation in
Antarctica.

At the same time the agenda before us gives cause
for a certain anxiety. Several of the questions we are
to discuss are connected in one way or another with problems
created by the manifold pressures being brought to bear on
Antarctica - a continent which we intended in 1959 - and still
intend - to maintain as the preserve of science. Now, tourists,
commercial companies or industrial concerns, and even
politicans, are taking an ever-keener interest in one of the
most precious areas of the world, which we all wish to keep
intact.
The French Delegation considers that these activities impinging on Antarctica must be strictly controlled and that one of the principal objectives of the discussions at this Eighth Consultative Meeting should be the attempt to establish a control mechanism.

Mr. Chairman,

You may rest assured that the French Delegation will cooperate to the full in the work of this Meeting. As on past occasions, together with the other Contracting Parties to the Treaty, my Delegation is determined to draw forceful attention to the words contained therein:"That it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica shall continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international discord".
