ANTARCTIC TREATY              
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA              

OSLO                                      

ANT/INF/9                                 
18 June 1975                              
Original: French                           

EIGHTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Speech by the Representative of Belgium.

Mr. Chairman,

I would like first of all to convey to you my sincere
congratulations  and those of the Belgian delegation on your
election as Chairman of our Eighth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting. Your gifts and your qualities as Chairman are well
known in international circles; and many of us here, who have
known you as Chairman of an  important working party in 1972  
and also of the only diplomatic meeting ever held at the South
Pole, in the same year, and have seen how you have prepared
our Meeting, cannot but feel satisfaction and pleasure at
knowing that the guidance of our work will be in your hands.

May I also convey to the Norwegian Government my
appreciation for the welcome extended to us in  the capital
of this beautiful country.

Mr. Chairman and Delegates,

One of the reasons why my delegation is particularly happy
at this Meeting being held in Oslo is that Norway and Belgium have
bonds of long standing in Antarctic research.
A Belgian expedition in 1898 - 1899, led by  Adrien de Gerlache
de Gomery, was the first to winter south of the Polar  Circle.
- 2 -

Not enough is known,perhaps,of Norway's important part
in this expedition. To begin with,the vessel "Belgica" was
a former Norwegian whaler of 214 tons. Six of the 19 men
taking part in the expedition were Norwegian. One of them,
the sailor Wiencke,was carried away by a wave off the Antarctic
Peninsula and lost his life. Wiencke Island, situated
in the region,was named in his memory. Another of these six
Norwegians was the second officer: his name was Roald Amundsen.
It was the first contact with Antarctica for the future conqueror
of the South Pole. At the age of 24, he had written to Mr. Adrien
de Gerlache on 29 July 1896 applying to join the expedition.

These ties with Norway were renewed sixty years later when
Gaston de Gerlache de Gomerey, Adrien's son, led the first of
a series of expeditions during and following the International
Geophysical Year. This expedition left Belg1um on board two
Norwegian polar vessels,the "Polarhav" and the "Polarsirkel",
with Norwegian crews,under the command of Captain Sigmund Böe.
A mountain discovered by the expedition in the Belgicafjella,
300 km south-east of Roi Baudouin Base,was named Böefjellet.
The expedition set foot on a coast which had never been explored
by land but which the Lars Christiansen expedition had flown
over in 1936-1937,thus enabling the Norwegian Polar Institute
to make a map of the coastal region and a partial map of the
interior of the country. This map helped the Belgian expedition
to establish a base,and as a token of appreciation,one of the
glaciers in the Belgicafjella  was named Norsk Polarinstituttbreen.
Another glacier in this region bears the name of John Giaever,
Norwegian explorer and adviser to the 1957-1958 Belgian expedition.
-3-

This co-operation with Norway has continued with the preparation 
of maps and in a study group of the Council of Europe.

Mr. Chairman and Delegates,

The Belgian delegation has come to the Eighth Antarctic Consulta-
tive Meeting filled with the spirit of co-operation  that it has 
always striven to maintain  since the Washington Conference of 
1959.

It realizes that in times to come the Eighth Consultative 
Meeting may be seen as an important stage in the development of the 
Treaty.

It has a heavy Agenda both in the number of items and in the 
special importance of some of them.

I have in mind particularly the item concerning the resources 
of Antarctica. This is a subject which, by its  nature, could 
either destroy the spirit of the Treaty or develop and strengthen 
it by extending co-operation to new fields. In fact, the impact on 
scientific research and on protection of the environment, fauna and 
flora, of exploiting the resources of this unique laboratory, the 
Antarctic Continent, would undoubtedly be such as to make wider 
co-operation essential
-4-

in order to keep it within acceptable limits.

The Washington Treaty, of which we are so proud, has been 
developing harmoniously for fourteen years, uniting  states 
representing all the continents and the two hemispheres in a 
common  striving for mutual understanding. The Belgian 
delegation is confident that this development will continue 
in the future in the same spirit.

It therefore offers, Mr. Chairman, its sincere wishes 
for the success of the Eighth Antarctic Consultative Meeting 
under your wise guidance.
