ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTATIVA

OSLO

Original: English

Speech by Foreign Minister Knut Frydenlund at the opening of The 8th Consultative Meeting under the Antarctic Treaty, Oslo.

It is a pleasure for me, on behalf of the Norwegian Government, to welcome you all to Norway.
I am sure you will have a busy time discussing the various items on the Agenda for this important meeting.  But I hope you will also find time to acquaint yourselves with the country and its people and thus get some impression of the daily life in Norway.

I find it symbolic that this meeting takes place here in Oslo, in one of the northernmost capitals of the world in order to discuss and pass recommendations on questions and matters connected with the large continent on the opposite side of the earth.  This shows that the Antarctic is a matter of great global interest and importance, but also that Antarctica is an area which for decades has played an important role in Norwegian life - both from an economic, a scientific and a cultural point of view.

16 years have passed since the Antarctic Treaty was signed in Washington, and developments during the 14 years it has been in force show that it has been a good treaty, which has served its parties well.  I think that both the Treaty and the cooperation under it can serve as an example to other parts of the world.  It is only natural that the Treaty has its limitations and that the achievements reached do not often make headlines in the newspapers.  But the treaty shows that countries with different political systems and different concepts on internal law can work effectively together in a peaceful way and cooperate in important fields such as science and the preservation of the environment.
- d - 

Developments in technology have in our time 
become a fundamental and dominating feature in 
international affairs.  It is technology which has 
been the driving force behind the rapprochement 
between the superpowers and the relaxation of tension 
in recent years.  It is technology which has opened 
up new areas - space, the continental shelf, the 
polar areas, the deep sea bed - to human endeavour. 
It is also technology which has formed the basis 
for the strong economic progress in the industrial 
part of the world, which in turn has given rise to 
the problems of resources and the environment. 

The strong surge of technological and industrial 
progress raises the question of how to master and 
control this process.  Developments seem to proceed 
so rapidly that there is room for doubt as to 
whether we are able to adapt ourselves to them, noth 
in political and human terms.  And time is not on 
our side.  For what is actually happening is that 
international organizations which are designed to 
tackle the problems raised by this rapid progress 
are not always themselves developing fast enough. 

How does the Antarctic Treaty fit into this picture? 
As I said, the Treaty has up to now served us well. 
It is our duty to see to it that it will continue to 
do so.  But this is not an automatic process.  If the 
Treaty shall remain a useful instrument, we must 
analyse future trends, be flexible in our approaches 
and continue to cooperate in a positive spirit.  In 
order to succeed we may in fact have to develop new 
concepts for international cooperation. 

The Eighth Consultative Meeting will be an important 
one.  On the Agenda we find items which have been 
discussed at several earlier meetings - for example 
Conservation of fauna anc flora, and Man's Impact 
on the Antarctic Environment - discussions which have 
resulted in recommendati:ns to the governments.  One 
item was new at the last consultative meeting in
- 3 -

Wellington, and from the Norwegian side we have proposed
a completely new item for this meeting.  These two
items I have just referred to, are of course item
No. 17: "Antarctic Resources - Effects of mineral
exploration" and item No. 18: "Marine Biological
Resources".

As to the first one, it is known that the Antarctic
contains important minerals, such as coal and iron,
and might contain many more.  On the continental
shelf there are indications of oil and gas.  Within
the not too distant future we might know more about
the kind and the amount of these resources.  This
may again raise the question of whether these resources
should be exploited or not, and, if so, when.

Man's history shows, however, that before one
embarks on any development in this respect, a
thorough study should be made of all the aspects,
including the political, economic, ecological and
environmental consequences.  These and other studies
will certainly be time-consuming and it may therefore
be wise to make haste slowly.  I believe that in
order to be realistic, one has to take into account
the world's diminishing resources and their uneven
distribution, which will inevitably bring pressure
to bear on any unused resources.

When turning to the living resources, I am sure
you will understand that the first thing that comes
to my mind is the history of the whaling industry
in the Antarctic.  This industry is now considerably
reduced. With more knowledge and insight on our side
it could still have played an important role in
the provision of food for mankind.  The lesson this has
taught us is important to bear in mind when considering
the management of other resources.

These and other items on the Agenda represent a
challenge to you, since the Antarctic countries,
through the Treaty, have taken upon themselves the
