ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO
ANT/INF/16
18 june 1975
Original: Russian

Speech by His Excellency Mr. Yu. A. Kirichenko, Representative 
of U.S.S.R.

Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Permit me to join with those who have warmly congratulated
Mr. Hambro on his election as Chairman. Mr. Hambro takes on active
part in many international conferences and we may expect that under
his chairmanship our Consultative Meeting will yield successful
results.

Today we are gathered in a country which has long displayed
keen interest in scientific exploration of the Polar regions. The
names of those Norwegians who courageously explored the Antarctic
at the cost of great self-sacrifice have won universal renown.
I only need mention one man - Amundsen - who conquered the South
Pole. Today, too, Norway is playing an active role in promoting
international collaboration, and we also take pleasure in the fact
that Mr. Hel[?]vik, the Director of the Norwegian Polar Institute,
is the present chairman of SCAR.

Peaceful international cooperation in the scientific
study of the Antarctic has been successfully progressing for many
years, and apart from the activities of the Consultative Parties
some scientists from other countries are also engaging in this
cooperation. The Antarctic Treaty of 1959 has provided ample
opportunity for this type of joint work.

The Soviet Union is continuing its intense scientific
research activity, and at the present time six Soviet Research
Stations are operating in Antarctica in collaboration with
stations belonging to other nations.  For example, a regional
meteorological centre has been established at our "Molodyozhnaya"
-2-

station and supplies forecasts and information to all enquirers.

In past years the Consultative Meetings have fruitfully
and successfully examined and unanimously adopted a series of
Recommendations concerning activities by countries in Antarctica.

The Soviet Government. has already given its approval to all the
Recommendations made at the Consultative Meetings, and if all participat-
ing Governments follow suit, this will give impetus to fruitful
international cooperation in the Antarctic region.

The satisfactory and productive work of the Meetings is
in large measure due to the sincere striving and effort by our
countries to foster peaceful collaboration in Antarctica. It is
precisely in this spirit of promotion of peaceful joint enterprise
that we intend to continue working in the future.

There are many matters awaiting our attention on the agenda,
most of them connected in one way.or another with environmental
protection.

Under Article IX of the Treaty we bear a special obligation
to envolve measures conducive to fulfilment of its aims and prin-
ciples, including environmental protection measures.

In the course of the work of the meetings over past years, a marked
trend has emerged towards greater emphasis on such measures, and
at the last meeting it was noted that still more energetic action
in this direction is essential. The Meeting recognized, inter alia,
that mineral exploration in Antarctica is likely to raise problems
of an environmental nature, and here we would do well to bear in
mind another fact, namely, that very little study of Antarctica
has been carried out by geologists. For this reason, all decisions
on this issue should be taken on the basis of appropriate and adequate
scientific dara, after the latter have been closely studied,
-3

The Parties to the 1959 Treaty bear a responsibility not 
only to one another but to all mankind for preservation of the 
unique Antarctic environment for scientific and practical uses.

The States participating in the Consultative Meetings 
possess considerable experience of work in forbidding Antarctic 
conditions and also have scientific knowledge of these conditions 
at their disposal. They therefore have compelling reasons for 
regulating man's activities in Antarctica.

A number of extremely complex matters feature among 
those we have to examine, but I am certain that all of us will 
display the necessary spirit of goodwill and work together actively 
in order to find the right solutions. The traditions and experience 
acquired by the Consultative Meetings entitle us to expect that 
such will be the case. The Antarctic Treaty itself gives ground 
for this expectation, because it represents an outstanding 
example of international cooperation for peaceful purposes.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
