ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

ANT/INF/8
18 june 1975
Original: English

OPENING STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR BRENNAN (AUSTRALIE)

ON 9: JUNE

Mr Chairman, Distinguished Foreign Minister, Your
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:

May I firstly congratulate you on your election as
Chairman of the 8th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  You
bring to the Chairmanship unequalled knowledge and experience
of the many facets of the Antarctic and my Delegation looks
forward to a most useful and constructive meeting under your
guidance.

I should like to express my Delegation's appreciation
of the presence here of the Foreign Minister and his words of
welcome and also of the preparations Norway has made for this
meeting and to record our thanks to your Government for the
welcome it has extended to us and for  the facilities it has
made available for this meeting.

The nations who today are here to attend this meeting
have done and are doing much to advance knowledge and understanding
of Antarctica.  Under the Treaty we have seen and are seeing
cooperation to the mutual benefit of all parties - cooperation in
science, in logistics, in the exchange of information, in the
preservation of the environment and in the overall coordination
of man's activities in the Antarctic.  Much has been achieved
since the Treaty came into force, but much remains to be done if,
as my Government hopes, the Treaty is to continue to provide the
framework within which activities in the Antarctic are ordered.

.../12
2.

My Government sees this meeting as a timely and welcome opportunity for Treaty parties to reassert their confidence in the Treaty and their willingness to work within the Treaty to find solutions to the increasingly complex problems before us.

The proposed agenda clearly reflects the nature and extent of these problems.  I do not propose at this stage to make any detailed comments on individual agenda items, except to mention briefly one matter of great importance to my Government.  At the appropriate time, under the appropriation agenda item the Australian delegation will be affirming my Government's determined opposition to the dumping of nuclear wastes in the Antarctic. My Government believes that all the Treaty parties should, and indeed do, share this concern.  My Government is confident that all the issues we discuss will be resolved in an atmosphere of mutual trust and cooperation which has developed over the years.

I would like to assure you, Mr Chairman, that my delegation has been instructed to make a constructive contribution to the discussion and to be receptive to any proposals put forward. In short, we consider this to be a vital meeting and we will be doing all we can to make it successful.
