ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
                                                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ               OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                 OSLO

RECOMMENDATION  VIII-1.

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS: LITCHFIELD ISLAND

The Representatives,

Considering that Litchfield Island, together with its
littoral, possesses an unusually rich collection of marine
and terrestrial life, is unique amongst the neighbouring
islands as a breeding place for six species of native birds
and provides an outstanding example of the natural ecological
system of the Antarctic Peninsula area;

Recommend to their Governments that the following be
included in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:

SPECIALLY  PROTECTED AREA NO. 17

Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Palmer Archipelage
Lat.66° 16'S,  Long. 64° 06'W.

Description: small island, about 2.5 km² in area. The
area is shown on the attached map.
LOUD WATER COVE

LITCHFIELD ISLAND

ANVERS ISLAND
ARTHUR HARBOR
From U.S. Coast & Geodetic Survey Chart 1905
ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                        OSLO

RECOMMENDATION VIII - 2

REVIEW OF SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

The Representatives;

Recalling Recommendations III-VIII and VII-2;

Conscious of the need to revise the list of Specially
Protected Areas in Annex B of the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of the Antarctic Fauna and Flora in the light
of experience;

Recalling the criteria established by paragraph 1 of
Recommendation VII-2 for the selection of Specially Protected
Areas;

Noting with appreciation the response of the Scientific
Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR) to paragraph 2 of
Recommendation VII-2;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. The following Recommendations, recommending certain
defined areas for inclusion in Annex B, Specially
Protected Areas,of the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, be
cancelled:

    (a) Recommendation IV-6 (Specially Protected Areas:
Cape Crozier, Ross Island)

    (b) Recommendation IV-10 (Specially Protected Areas:
Byers Peninsula)

    (c) Recommendation IV-12 (Specially Protected Areas:
Fildes Peninsula)
- 2 -

(d) Recommendation V-5 (Specially Protected Areas: 
      Fildes Peninsula)

2. The numbers 6, 10 and 12 in Annex B of the Agreed 
      Measures should not be used for other Specially 
      Protected Areas.
*ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

RECOMMENDATION VIII QSLO - 3.

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

The Representatives;

Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty and
Recommendation VII-3;

Conscious of the need to protect scientific investigations
which might suffer from wilful or accidental interference;

Desiring to protect only sites where harmful interference
is generally recognised to be likely;

Recognising the need to protect such scientific investi-
gations irrespective of their purpose;

Recognising that a limitied number of sites of exceptional
scientific interest may require long-term protection from
harmful interference;

Noting with appreciation the interim response of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to paragraph
1 of Recommendation VII-3;

Recommend to their Governments that;

1. They invite SCAR, through their National Committees,
to have regard to the following when considering
proposals for Sites of Special Scientific Interest:

(a) Sites should only be proposed when:

(i) Scientific investigations are being carried
out or are planned to begin before the following
meeting of SCAR, and there is a demonstrable
risk of interference which would jeopardise
those scientific investigations; or

(iii) they are of exceptional scientific interest
and therefore require long-term protection
from harmful interference;

(b) Sites should be proposed for designation up to a
specified date, which may be extended following  a
review by SCAR;

(c) Proposals for the designation of Sites should be
accompanied by a management plan which should
include, inter alia, and where applicablè, the
following details:

(i) a description of the Site,together with a map
delimiting its boundaries and where applicable
showing any existing or proposed demarcations
on the Site;

(ii) a statement setting out the reasons in
conformity with paragraphs 1 (a) (i) and (ii)
above  for designation of the Site;

(iii) a summary of the scientific investigations
being carried out or planned;

(iv) the proposed date at which the designation will
expire unless extended;

(v) proposed points of access;

(vi) any proposed pedestrian and vehicular routes;

(vii) other kinds of scientific investigation which
would not cause harmful interference with the
investigations described at (c)(iii) above;

(viii) whether specific kinds of scientific sampling
may take place and guidelines for such sampling;
- 3 -

(ix) any other restraints that may be needed.

2. They invite SCAR, through their National Committees,
   to initiate review of those Sites whose designation
   is likely to terminate before the second following
   Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting;

3. They request their national offices responsible
   for the administration of Antarctic expeditions to
   maintain a record of activities within each Site
   of Special Scientific Interest in which their
   scientists are active;

4. Persons wishing to visit Sites of Special Scientific
   Interest should consult their national offices
   responsible for the administration of Antarctic
   expeditions;

5. Until such time as the Recomendations designating
   Sites of Special Scientific Interest become
   effective, in accordance with Article IX of the
   Antarctic Treaty, they should, as far as possible,
   be considered as guidelines.
ANTARCTIC TREATY              
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

TRATADO ANTARTICO             
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA      

                                  OSLO

              RECOMMENDATION VIII-4

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

              INTERIM GUIDELINES

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation VII-3;

Noting Recommendation VIII-3;

Noting with appreciation the interim response of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to paragraph
1 of Recommendation VII-3;

Noting that management plans have been prepared for certain
Sites of Special Scientific Interest;

Considering that it would be advantageous to gather
experience of the practical effect of management plans for
certain sample Sites;

Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take
account of the management plans annexed to this Recommendation,
for the following Sites:

Site No. 1: Cape Royds, Ross Island

Site No. 2: Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island

Site No. 3: Barwick Valley, Victoria Land

Site No. 4: Cape Crozier, Ross Island

Site No. 5: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland
Islands

Site No. 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland
Islands

Site No. 7: Haswell Island.
2

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO.1

CAPE ROYDS, ROSS ISLAND

Management Plan

(i) Description of Site

All that area of Cape Royds west of a line drawn from the 
south coast of the Cape through Flagstaff Hill to the south 
eastern tip of Pony Lake, and the west shoreline of this lake; 
and south of a line drawn from the western extremity of Pony Lake 
280° True to the coast. The boundaries, which are demarcated, 
are shown on the attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation

This area supports the most southerly Adelie Penguin 
(Pygoscelis adeliae) colony known, the survival of which is 
marginal. The population declined rapidly from 1956 following 
interference by man until 1963 when United States and New 
Zealand authorities agreed to restrict activities and develop 
a management plan for the area. It is considered important to 
continue study of this colony under controlled conditions, at 
least until the penguin population has recovered to its 
estimated normal pre-1956 (pre-man) level.

(iii) Outline of research

A long-term study of the population dynamics began in 1969 
and is expected to continue.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

30 June 1981.
(v) Access points

The Site should not be entered during the period of 
penguin occupation (approximately mid-October to March) except 
by the marked tracks. Only scientists engaged in the population 
studies should enter the Site during this period. Visitors to 
Cape Royds should not enter the Site. Photographs of the colony, 
except for scientific purposes, should be taken from the 
boundaries of the Site.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not enter the Site. Pedestrians should 
keep to the marked tracks and not move through the populated 
areas except as necessary in the course of scientific investigations 
Helicopters and low-flying aircraft should avoid the penguin 
colony in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would 
not cause harmful interference

Other kinds of scientific investigations should not be 
undertaken while penguins occupy the Site.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Taking samples of the bird population by killing, capture, 
or taking of eggs should be done only for a compelling scientific 
purpose and in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
(ix) Other restraints

The following activities should be avoided:

1. Landscaping and removing surface material;

2. Construction of huts or buildings;

3. The depositing of any pieces of equipment or 
material that would in any way hinder re-occupation 
of nests by penguins.
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO.2

ARRIVAL HEIGHTS, HUT POINTS PENINSULA, ROSS ISLAND

Management Plan

(i) Description of Site

All that area of Arrival Heights enclosed within a line drawn from Trig T510 north-west over First Crater to the 500 foot contour, then north along this contour to a point immediately west of Second Crater, then around the lip of this crater and south to Trig T510. The boundary, which is demarcated, is shown on the attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation

This area is an electromagnetically and natural "quiet site" offering ideal conditions for the installation of sensitive instruments for recording minute signals associated with upper atmosphere programmes.

(iii) Outline of research

Upper atmosphere investigations associated with auroral and geomagnetic studies.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

30 June 1981.

(v) Access points

None are defined but movement within the area by vehicles or personnel other than those directly concerned with the investigations should be kept to the minimum necessary for implementing the programme.
(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles and pedestrians should keep to the tracks shown 
on the attached map.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would 
not cause harmful interference

Scientific investigations other than those associated with 
the upper atmosphere programme should be kept to a minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Not applicable.

(ix) Other restraints

No R. F. transmitting equipment other than low power 
transceivers for local essential communication may be installed 
within this. Site. Every precaution should be taken to ensure 
that electrical equipment is adequately suppressed and correctly 
installed to keep man-made electrical noise to an absolute 
minimum.
7

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST  NO.3

BARWICK VALLEY, VICTORIA LAND

Management Plan

(i) Description of Site

The Site includes the greater part of Barwick Valley,
Victoria Land, and contains parts of several glaciers, exposed
soils, a lake about 3 km wide and 16 km long and a connecting
stream about 5 km long leading to Lake Vashka. It is bordered
on the south, west and north by the Olympus, Willett, and
Clare Ranges respectively. The boundary of the Site approximates
to an irregular pentagon enclosing about 325 km2. The Site
is defined by lines joining Skew Peak (77° 13'S, 160° 43'E),
Sponsors Peak (77° 18'S, 161° 24'E), a point in the Insel
Range (77° 24'S, 161° 26'E), a point in the Apocalypse Peaks
(77° 24'S, 160° 46'E), Mount Bastion (77° 19'S, 160° 34'E)
and Skew Peak. The boundaries are shown on the attached map.

(ii) Reason for Designation

Barwick Valley is one of the least disturbed and contaminated
of the Dry Valleys of Victoria Land which are environmentally
unique and possess extreme polar desert ecosystems. The Site is
important as a reference base against which to measure changes in
comparable ecosystems of the other Dry Valleys where a considerable
variety of scientific investigations have been conducted regularly
over the past decade. It is also expected to be of use in connection
with global environmental monitoring.
(iii) Outline of research

Investigations are proposed of the microbiology, bacteriology, mycology (especially of yeasts and moulds), and of the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, with special programmes to establish baseline measurements for biological and environmental monitoring.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

30 June 1981.

(v) Access points

Access should be by helicopter to Wright Valley, thence into the Barwick Valley Site on foot past Lake Vashka.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not be used. Pedestrian routes should keep to well-drained ground avoiding streams and the lake margins as much as possible.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmful interference

Geological, pedological, and glaciological studies except those which would introduce exotic species and those which would disrupt or damage the existing ecosystems.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Scientific sampling in the Site should be restricted to that which can be accomplished without introducing new organisms, including micro-organisms, and without disturbing the environment.
(ix) Other restraints 

Overflight of the Site should be avoided. Aircraft landing 
and vehicle parking should be kept well outside the boundaries 
of the Site. Field activities should be kept to a minimum. 
Permanent field camps, landfill disposal, and other activities 
which would introduce new materials or organisms, including 
micro-organisms, into the Site should be avoided. All materials 
carried into the Site should be removed.
10

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO. 4
CAPE CROZIER, ROSS ISLAND

Management Plan

(i) Description of Site

The Site comprises 40 km2 and includes the land areas where 
the Adélie Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) nest and the adjacent 
fast ice where the Emperor Penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) 
annually breed. It is bounded by lines joining 77o 28'S, 
169o 20'E, 77o 28'S, 169o 28'E, 77o 31'S, 169o 28'E, 77o 31'S, 169o 20'E; and also includes the land area lying 
north of a line from 169o 20'E, 77o 28'S to the summit of 
Post Office Hill and north-east of a line which bears 315o 
True from the summit of Post Office Hill to the coast.

The boundaries of the Site,  the access track and road, the 
helicopter landing place and refuge hut are indicated on 
the attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation

The penguin colonies are the subject of long-term studies 
of population dynamics and social behaviour, and are relatively 
accessible by air from McMurdo Station and Scott Base. Access 
to the Site should be restricted to scientists engaged 
in investigations within the Site.

(iii) Outline of research

Studies of the Emperor and Adélie Penguin populations and 
their ethology, life cycles, physiological adaptation and
natural population fluctations. Detection of possible 
changes in their biological characteristics which may 
be due to man-induced changes in the environment.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation
30 June 1981.

(v) Access points

Access should be at points on the boundary closest to the 
refuge hut and the helicopter landing place.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Helicopters and low-flying aircraft should avoid the Site. 
Vehicles should not enter the Site and should approach 
the Site boundary,when serving authorised activities, on 
courses at right angles to the boundary orientation. 
Pedestrian movement within the Site should be limited to the 
shortest routes consistent with the scientific activity.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would 
not cause harmful interference

Biological, pedological, and geological observations 
except those which would cause harm to the birds or 
interfere with the breeding success of the penguin colonies. 
As far as possible such studies should be made at times 
when the Adélie Penguin colony is absent or when the 
Emperor Penguin colony is at least 1 km from the locality 
under scientific consideration.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Samples of the bird populations taken by killing, capture, 
or taking of eggs should be done only for a compelling
12

scientific purpose and in accordance with the Agreed
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and
Flora. Close inspection of birds, including photography,
or taking blood or other biological samples, should
be kept to a minimum.
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST
NO.5: FILDES PENINSULA,KING GEORGE 
ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

Management Plan

(i)     Description of Site
The two areas on Fildes Peninsula shown on the attached map will 
be demarcated.

(ii)    Reason for designation
The unique fossil ichnolites found in these areas are located close 
to two permanent scientific stations which have been visited frequent-
ly by tourist groups. The areas also contain representative sequences 
of Tertiary strata.

(iii)   Outline of research
The main object of the research programme is to describe the Tertiar:
stratigraphic sequences and to understand the geological evolution 
of this part of the Antarctic Peninsula.

(iv)   Date of expiry of designation
30 June 1981.

(v)     Access points
None are defined.

(vi)    Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Vehicles and helicopters should not enter the Site except in an 
emergency.

(vii)   Other kinds of scientific investigations which
would not  cause harmful interference
Scientific research other than geological should be kept to a 
minimum.

(viii)  Scientific sampling
Samples of rocks should only be taken for comelling scientific 
purposes.

(ix)    Other restraints
Buildings and other facilities should not be erected in the Site.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

14

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST
NO.6: BYERS PENINSULA,LIVINGSTON ISLAND
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

Management Plan,

(i)     Description of Site

The Site comprises four areas of sedimentary and
fossiliferous strata on Byers Peninsula.  These areas
are shown on the attached map.

(ii)    Reason for designation

The fossils found in this area provide evidence of
the former link between Antarctica and the other Southern
Continents.  A long-term paleontological research
programme is in progress.  It is important to protect
these Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks from being used as
building materials or as souvenirs.

(iii)   Outline of research

A long-term research programme was established in 1964.
The main objectives are the description of sediments and
fossils found in this area.

(iv)   Date of expiry of designation

30 June 1981.

(v)    Access points

None are defined.

(vi)   Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not enter the Site except in an emergency.

/(vii)
15

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which 
would not cause harmful interference

Scientific research other than geological should be kept 
to a minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Samples of rocks or biological specimens should only be 
taken for compelling scientific purposes.

(ix) Other restraints

Buildings and other facilities should not be erected in 
the Site.
16

SSSI SITE N? 6
BYERS PENINSULA, LIVINGSTON ISLAND, SOUTH
SHETLAND ISLANDS.

Anr'44
17

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO.7
HASWELL ISLAND

Management Plan.

(i) Description of Site

The Site consists of Haswell Island (66º 31'S,93º 00'E),
about 1 km² in area, the largest of a group of islands lying
close to Mirny station, together with its littoral zone and
the area of fast ice, when present, lying within the delimitation
shown on the attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Site is an exceptionally prolific and representative
breeding locality for all the species of birds which occur
in this part of the Antarctic (five species of petrel
(Procellariiformes), one species of skua (Catharacta skua),
and one species of penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae)). The Site
provides exceptional opportunities for research and needs
protection in view of its close proximity to a large Antarctic
station.

(iii) Outline of research

A long-term biological programme associated with the
bird colonies and studies of the inshore marine biology are
expected to continue in the Site.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

30 June 1981.
(v) Access points

The Site may be entered from any direction but access 
should cause minimum disturbance to the bird colonies.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not enter the Site. Pedestrians should not 
move through the populated areas except as necessary in the 
course of scientific investigations. Helicopters  and low-flying 
aircraft should avoid the bird colonies in accordance with 
the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
Flora.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would 
not cause harmful interference

Any scientific investigation which will not cause significant 
disturbance to the biological programmes for which the Site has 
been designated.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Taking samples of the  bird population by killing, capture, 
or taking of eggs should be done only for a compelling 
scientific purpose and in accordance with the Agreed Measures 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTA[R]CTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

RECOMMENDATION VIII-5

PERMITS FOR ENTRY TO SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

The Representatives,

Noting that Recommendation VI-8, paragraph 2, and Articles VI and VIII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora enable Governments to issue permits for entry to Specially Protected Areas only for the collection of native mammals or birds (Article VI) or native plants (Article VIII, paragraph 2 (a));

Desiring to extend this facility to include other compelling scientific purposes;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. Recommendation VI-8 be terminated;

2. The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora be modified by the addition of a new subparagraph to Article VIII, paragraph 2, as follows:

"(c) entry by their nationals, except in accordance with a permit issued under Article VI or under paragraph 2 (a) of the present Article or in accordance with a permit issued for some other compelling scientific purpose."

3. Until such time as the Agreed Measures and this Recommendation become effective in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, this Recommendation should, as far as possible, be considered as a guideline.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                         TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                    
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ        

                                         TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                         OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

RECOMMENDATION VIII-6

ANNUAL EXCHANGES OF INFORMATION

The Representatives,

Recalling Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting that numerous recommendations of Consultative Meetings
have established requirements for exchange of information between
Governments;

Desiring to consolidate the requirements for periodic exchanges
of information into a standard annual report;

Conscious that other Recommendations, including Recommendations
I-I, I-III, I-VII, I-XIII, II-I, II-VIII, IV-27,VI-3, VI-7, and
VII-7 provide for exchanges of information on an occasional basis
or outside the annual reports exchanged between Governments;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They adopt the Annex to this Recommendation as the standard
format for the annual exchanges of information between Governments;

2. They consider that the provisions set forth in the Annex
satisfy the requirements for exchanges of information in Recommendat.
ons I-VI, II-IV, II-VI, III-I, III-II, IV-23, VI-2, VI-6, VI-12, and
VI-13;

3. They exchange the report described in the Annex through
diplomatic channels, not later than 30 November each year;

4. They report prior to 30 June in accordance with Recommendati-
on II-VI on extensions, reductions or other modifications in the
development of the activities previously reported :
5. Until such time as the Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora become effective, the information 
exchange requirements set forth in Recommendation IV-19 should be 
considered as an interim guideline and may be added to the Annex.
ANNEX

STANDARD FORMAT FOR THE ANNUAL EXCHANGES OF INFORMATION

1.  Information in as complete a form as possible under the cate-
gories listed below is to be exchanged as early as possible but
in no case later than 30 November each year.

2.  Under Recommendation II-VI any extensions, reductions or other
modifications of activities (in the categories marked below with
an asterisk (*)) previously reported are to be furnished as
soon as possible and in any case prior to 30 June following the
season of activity.

3.  If a category is not applicable to the activities of a particular
country ( for example, it has no airfields or does not intend to
use research rockets) this fact should be stated.

I.* The names, types, numbers, descriptions, and armament of
ships, aircraft, and other vehicles, introduced, or to be
introduced, into the Antarctic Treaty Area, and information
on military equipment, if any, and its location in the
Area.( List only vehicles used for transport to and from
Antarctica. Vehicles at individual stations are described
under category VIII below.)

II.* Dates of expeditions leaving for, and arriving in, the
Antarctic Treaty Area, duration of stay, itinerary to and
from the Area and routes followed within the Area.

III.* The names, locations, and dates of opening of the Party's
bases and subsidiary stations established or planned to be
established in the Antarctic Treaty Area, listed according
to whether they are for summer and/or winter operations.

IV.* The names of the officers in charge of each of these bases,
subsidiary stations, ships and aircraft; the number , occu-
pations and specialisations of personnel (including any
designated by other Governments), who are or will be
stationed at each of these bases and subsidiary stations 
and on board these ships and aircraft, including the 
number of personnel who are members of the military 
services, together with the rank of any officers and the 
names and professional affiliations of personnel engaged 
in scientific activities:

A.* Officers in charge of bases.

B.* Officers in charge of ships.

C.* Officers in charge of aircraft.

D.* Number, occupations and specialisations of personnel:

      1.* Summer personnel (listed according to base or 
          ship at which working);

      2.* Winter personnel (listed according to base at 
          which working).

E.* Number of personnel who are members of the military 
    services together with rank of any officers.

F.* Names and professional affiliation of personnel engaged 
    in scientific activities (listed according to base or 
    ship at which  working.It would be useful to list each 
    person's scientific disciplines as well as his 
    affiliation).

V.*  The number and types of armaments possessed by personnel.

VI.* The programme of work, including scientific investigation, 
     being done and planned at each of these bases and subsidi-
     ary stations and on board those ships and aircraft; and 
     also the area or areas of operation to be covered by such 
     programme (this may be included as an Annex).

VII.* Principal scientific equipment,which may be listed accord-
      ing to the base at which it is customarily used (this may 
      be included as an Annex).

VIII. Transportation facilities and communication equipment for 
      use within the Antarctic Treaty Area:

      A.* Surface, marine, and air transport vehicles at each 
          base.

      B.* Description of communications facilities using the 
          standard form in accordance with Recommendation VI-2
C. Description of airfields in accordance with Recommendation III-I, including particulars of location, operating conditions and limitations, radio aids to navigation, facilities for radio communications and instrument landing (this may be included as an Annex).

IX.* Facilities for rendering assistance (medical and transport services and shelter available in emergencies).

X.* Notice of any expeditions to Antarctica not organised by the Party but organised in, calling at,or proceeding from the Party's territory (including tourism in accordance with Recommendations IV-27 and VI-7).

XI.* Description of unoccupied refuges in accordance with Recommendation III-II, including name,position, description of location, dated established, date last examined and estimate of available accomodation, facilities, food, fuel, and supplies of other kinds (this may be included as an Annex).

XII. Annual return of the numbers of each species killed or captured in the Antarctic Treaty Area in accordance with Article XII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, using the format annexed to Recommendation IV-19 (this may be included as an Annex).

XIII. Notice of the intended use of radio-isotopes in scientific investigations in the Antarctic Treaty Area. (Note: under Recommendation VI-6 this information is to be provided by Consultative Parties as early as possible, preferably six months in advance, but in any case annually.)

XIV. Notice of intended use of scientific research rockets in the Antarctic Treaty Area in accordance with Recommendation VI-12 including inter alia geographical co-ordinates of the place of launching; the time and date of launching or, alternatively, the approximate period of time during which it is planned to carry out the launchings; the direction of launching; the planned maximum altitude; the planned impact area; the type and other specifications of the rockets to be launched, including possible residual hazards; the purpose and research programme of the rocket.

XV.* Notice of ships which are carrying out substantial oceanographic research programmes in the Antarctic Treaty Area in
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ               OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                OSLO

RECOMMENDATION VIII-7

CO-OPERATION IN TRANSPORT

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation VII-8;

Recognizing that access to Antarctica by long-range aircraft
combined with intracontinental feeder routes by smaller aircraft
would facilitate new levels of co-operation and flexibility in
research;

Noting the interest taken by the Scientific Committee  on
Antarctic Research (SCAR) in the potential benefits to be derived
from a co-operative air transport system;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They request their offices responsible for the admini-
stration of Antarctic expeditions to review their scienti-
fic programmes in order to identify the ways in which a co-
operative air transport system might benefit them and to
inform SCAR through their representatives on the SCAR Work-
ing Group on Logistics;

2. They request SCAR, through their National Antarctic
Committees, to review the available transport resources
and the potential requirements with respect to a co-
operative air transport system and to bring their conclu-
sions to the attention of the Consultative Parties.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                            TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                      TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ          OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                 OSLO

RECOMMENDATION VIII - 8

ACTIVITES OF STATES THAT ARE NOT CONSULTATIVE PARTIES

The Representatives,

Recalling  the principles and purposes of the Antarctic
Treaty;

Reaffirming that it is in the interest of all mankind that
Antarctica shall continue forever to be used exclusively for
peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object
of international discord;

Recognizing that the Antarctic Treaty places a special
responsibility on the Contracting Parties to exert appropriate
efforts, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to
the end that no one engages in any activity in the Antarctic
Treaty Area contrary to the principles or purposes of the
Treaty;

Considering paragraphs 15 to 17 of the Final Report of
the Seventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting regarding
activities in the Treaty Area by States that are not Contracting
Parties;

Considering further that it is desirable for acceding
States  to  approve  existing  and future Recommendations,
which form an integral part of the Treaty regime;

Recommend  to their Governments that:.

1. They reaffirm the principles set forth in paragraph 15
to 17 of the Final Report of the Seventh Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting in respect of activities by States that are
not Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty ;
2. They urge the States that have or will become Parties 
to the Antarctic Treaty to approve the Recommendations adopted 
at Consultative Meetings in puruance of the Treaty and 
subsequently approved by all the Contracting Parties whose 
representatives were entitled to participate in the meetings 
held to consider those measures.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                   TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        HUITIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                  OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO
RECOMMENDATION VIII-9

EFFECTS OF TOURISTS AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

The Representatives,

Recognizing that tourists and other persons not sponsored
by Consultaitve Parties are visiting the Antarctic Treaty Area
in increasing numbers;

Acknowledging that tourism is a natural development in
this Area and that it requires regulation;

Recalling Recommendation VII-4, and particularly the
need to avoid increasing interference with natural ecological
systems which are not yet sufficiently understood;

Recognizing the necessity to restrict the number of
places where large numbers of tourists may land so that the
ecological effects may be monitored;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They use their best endeavours to ensure that all those
who enter the Antarctic Treaty Area, both those sponsored
by Governments and those not so sponsored, are aware of
the Statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant
Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty in Annex A to this
Recommendation;

2. They require all organizers of tourist groups, except
in an emergency, to:

(a) visit only those Antarctic stations for which
permission has been sought and granted in
accordance with Recommendation IV-27;
(b) land only within the Areas of Special Tourist
Interest listed or defined in Annex B to this
Recommendation.

3. When granting permission for tourist groups to visit
Antarctic stations which they maintain, Consultative Parties
shall require tour organizers to report their activities
within the Treaty Area. These reports shall be made at
the end of the season to the Consultative Parties whose
stations they have visited, in accordance with the
requirements listed in Annex C to this Recommendation.
The Consultative Parties shall transmit any such reports
received by them to the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.

4. They keep Annexes A, B and C to this Recommendation
under review at successive Consultative Meetings.

Annex A x

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTED PRACTICES AND THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS
OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
......................................................................................
......................................................................................
......................................................................................

Annex B x

AREAS OF SPECIAL TOURIST INTEREST
......................................................................................
......................................................................................
......................................................................................
Annex C

MATTERS TO BE REPORTED BY TOUR ORGANIZERS

1. Name and nationality of ship

2. Name of captain

3. Itinerary of each separate cruise

4. Number of tourists accompanying each cruise

5. Places and dates at which landings were 
    made in the Antarctic Treaty Area, with the 
    number of persons landed on each occasion

X To be discussed at the Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

RECOMMENDATION VIII-10

ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

The Representatives,

Recalling Article IX, paragraph 1 (f), of the Antarctic
Treaty;

Convinced that the Antarctic Treaty Area contains
significant concentrations of marine living resources;

Recognizing the need to promote and achieve, within
the framework of the Antarctic Treaty, the objectives of
protection, scientific study and rational use of these marine
living resources;

Aware of the inadequacy of the information concerning the
stocks of these living resources and of the need to develop a
good scientific foundation for appropriate conservation
measures;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They initiate or expand,insofar as is practicable within
their Antarctic scientific programmes, detailed studies of the
biology,distribution, bio-mass and population dynamics and the
ecology of Antarctic marine living resources;

2. They encourage further co-operation among the
Consultative Parties in scientific studies of and programmes
relating to Antarctic marine living resources;

3. They encourage studies which could lead to the
development of effective measures for the conservation of Antarcti:
marine living resources in the Treaty Area;
4. They urge the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
(SCAR), through their National Antarctic Committees, to 
continue its scientific work on these matters and to consider 
convening, as soon as practicable, a meeting to discuss current 
work and report on programmes for the study and conservation 
of Antarctic marine living resources;

5. They include the subject "Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources" on the agenda of the Ninth Consultative Meeting.
ANTARCTIC TREATY              
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ      
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

TRATADO ANTARTICO      
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA      

OSLO                          

RECOMMENDATION VIII-11        

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT      

The Representatives,          

Recalling Recommendations VI-4 and VII-1;  

Desiring to minimise the impact of man on the Antarctic  
environment;                  

Noting with appreciation the response of the Scientific  
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to Recommendation VI-4;  

Recommend to their Governments that:      

1. To the greatest extent feasible they observe  
the code of conduct annexed to this Recommendation  
at their stations and for their activities within  
the Antarctic Treaty Area;              

2. Through their National Antarctic Committees they  
invite SCAR, in co-operation with the Scientific  
Committee on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE)  
of the International Council of Scientific Unions,  
to continue its interest in the development of  
scientific programmes for detecting and assessing  
changes occurring in the Antarctic environment.
ANNEX

CODE OF CONDUCT FOR ANTARCTIC EXPEDITIONS AND STATION

ACTIVITIES

1. Waste disposal

The following are recommended procedures:

(a) Solid Waste

(i) Non-combustible, including chemicals
(except batteries)

    i.e. material may be disposed of at sea either
in deep water or, if this is not possible, at
specified sites in shallow water.

(ii) Batteries should be removed from the
Antarctic Treaty Area.

(iii) Combustibles - Wood, wood products and paper
should be incinerated, the ash
being disposed of at sea.
- Lubricating oils may be burnt
except those containing harmful
additives which should be removed
from the Antarctic Treaty Area.
- Carcasses and materials associated
with imported experimental animals
should be incinerated.
- All plastics and rubber products
should be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty Area.
(b) Liquid Waste

(i) Human waste, garbage and laundry effluents            
should, where possible, be macerated and be flushed into the sea.

(ii) Large quantities of photographic liquids            
should be treated for the recovery of silver            
and the residue should be flushed into the sea.

(c) The above procedures are recommended for coastal            
stations. Field sites supported from coastal stations            
should, where feasible, use the facilities of their            
supporting station. Inland stations should concentrate            
all waste in deep pits. Except as stated for inland            
stations, waste should not be buried.

(d) Waste containing radio-isotopes should be removed from            
the Antarctic Treaty Area.

(e) Every effort should be made to reduce the plastic            
packaging of products imported into the Antarctic            
Treaty Area.

(f) If possible the use of leaded fuels or fuels            
containing ethylene bromide and ethylene chloride            
should be avoided.

(g) When incinerators are used it is desirable to monitor            
the effluents.

2. Introduction of alien species

Procedures to safeguard against the introduction of alien            
species are covered by Article IX of the Agreed Measures for            
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
3. Disturbance of breeding colonies and concentration
of birds and mammals

Procedures to minimise such disturbances are covered by
Article VII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

4. Guidelines for Antarctic operating organi?ations
planning major Antarctic Projects

(a) In the planning of major operations in the Antarctic
Treaty Areaan evaluation of the environmental impact of
the proposed activity should be carried out by the
Antarctic operating organi?ations concerned. Such an
evaluation should include:

(i) A description of the proposed action and an
assessment of its potential benefits and its
possible impact on the relevant ecosystems.

(ii) A consideration of alternative actions which
might alter the pattern of benefits versus
adverse environmental effects expected to
result from the action.

(b) These evaluations may be circulated for information
through SCAR channels to all the states engaged in
Antarctic activities.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                               HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                    
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                         TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                          OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                          OSL0

RECCOMENDATION VIII-12

DISPOSAL OF NUCLEAR WASTE

The Representatives,

Recalling  Article V of the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting the increasing production of nuclear materials and 
the growing concern about the disposal of nuclear waste ;

Bearing in mind  the undertaking of Contracting Parties in 
Article X of the Antarctic Treaty to exert appropriate efforts,
no one engages in any activity in Antarctica contrary to the prin-
ciples or purposes of the Treaty;

Desiring  to preserve the unique quality of the Antarctic 
environment;

Recommend  to their Governments that they continue to exert 
appropriate efforts to the end that no one disposes of nuclear 
waste in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

RECOMMENDATION VIII-13

THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

Recognizing that prime responsibility for Antarctic
matters, including protection of the Antarctic environment,
lies with the states active in the area which are parties
to the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting the vulnerability of the Antarctic environment
to human interference and that the consequences of major
alterations would be of global significance;

Noting the distance of the Antarctic from the main
sources of environmental pollution and hence its value for
global baseline monitoring purposes;

Considering the role of the Antarctic as a global
climatic regulator of major importance;

Noting that in seeking to fulfil these responsibilities
Antarctic Treaty States have;

(a) negotiated the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora;

(b) negotiated the Convention for the Conservation
of Antarctic Seals (London 1972);

(c) invited the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR) of the International Council
of Scientific Unions (ICSU) :

(i) to identify the types and assess the extent of
human interference which has occurred in the
Treaty Area as a result of man's activities;
(ii) to propose measures which might be taken 
to minimise harmful interference;

(iii) to consider and recommend scientific programmes 
which will detect and measure changes occurring in 
the Antarctic environment.

Noting that a Code of Conduct for stations and activities 
within the Antarctic Treaty Area to minimise their harmful 
environmental effects has been adopted;

Noting that the Antarctic Treaty calls upon Contracting 
Parties to encourage co-operative working relations with 
those specialised agencies of the United Nations and other 
international organisations having a scientific or technical 
interest in the Antarctic;

Noting the cable to the Chairman of the Consultative 
Meeting from the Executive Director of the United Nations 
Environment Program (UNEP), circulated to the meeting 
on 10 June 1975;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. In exercising their responsibility for the wise 
use and protection of the Antarctic environment 
they shall have regard to the following;

    (a) that in considering measures for the wise use 
and protection of the Antarctic environment they 
shall act in accordance with their 
responsibility for ensuring that such measures 
are consistent with the interests of all mankind;
    (b) that no act or activity having an inherent 
tendency to modify the environment over wide 
areas within the Antarctic Treaty Area should be
undertaken unless appropriate steps have been
taken to foresee the probable modifications and
to exercise appropriate controls with respect to
the harmful environmental effects such uses of
the Antarctic Treaty Area may have;

(c) that in co-operation with SCAR and other relevant
agencies they continue,within the capabilities
of their Antarctic scientific programmes, to
monitor changes in the environment, irrespective
of their cause, and to exercise their
responsibility for informing the world community
of any significant changes caused by man's
activities outside the Antarctic Treaty Area;

2. They welcome the offer made by UNEP of co-operation in
questions of scientific and technical interest relating
to the Antarctic environment and invite SCAR, through
their National Antarctic Committees, to continue its
participation in the development of the relevant parts
of the programme under consideration by the Scientific
Committee on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE)
ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                        OSLO

VIII - 14

ANTARCTIC RESOURCES - EFFECTS OF MINERAL EXPLORATION

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation VII-6;

Bearing in mind the purposes and principles of the
Antarctic Treaty;

Reaffirming that it is in the interest of all mankind
that the Antarctic Treaty Area shall continue forever to be
used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become
the scene or object of international discord;

Acknowledging that the Antarctic Treaty places a special
responsibility upon the Contracting Parties to exert appropriate
efforts, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to
ensure that no one engages in any activity in the Antarctic
Treaty Area contrary to the purposes or principles of the
Treaty;

Concerned that mineral resource exploration and exploitation
could adversely affect the unique environment of the Antarctic
and of other ecosystems dependent on the Antarctic environment;

Noting the technological developments in polar mineral
exploration and exploitation;

Convinced that further consultations on the questions
concerning Antarctic mineral resources are desirable and, in
the meantime, of the need for restraint while seeking timely
agreed solutions by the Consultative Parties to problems raised
by such questions;  and noting the intention of their Governments
to keep these matters under review in the light of possible
actions by others;
.2.

Aware that available scientific information on the environmental effects of mineral exploration and/or exploitation in the Antarctic has been inadequately studied and that the Consultative Parties bear a special responsibility for environmental protection in the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Aware also that Antarctic geological structures have not been sufficiently investigated;

Recognizing the need for further study and consideration of these matters;

Resolved that the Consultative Parties should seek to develop an approach to the problems raised by the possible presence of valuable mineral resources in the Antarctic Treaty Area, bearing in mind the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.    The subject "Antarctic Resources - The Question of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be fully studied in all its aspects in relation to the Treaty and be the subject of consultation among them with a view to convening a special preparatory meeting during 1976, the terms of reference of which will be determined precisely through diplomatic channels; the special preparatory meeting to report to the Ninth Consultative Meeting;

2.    They undertake to study the environmental implications of mineral resource activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area and other related matters, including joint studies among them, and that they exchange the results of such studies;

3.    They invite SCAR through their National Antarctic Committees to:

      (1) make an assessment on the basis of available information of the possible impact on the environment of the Treaty Area and other eco-systems dependent on the Antarctic environment if mineral exploration and/or exploitation were to occur there.
.3.

If possible and appropriate, Governments may wish 
to assist their National Antarctic Committees in 
this undertaking by appropriate means;

(ii) continue to co-ordinate national geological and 
geophysical research programmes in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area with the aim of obtaining fundamental 
scientific data on the geological structure of 
the Antarctic;

(iii) consider what further scientific programmes are 
necessary in pursuit of these objectives;

4. The subject "Antarctic Resources - The Question of 
Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be placed on the Agenda 
of the Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
