


Proposed Improvements to Measures Designed to Prevent Environmental Damage in Antarctica





Proposed Improvements to Measures Designed to Prevent Environmental Damage in Antarctica



Preventing damage to the Antarctic environment is a priority for the Antarctic Treaty Parties.

Pursuant to Article 3 of the Madrid Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, including its wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential to understanding the global environment, shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area “shall be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment”. The Protocol also requires (Article 8) that the State Parties should establish special procedures for prior assessment of the impacts of activities planned in the Antarctic Treaty Area on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. 

Even where there is a strict national permitting system, one cannot exclude a possibility that operators whose activity was not approved by the national authorities, or operators without a permit to conduct activities in the region, would get access to the continent. 

Such “illegal” operators might act without notifying the national authorities of their planned activities in Antarctica. Therefore, States may be unaware of the forthcoming activities. Sometimes, information that such activities are being conducted becomes available only when their adverse consequences and damage to the Antarctic environment have been discovered.

Also, there may be cases when activity is conducted in Antarctica despite a vigorous counteraction by the State which has sound reasons to believe that the proposed activity will not meet international legal requirements. Strictly speaking, States can only monitor the behaviour of “law-abiding” operators that observe the permit issue procedure established for activities in Antarctica. However, when operators deliberately circumvent requirements established by national legislation, the permitting system cannot ensure adequate control. Using the right of free exit from their own State, operators may go to Antarctica without providing notice to the national authorities. It is the activity of such operators that poses the greatest potential threat to the Antarctic environment, as it is these “operators” that may travel without adequate, well-functioning equipment and necessary gear. “Illegals” may fail to have trained staff, mandatory insurance, or other types of financial security otherwise required.

It should be noted that gateway States do not know whether an expedition to Antarctica has been authorised. Lack of information prevents the States from taking enforcement actions against “illegal” operators pursuant to their national legislation.

We believe that the establishment of an information system on proposed Antarctic activities, authorised by States, could be very helpful in barring in barring the access of “illegal operators” to the Antarctic region.
 
In our view, the system shall operate as follows:.

The Consultative Parties shall undertake to inform the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat of all planned Antarctic expeditions and activities whose organisers have obtained a permit as required by their national permitting systems, or of those expeditions and activities that will be conducted in compliance with a comparable regulatory procedure established by the Parties. Having received such information from the Consultative Parties, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat shall post it to the Secretariat’s website. The Secretariat shall maintain and update this database. The Secretariat’s authority and responsibility to collect data from States on activities in Antarctica approved by these States, and the establishment of a continuously updated database, is fully consistent with Measure 1 (2003) Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Draft Decision XX (2006)

Database on Proposed Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The Representatives,
Noting that pursuant to Article 3 of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment; 
Noting further that pursuant to Article 8 of the Protocol the Parties shall establish special procedures for prior assessment of the impacts of proposed activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area on the Antarctic environment and its dependent or associated ecosystems; 
Recognising the need to create conditions whereby any activity in Antarctica is conducted only in compliance with international legal requirements for the protection of the Antarctic environment;
Acknowledging the need for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to exchange information about all activities in Antarctica;
Recalling Article 2 of Measure 1 (2003) Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;

Decide:
    1. To establish a database on all proposed activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area which: 
а) Were authorised by the Consultative Parties as permissible activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, or
b) Shall be conducted in compliance with comparable regulatory procedures established by the Parties.
    2. That the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat should develop and maintain the database.
    3. That the database establishment procedures should be consistent with the Annex to this Decision.  


    
	 

Annex to Decision XX (2006)
  
Procedure to Establish a Database on Proposed Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

1. The Consultative Parties shall inform the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat of all proposed activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, which were authorised by the Parties as permissible activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, or, in the absence of a formal permit issued by a Party, activities which shall be conducted in compliance with comparable regulatory procedures established by that Party, not later than 15 days prior to the commencement of the proposed activity.
2. The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat shall inform the Consultative Parties of all activities referred to in paragraph 1 above by posting the received data to the Secretariat’s website, not later than 10 days prior to commencement of the proposed activities.






     

