





The Enquiry Procedure of Article 18




The Enquiry Procedure of Article 18


INTRODUCTION

    1. During the XXIVth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Chile introduced Information Paper IP-27 entitled “The Enquiry Procedure of Article 18”.  The paper was introduced in the context of Agenda Item 4 (Operation of the Antarctic Treaty). Said document refers to the Final Act of the Eleventh Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Madrid, October 1991), which contains several understandings and commitments recorded by the Meeting, and whose purpose is to facilitate the interpretation and application of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes.   

    2. Among these, the Meeting agreed, in reference to Article 18, that an Enquiry Procedure would be elaborated in order to facilitate the resolution of controversies over the interpretation and application of Article 3 regarding activities undertaken or planned to be undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

    3. In order to fully grasp the importance of this commitment, which remains unfulfilled, it is indispensable that the significance of Article 3 also be understood. The norm in question contains, in addition to certain fundamental environmental principles, the basic tenets of conduct, planned and conducted with the intention of avoiding certain adverse effects and of promoting others that may be considered beneficial to the global comprehensive and systematic environmental protection envisaged by the Protocol and its Annexes.

    4. Firm obligations such as those contained in Articles 7, 8 and 15, or in the relevant provisions of Annexes I to V, and Article 13, which develops a general framework for compliance, may all be subject to the full dispute settlement regime. A Liability Annex would allow for dispute settlement either under Article 19, or, otherwise, for a special regime that could be established for adjudications with relation to issues not involving States, as well as other more complex matters. Given their very special nature, it is rather difficult to ascertain to what extent Articles 6 (Cooperation) and Article 14 (Inspection) lend themselves to arbitration.  

    5. Both the provisions of the Protocol and the mandate contained in the Madrid Final Act clearly point to a “soft” procedure for dealing with issues arising between Parties to the Protocol regarding the interpretation or application of its Article 3. The differential treatment awarded to Liability and to the Environmental Principles of Article 3 reinforces this interpretation. The Madrid Meeting decided that an Annex on Liability, including liability for damage to the environment, could be negotiated. Simultaneously, it was also decided that an Annex would not be elaborated to clarify the principles contained in Article 3 or to make them enforceable as legal obligations, but that one of the procedures mentioned in Article 18 should be developed by the Parties to the Protocol as a formal enquiry procedure.

    6. Chile has suggested that this unfinished task of the Antarctic Treaty System and the Parties to the Protocol should be undertaken, and, pursuant to some intersessional consultations, now proposes that the XXVIIIth ATCM be requested to set up a Working Group, whose task would include elaboration of the above mentioned Enquiry Procedure and approbation of its mandate. Further suggestions, including a draft enquiry procedure and a complementary or alternative proposal are outlined in this paper.

THE VALUE OF ENQUIRY IN INTERNATIONAL DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

    7. “Enquiry”, as a legal term, conveys two distinct but related meanings. In the broader sense it refers to the process that is performed when a court or other body endeavors to resolve a disputed issue of fact. Thus, it is an important component of other means of dispute settlement, such as conciliation. In the context of article 18 and the mandate of the Madrid Final Act, enquiry is obviously something different. It is a specific institutional arrangement that States may prefer to arbitration, because they desire to have some disputed issue investigated independently by a commission or some other body, rather than settled judicially by a court.

    8. Therefore, the mandate in the Final Act, which refers to the elaboration of an enquiry procedure, leads us to consider the institutional profile of this legal institution, a body of international dispute settlement since its introduction by the 1899 Hague Convention and further development by the 1907 Hague Convention, whose text contains twenty-five articles on the object, composition, and procedure of enquiry commissions. The contracting Parties to The Hague Convention N° 1 deemed it “expedient and desirable...in the case of international disputes involving neither the honor nor the vital interest of the parties” to resort to an International Commission of Enquiry. Therefore, an enquiry procedure must necessarily be performed by an Enquiry Commission, Committee, or other body designed to that end.

    9. In the sequence of dispute settlement instrumentalities, enquiry goes between negotiation and conciliation, but many treaties contain provisions linking both options.  Most collective bodies created to perform monitoring functions and to search for amicable solutions are often endowed with a mixed fact-finding and conciliatory capacity.

    10.  When a disagreement arises between States about some issue of fact, law or policy, bilateral negotiation is the standard procedure. However, if the controversy concerns the rights and obligations of the respective Parties within a multilateral framework, the procedure must be multilateral in character and duly take into account the interests of all Parties within such a framework. Negotiation must proceed through multilateral channels. Nevertheless, if the contentious matter has already crystallized into a controversy, multilateral negotiation, even if assisted by good offices or mediation, cannot be regarded by itself as a sufficient or adequate means of resolving such disputes.

    11. Clearly, in the case of a controversy, Article 18 leaves it to the Parties to choose any of the “soft” means of dispute settlement mentioned in that provision. However, the XI Special Consultative Meeting decided that if the issue concerns either the interpretation or the application of Article 3, such matters should be addressed by the means of enquiry, and that the Consultative Parties should develop a standard procedure to uniformly deal with all cases related to Article 3.

    12.  Explanatory reasons for this decision are less obvious. The use of a “soft approach” to dispute settlement in international environmental law disputes is a recognized practice. Soft settlement, when it leads to the development of “soft law” standards can channel negotiations and lead to a peaceful and durable adjustment. A number of treaties have established bodies for collecting information, reporting, carrying out inspections of Party performance, or for enquiry, conciliation and monitoring for compliance. There is, however, a question concerning the capabilities of enquiry, in the classic pattern of enquiry commissions, to effectively generate standards equivalent to “soft law”.

    13. Such doubts concern the record of “enquiry” commissions set up under  the 1899 Hague Convention (i.e., the Dogger Bank Inquiry in 1904) and particularly the enquiries held under the 1907 Hague Convention (the Tavignano, the Tiger, the Tubantia, and the Red Crusader cases). The relative success of these commissions, as well as those set up by the League of Nations (Aaland Islands and Mosul), the United Nations (Seychelles, 1982, Use of chemical weapons during the Iraq-Iran war, 1984), and later the Specialized Agencies, specifically the ILO and ICAO, has been the product of a combination of circumstances: in most cases the dispute is largely one of fact, the Parties can agree to an authoritative version of events, and the decision does not generate a strong precedent.



PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS

14. If the enquiry procedure does not produce generally accepted “standards”, and therefore does not generate the equivalent to a complementary interpretation of “soft law”, that furthers the uniform application of the Principles and other contents of Article 3, the objectives pursued by SATCM XI will not be attained. While its is true that procedures included in Article 18 are not necessarily intended to produce or generate such standards and soft law, in the special case that an adjudication affects the contents of Article 3, such performance should be considered unsatisfactory, in the light of the objectives which the Parties contemplated in the Madrid Final Act.

15. On the other hand, there is an imperative need to comply with the mandate of the Madrid Final Act; to assist in solving, and, still better, in preventing disputes arising from the interpretation and application of Article 3; to promote the Principles contained in Article 3; and, finally, to contribute to the search for solutions with consensus on some of the more complex issues of  liability for damage to the Antarctic environment and dependent and associate ecosystems, as well as a negotiable compensation, irreparable damage, or damage to ecosystems beyond 60° S, among others.

16. One possible approach --that attempts to bridge the gap between investigation and the elaboration of “standards” and precedents-- is to regard the enquiry procedure to be established by the Consultative Parties as a more eclectic and  developed method, a method incorporating ingredients of conciliation, and, perhaps, in the broader sense, some guidance and recommendations with respect to the operation of an Antarctic Enquiry Commission, its relation to the Antarctic Treaty System, and the support provide by the Secretariat to the Commission.

17. In this context, investigation, the essence of enquiry, continues to be a key element. Historically, the institutional component (a commission of enquiry, either on a permanent or on an ad-hoc basis) has also been an essential part of the enquiry procedure.  Mention has been made of conciliation (a procedure first established in a treaty between Sweden and Chile in 1920). The hypothesis in this context is that, beyond the impartial examination of the dispute, the Enquiry Commission should also attempt to define terms of settlement that can be accepted by the Parties and that contribute to the interpretation and application of Article 3, in a manner consistent with its provisions, and that garner sufficient support for acceptance by the Consultative Meeting.

18. It is suggested that the Consultative Meeting consider establishing a Working Group charged with the task of defining the precise nature of the enquiry procedure, the requirement for any commission or committee of enquiry and its relationship to the ATS (possibly a subsidiary body of the CEP but that could also continue for the time being as a working or task force of the ATCM), as well as its terms of reference. Nevertheless, in order to collaborate with the Working Group, a tentative draft of an enquiry procedure, as well as other complementary and/or alternative actions that could be envisaged by the working group, are included as an Appendix.

APPENDIX I
Draft Enquiry Procedure
 
    1. The requesting Party or Parties to the Protocol shall notify the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat that they will resort to the Enquiry Commission established under the provisions of this Appendix to determine whether a proposed activity, undertaken or proposed to be undertaken by another Party or Parties to the Protocol, is likely to have significant adverse effects on climate or weather patterns, air or water quality, the distribution, abundance, or productivity of floral and faunal species, and/or pristine areas or areas of biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic significance.  The Commission may otherwise determine whether an activity may diminish the value or efficiency of the environmental principles contained in Article 3 of the Protocol. The notification shall state the subject matter of the enquiry in a standard form produced by the Secretariat.

    2. The Secretariat shall immediately notify all Parties to the Protocol and the Chairman of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) of the submission. The Chairman of the CEP shall include the notification of a request for clarification of Article 3 as a priority matter in the CEP agenda.

    3. The CEP shall recommend a list of persons, not including nationals of any of the Parties to the enquiry procedure, for consideration to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). From this list, the ATCM shall designate three members who shall constitute the Enquiry Commission.

    4. In addition to the designated members, the requesting Party or Parties and the other Party or Parties shall appoint a scientific or technical expert for each side, and the two experts so appointed shall assist the Enquiry Commission, but will not have the right to vote.

    5. The Enquiry Commission shall elect its president and adopt its own rules of procedure.

    6. The Enquiry Commission may take all appropriate measures in order to carry out its functions, including:
    a) requesting the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to provide it with all relevant documents, facilities, and information; and
    b) when necessary, consulting the CEP, SCAR, COMNAP, CCAMLR, or any other component of the Antarctic Treaty System whose experience in the matter may be received as evidence by the Enquiry Commission.

    7. Members of the Enquiry Commission, Parties, their respective scientific and technical experts, and any other consultants or witnesses participating in the proceedings of the Enquiry Commission shall protect the confidentiality of any information they receive in confidence during the above mentioned proceedings.

    8. After notification has been received by the Secretariat, and the Enquiry Commission has initiated its work, absence of a Party or failure of a Party to present its case shall not constitute a bar to the continuation and completion of the work entrusted to the Enquiry Commission.

    9. Whenever the expenses of the Enquiry Commission, due to the particular nature of the matter or other circumstances, exceed or do not correspond to the normal operation of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, they shall be borne by the Parties to the enquiry procedure in equal shares.

    10. Any Party to the Protocol having a real interest in the subject-matter of the enquiry procedure, and whose interests may be affected by the findings and decisions of the Enquiry Commission, may intervene in the proceedings with the consent of the Enquiry Commission.

    11. The final opinion of the Enquiry Commission shall be based on the accepted environmental principles of Article 3 of the Protocol and on the mandate of the Madrid Final Act, and shall strive, as much as possible, to harmonize the policies and measures adopted by all Parties to the enquiry procedure, endeavoring to improve the application of Article 3 so as to give full effect to the Protocol.

    12.  Decisions of the Enquiry Commission on matters of procedure shall be made by the majority of its members. The final opinion and recommendations of the Enquiry Commission shall reflect the view of the majority of its members and shall include any dissenting view.

    13. The final opinion of the Enquiry Commission shall be presented within three months of the date it was established, unless it finds it necessary to extend the time limit for a period which should not exceed two months. Once rendered, the opinion of the Enquiry Commission shall be reviewed by the CEP and included with any additional views or recommendations of that body in the Report of the Chairman of the CEP to the ATCM.  


APPENDIX II

Development of a Guide for the Application of Article 3 by the CEP

Notwithstanding the mandate of the Madrid Final Act, a useful procedure to: (i) complement the development of a special procedure under article 18; (ii) assist the findings and opinions of any Enquiry Commission; or sometimes (iii) offer an alternative to eliminate the more contentious and time-consuming aspects of such procedure; but, above all, (iv) improve the “soft law” approach towards an agreed interpretation of Article 3, would be for a Working Group or Task Force of the CEP to develop a set of agreed upon Guidelines for the sound application of its “Principles”.  This would follow the precedent established for the environmental impact assessment procedures instituted by Article 8 of the Protocol and Annex I, whose periodic review and improvement remain essential for the multiple challenges involved in the designation of sites, review of management plans, and, in general, the gaps found in the present area protection system compared to the objectives of Annex V to the Protocol. Inevitably, the specificity of the problems which arise from the ambitious and all encompassing character of Article 3 will surface both in the enquiry procedure and in any “Guidelines” proposed to assist Parties in the reconciliation of policies and measures for environmental protection. However, the need that Parties to the Protocol attain the greatest possible accordance and methods related to the objectives of compliance of the Protocol requires that the political will of the Parties overcomes all possible obstacles, with the objective of making Article 3 a central element of an operational system, instead of a mere declaration of intentions.

