


Revision of Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 150 
Ardley Island






Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area N° 150
ARDLEY ISLAND,  MAXWELL BAY, KING GEORGE ISLAND 


1. Description of Values to be Protected
Ardley Island (62°13' S; 58°56' W) was originally designated as Site of Special Interest (SSSI) Nº 33 through Recommendation XVI-2 (1991), pursuant to a proposal by Chile, due to its diverse community of birds and terrestrial plants. During the XXIV ATCM, through the Measure 3, the expiry date of protection was extended. The Area has been protected for intensive research, but also includes a visitor zone, with a scientific station and tourist area.
The island was designated as a Protected Area because it supports a diverse assemblage of birds’ species that breed in it (Table 1). Its beaches are also visited by seals, which use the Area to rest and moult. Ardley Island also possesses a developed and outstanding flora, with several species of lichens and macro-lichens, mosses and vascular plants. Both the flora and fauna are extremely sensitive to human disturbance.
Due to its proximity to Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, Ardley Island is an attractive Area for tourist activities. During the last years, tourism increased from a few visitors to approximately a hundred visitors per season.
Table 1: List of bird species breeding at Ardley Island.

Spanish common name
English common name
Species
Pingüino Adelia
Adelie
Pygoscelis adeliae
Pingüino Barbijo
Chinstrap
Pygoscelis antarctica
Pingüino Papua
Gentoo
Pygoscelis papua
Skua o Salteador Pardo
Brown skua
Chatharacta antarctica lonnbergi
Skua o Salteador Polar
South Polar Skua
Chatharacta maccormicki
Petrel Gigante
Southern Giant Petrel
Macronectes giganteus
Petrel de Wilson
Wilson’s storm petrel
Oceanites oceanicus
Golondrina de vientre blanco
Blackbellied storm petrel
Fregetta tropica
Petrel damero o del cabo
Cape petrel
Daption capense
Gaviota dominica
Kelp gull
Larus dominicanus
Gaviotín antártico
Antarctic tern
Sterna vittata
Paloma antártica
Lesser sheathbill
Chionis alba

2. Aims and Objectives
The Management Plan of ASPA Nº 150 aims to:
    • Preserve the community of birds and the terrestrial ecosystem.
    • Avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance in the Area.
    • Allow scientific research on marine Antarctic birds, on the ecosystem and physical environment associated with the values for which the Area is protected, with the less possible interference.
    • Allow other scientific research in the Area provided it does not compromise the values for which the Area is protected. 
    • Minimize the possibilities of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area. 
    • Allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the Management Plan.
    • Allow tourists’ visits in the area in accordance with the measures established in the Protocol. 
3. Management Activities
The following management activities will be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
    • Copies of this Management Plan, including maps of the Area, shall be made available at the following locations:
    1. Julio Escudero Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    2. Eduardo Frei Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    3. Bellingshausen Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    4. Great Wall Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    5. King Seyong Station, King George Island.
    6. Artigas Station, King George Island.
    7. Jubany Station, King George Island.
    • The staff to be posted at Ardley Island will be specifically trained on all matters concerning this Management Plan and the measures established in the Protocol.
    • Markers, signs or any other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition.
    • The circulation will only take place on vegetation-free areas, taking a wide berth from the fauna, except when the scientific projects specifically mention otherwise and provided the correspondent harmful interference permits have been issued.
    • The tourist visitors shall circulate just in the tourist area and under the supervision of the authorized scientific staff.
    • Visits shall be made as necessary to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designed and to ensure management and the maintenance measures are adequate.
    • Establish what is strictly prohibited: entrance of vehicles of any kind, groups of visitors should not be more than 10 while critical stages of birds’ breeding cycle (incubation, hatching and early chick rearing) and no more than 20 at any other time, tourists can only visit tourist zone and only under authorization and supervision of the authorized scientific staff…
4. Period of Designation
Designated for an indefinite period.
5. Maps and Photographs
Two maps are enclosed to this Management Plan as Annexes:
Map 1. Ardley Island in relation to King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
Map 2. Ardley Island. Map showing Ardley Is and the main stations and constructions in the area, including the roads and main access points to the protected area. 
6. Description of the Area 
i. Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Ardley Island (62º13’ S; 58º54’ W) is located in the southwest coast of King George Island, about 500 m east of the coast of Fildes Peninsula, Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay). It is about 1 km southeast of the Bellingshausen Station (Russian Confederation) and of the Escudero and Frei Stations (Chile), and about 5 km east of the Great Wall Station (China).
The island is about 2.0 km long and 1.5 km at its widest, and rises to about 50 m altitude. Geomorphologically, the Area comprises mainly Tertiary andesitic-basaltic lavas and tuffs, and there are some raised beach terraces. It is snow and ice free in summer. A small freshwater pond, about 100 m long, on the southwest part of the island, remains between November and February. The Protected Area comprises the entire island and its associated littoral zone, including the isthmus between the island and Fildes Peninsula, in the west part of the island.
BREEDING BIRDS
The seabird community of Ardley Island is diverse and of exceptional biological interest. Its diversity encompasses several breeding species. Of particular importance are the breeding colonies of Pygoscelid penguins. Ardley Island also represents one of the few places where the three species of Pygoscelid breed together sympatrically. Gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis papua), whose number of breeding pairs has being around 4,000 in the last twelve breeding seasons. This is one of the biggest breeding colony of gentoo penguin censed of this species within the South Shetland Islands and probably in the Antarctic. Actually there are around50 breeding pairs of Chinstrap penguins (P. antarctica) and 300 breeding pairs Adélie penguins (P. adeliae). The breeding population of this species have being declining since the last 7 years, e.g. Adelies reduced their breeding population from 1192 in the breeding season 1998/99 to 334 in 2005/06 (more than 70% of reduction).
Detailed ornithological and botanical research has been undertaken on Ardley Island for many years mainly by Chilean and German scientists, with brief studies made also by scientists from Russia, Korea and China. Other breeding species of particular importance are Southern Giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), Brown and South Polar skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii and C. maccormicki), Kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), Black-bellied storm petrels (Fregetta tropica) and Snowy sheathbills (Chionis alba). 
German studies indicate that the Giant petrel breeding population has declined by about 80% in recent years. There is strong evidence that numerical fluctuations of these particular populations are a direct response to disturbances produced by large numbers of visitors, aircraft overflights and station constructions. Disturbed pairs have moved their breeding sites to less influenced areas. In the case of the Skuas breeding population, reflects anthropogenic and natural influences in the recorded fluctuations caused by variable food availability and weather conditions. The effects of these impacts will continue to be monitored as an integral part of the long-term ornithological research being undertaken at this site.
MARINE MAMMALS
Seals are usual visitors of Ardley Island. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) breed near the Area between September and November, on beaches and on the sea ice in Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay). During December and March, some Elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), Weddell seals and Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) visit the Area to rest or to moult. 
Although no records of Leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) have been made in Ardley Island, some animals have seen predating on penguins, mainly in the eastern area of the protected area.
In summer time, from the beaches, is also possible to record some Humpback and Minke whales in the waters of Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay).
VEGETATION
The island possesses some of the best-developed and most extensive plant communities in the South Shetland Islands, notably the climax fell field ecosystem dominated by macro lichens as Himantormia lugubris and several species of the Gender Usnea. Such vegetation is extremely sensitive to human intervention and is very easily damaged. 
The presence of Antarctic grass Deschampsia antarctica reveals a significant increase in size and number of the recorded colonies. It is suggested that this population increases as a response to warmer and longer growing seasons, caused by regional warming.  
ii. Restricted and managed zones within the Area
There is a tourist area in Ardley Island. Tourist visits shall be restricted to this zone and it shall be guided for the authorized staff, according to the terms of Permit extended for each visit. Access to bird breeding areas should be restricted to scientific activities. 
iii. Structures within and near the Area
There are two semi-permanent summer-only research refuges. Ripamonti I, in the northern coast of Ardley and Ripamonti II (former AWI hut), 200 meters south west from Ballaird Point on the south eastern area, situated inside the penguins’ breeding colonies. There are also two Argentinean buildings in the area, 50 meters east of the Ripamonti I Hut. 
An Argentinean radio beacon facilitates navigation, looking towards Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay). 
All the described structures remain in the Area year-round. 
iv. Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
There are four Protected Areas in Nelson and King George Islands, close to Ardley Island,. The nearest area is Fildes Peninsula, ASPA Nº 125, which lies about 2.0 km west and north-northwest. The ASPA Nº 128, West shore of Admiralty Bay, is located about 25.3 km west-northwest. Also in King George Island, the ASPA Nº 132, Potter Peninsula, is approximately 14.5 km. Finally, Harmony Point, ASPA Nº 133, is located around 18.6 km west-southwest from Ardley Island. 
7. Permit Conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate National Authority. Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
    • It is issued only for scientific purposes or for essential management purposes, consistent with plan objectives, such as inspection, maintenance or review activities which must be undertaken in accordance with the objectives of the Management Plan and cannot be served elsewhere.
    • The actions permitted may not jeopardize the scientific and ecological values of the Area.
    • Any management activity will be developed in support of the objectives of the Management Plan.
    • The actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan.
    • During the stated period, the permit, or an authorized copy, shall be carried at all times by the scientific staff present within the Area.
    • At the end of the period, a report shall be supplied to the appropriate National Authority mentioned in the permit, including any activities undertaken that were not explicitly mentioned in the authorized Permit.
i. Access to and movement within the Area 
Any access to the Area will be possible only with a permit delivered for the appropriate National Authority. Access to Ardley Island shall be by small boat or on foot. The movements within the Area shall be carried on foot.
Boat access
The northern coast of Ardley Island is the appropriate sector to land. Small zodiac boats may land in the Island only supervised by authorized scientific personnel. Recommended and preferred landing boat spots: Ripamonti I Beach and Punta Faro Beach. Groups between 10 and 20 visitors per time, depending on the breeding cycle stage of birds. It is not allowed that boat crew or other people in boats move on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of the landing and sites contiguous to refuges, unless they carry with them an authorized Permit.
On foot
From Fildes Peninsula, it is possible to reach the island on foot, crossing the isthmus during low tide periods. Pedestrian activity should be restricted whenever possible to areas with minimal vegetation, and should avoid any seabird breeding sites, except as required for approved research studies. Tourists and non-scientific station and ship personnel should not move on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of their landing site unless specifically authorized by Permit, in order to minimize disturbance of biota. The tourist activity may only be developed with the assistance of an appropriate and authorized guide.
Vehicle access
The use of any type of vehicles, including amphibious craft on land, jeeps or terrestrial vehicles of any type, are not allowed in the Protected Area. 
Overflights
Due to the widespread presence of seabird over the island, landing by aircraft is prohibited within the Area and any necessary overflight shall be conducted according to the height restrictions imposed in the following table:
Minimum overflights heights within the Area, according to aircraft type

Aircraft type
Number of engines
Minimum height above ground


Meters
Feet
Helicopter
1
750
2460
Helicopter
2
1000
3300
Fixed-wing
1 or 2
450
1500
Fixed-wing
4
1000
3300
Aircraft landing at and taking off from Teniente Marsh airfield should avoid overflying the island.
These aircraft regulations should be inserted into the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) and a “Wild Life and Low Flying Avoidance Map” related to ASPA Nº 150 should be prepared as recommended by Resolution 2 (2004).
ii. Activities that are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time or place
    • Scientific research that will not jeopardize the ecosystem or scientific values of the Area, or somehow diminish the value of the Area as a reference site.
    • Essential management activities, including monitoring.
    • Tourist activities duly restricted to the Tourist Zone carried on by groups limited to a maximum of 20 persons at any time. Such groups should only have access to the north coast of the island, as far as 300 m west of Braillard Point, and to the Chilean refuge located in the central part of the north coast (Point Luis). Groups shall be accompanied by a guide, provided by the National station approving the visit, which shall be responsible for their conduct and which shall be fully conversant with the Site Management Plan, Annexes II and V to the Protocol for Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the Scar Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, and the current research programs within the Area.
    • The appropriate National Authority should be notified of any activities or measures undertaken that were not included in the authorized Permit, including the tourist visits.
iii. Installation, modification or removal of structures
No additional structures will be erected in the Area, except for essential scientific or management activities, and with a proper permit for a specified period. Any scientific equipment to be installed in the Area shall be approved in a Permit and clearly labeled, indicating country, name of the principal investigator or agency and year of installation. All such items shall be made of materials that pose minimal risk of harm to the fauna or of contamination to the Area.
Installation, maintenance, modification or removal of structures shall be undertaken in a manner that minimizes disturbance to flora and fauna. Removal of structures, equipment or makers for which the period specified in the Permit has expired, should also be considered in the Permit.
iv. Location of field camps
Camping should be avoided within the Area.
However, if such activity is considered necessary for essential purposes specified in the Permit, temporary camping may be allowed at the vicinity of the existing refuges.
No other locations shall be used for this purpose, in order to restrict human impacts and reduce their effects on the Area.
v. Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be into the Area
No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the corresponding Permit, shall be properly stored during the stated period, so that risks inherent to their introduction into the environment are minimized. If releases occur which are likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than that of leaving the material at the place.
Fuel, food and other material are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes related with the scientific or management activities for which the Permit has been granted and every precaution shall be taken against the risk of accidental introductions.
Any materials so introduced shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the stated period.
vi. Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by a Permit issued in accordance with the Annex II to the Madrid Protocol. Where the activity involves taking or harmful interference with the flora or fauna in the Area, the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes should be used as a minimum standard.
vii. Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall only be in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Removal of dead biological specimens for scientific purposes must not exceed levels that affect the other species in the Area and only with the purpose of developing pathological studies.
Anything of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit holder or otherwise authorized, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in the area. If this is the case, the appropriate National Authority should be notified.
viii. Disposal of waste
All the non-physiological waste shall be removed from the Area. Domestic liquid waste may be dumped into the sea, according to the Article 5 of the Annex III of the Madrid protocol, or preferably may be temporally stored and removed from the Area at the end of the stated period.
The waste generated as a consequence of the activities developed in the Area should be temporally stored nearby the refuges, in a secure place against accidental loss. It should be properly labeled as Trash. At the end of the period, it should be removed from the Area.

ix. Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met
    • Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of limited samples of plant material and animals for with scientific purposes, for analyses or review, or for protective measures.
    • Any specific sites subject to long-term monitoring that are vulnerable to inadvertent disturbance should be appropriately marked.
    • To study the effect or possible disturbance of the activities developed in Fildes peninsula, a monitoring of flights into and out of Teniente Marsh airport should be developed.
    • To avoid interference with long-term research and monitoring activities or possible duplication of effort, persons planning new projects within the Area should consult with established national programs working at Ardley Island before initiating the work.
    • To help maintain the scientific values found at Ardley Island, visitors shall follow the indications regarding this Management Plan.
x. Requirements for reports
The principal holder for each permit issued shall submit to the appropriate National Authority a report describing the activities undertaken in the Area once the stated period has ended. Such report should include the information identified in the Visit Report Form, recommended by SCAR and enclosed with the Permit. The report should be stored with the National Authority in order to enable it to provide summary descriptions of the activities conducted in the Annual Exchange of Information or to provide the necessary information on human activities within the Area to all the interested Parties in a proper management of the Area; and further maintain a record of usage which may serve the review processes of the management plan, improve the scientific use of the area and contribute to its best environmental protection.


ANNEXES: Maps



Map 1. Ardley Island in relation to King George Island, South Shetland Islands.



Map 2. Ardley Island. Map showing Ardley Is and the main stations and constructions in the area, including the roads and main access points to the protected area.






