


Possibilities for environmental management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Proposal to establish an intersessional contact group





“Possibilities for environmental management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island”
Proposal to establish an intersessional contact group
submitted by
Brazil, China, Germany, Korea and Russia

Introduction
At CEP VII Germany introduced IP 005, “Research Project ‘Risk assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas’”. This paper described a three-year research project (2003 – 2006) to provide data to fully evaluate the role and structure of a possible broad-scale management system on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. The project has been carried out by scientists of the Polar and Bird Ecology Group at the Institute of Ecology, University of Jena, Germany. Several CEP members expressed their support for the proposal, and indicated that they would willingly assist Germany in the project.
At CEP VIII Germany introduced IP 016, “Progress Report on the Research Project “Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas””. This paper provided an update on the project, noting the excellent co-operation of other Parties in the area through an informal co-ordination group. Germany also indicated its intent to submit a draft ASMA plan for consideration at CEP IX.
At ATCM XXVIII, “Germany agreed that prior to tabling a draft Management Plan for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island (King George Island) and following a proposal by Chile an International Working Group should be established, composed of those Parties with stations and/or huts in the area, Parties with an interest in the area as well as Observers to the Antarctic Treaty. This group will discuss the issues related to the Draft Management Plan. With this purpose, Germany will carry out two international workshops, one in September 2005 and another one in January/February 2006, in order to convene the participants on this issue” (Final Report of ATCM XXVIII, para. 90).
Both workshops mentioned in the preceding paragraph have been carried out. The first took place at the University of Jena (Germany) in September 2005, where participants appreciated the work undertaken and expressed support for the intention to develop effective management tools for the region. The outcome of the workshop is summarized in Appendix 1 to this Working Paper. The following deals with the second workshop.

1. The King George Island Workshop
1.1 General
The second workshop was convened by the Federal Environmental Agency and the Federal Ministry of the Environment of Germany, from 30 January to 3 February 2006. It was hosted by the Russian Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St Petersburg, Russia, at Bellingshausen Station on King George Island, which provided excellent facilities. All participants appreciated the hospitality and the agreeable atmosphere of the meeting. 
Transport was generously supported by Norwegian, Chilean and US Antarctic tour operators. Their assistance as well as the personal engagement of individuals within these companies contributed to a great extent to the success of the workshop. 
The workshop was attended by government representatives, scientists, and station leaders of eight Antarctic Treaty Parties, as well as representatives of ASOC and IAATO and other non-governmental organizations.
1.2 Main Findings and Recommendations 
At the workshop, possible management approaches for the Fildes Peninsula Region (including Fildes Peninsula, Ardley Island and other adjacent smaller islands) were discussed; among others a Fildes Region ASMA, a zoning system without ASMA designation, the extension of ASPA Nr. 125, special guidelines for station activities, science and tourism, the possibility of a Maxwell Bay ASMA and as well the option of no changes in the current system.
There was general agreement among all participants that:
    • the Fildes Peninsula Region needs a multiple use management system and 
    • an ASMA for the Fildes Peninsula Region would provide the most comprehensive approach for managing the area. 
It was recommended that further discussion on such a management system should include all Parties with stations and/or huts in the area, Parties with an interest in the area as well as Experts and Observers to the Antarctic Treaty.
The findings of the workshop, the list of the participants and the work programme are attached as Appendix 2 to this Working Paper.

2. Conclusion
In order to formalize the discussion process on a management system for the Fildes Peninsula Region, a single Intersessional Contact Group should be established by the CEP. This group should collect management concepts of various Parties on a broad basis, and should discuss possible management approaches that will include among others, visitor guidelines as a practical tool, and the possibility of designing the Fildes Peninsula Region as an ASMA. For this Intersessional Contact Group the following Terms of Reference are proposed:
    1) Discuss the future preparation of a draft Management Plan, for the possible designation of the Fildes Peninsula Region as an ASMA considering any revision of Management Plans for the ASPAs involved (No. 125 and 150).
    2) Consider in its work in particular the findings of the King George Island Workshop.
    3) Examine in cooperation with CCAMLR the possibility to include marine components in the referred Management Plan.
    4) Consider the possibility to set up an integrated web based information system in order to allow for input of all scientific, tourist and logistic activities in the Fildes Peninsula Region, and to this end cooperate with SCAR, IAATO and COMNAP.
    5) Submit an advance report of the mentioned discussion about the preparation of the draft Management Plan to CEP X."

Appendix 1

Outcome of the Workshop ‘Human impact on terrestrial habitats in the Antarctic’ held at the 22nd International Polar Meeting
23 September 2005, Jena, Germany

The workshop joined researchers from twelve nations currently working on human impact studies in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic. It offered a platform for a comprehensive and profound meeting of experts on current human impacts in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic.
After a brief opening address by a representative of the Federal Foreign Office, Germany
18 presentations were given and discussed in the course of one day (see program below). 
Peter Convey gave a research overview regarding alien terrestrial organisms in the Antarctic. Although few impacts are visible in the environment, there is a strong lack of basic survey and monitoring data. He stated an urgent need for the establishment of monitoring programs and measures to mitigate the risk of introduction of such organisms by the movement of people and cargo. Kevin Hughes presented results from responses of Antarctic soil micro-organisms to oil contamination. Microcosm experiments showed that oil degradation increased to the greatest extent with a treatment combination of bioaugmentation and biostimulation. 
Enn Kaup summarised studies of sewage flow and waste dispersal into Antarctic lakes between the 1970s and 90s. Impacts were evident in the vicinity of stations including increases in salinity and nutrient levels. In recent years, research and environmental monitoring activities of the Russian Antarctic Expedition focussed on these and other human impacts which Maria Gavrilo outlined in the workshop.
After Michaela Mayer had given a special overview of the development of tourism in Arctic and Antarctic, three speakers reported on human impacts on the sub-Antarctic islands. Sally Poncet provided an insight into the monitoring program for the South Georgian Islands Albatross and Prion where interactions between visitors, fur seals and wandering albatrosses are evident. Marienne de Villiers summarised a variety of human impacts and presented current management activities to reduce or eliminate them on the Prince Edward Islands. Finally, experimental and observational disturbance studies on penguins of Macquarie Island were undertaken and presented by Nick Holmes.
Then, several presentations followed dealing with studies being conducted on King George Island. Rolf Weber informed about the Brazilian research network for assessing impacts around Ferraz Station in Admiralty Bay. This large multidisciplinary study runs since 2002, joining 15 research groups. A Chinese-German co-operation project on the impacts of station food and garbage on skuas at the Fildes Peninsula was presented by Wang Zipan. Preceding the vegetation mapping on the Fildes Peninsula in 2003/04, South Korean researchers produced a GPS/GIS-map for the vegetation around King Sejong Station on Barton Peninsula – an overview was given by Ji Hee Kim. Dmitry Vlasov reported results of a survey on fungi conducted on the Fildes Peninsula, Ardley and Nelson Island that covered rock, soil and building material.
To open the last session of the workshop, Rod Downie provided an insight into the development of the ASMA management package of Deception Island. This package was the result of an intensive international co-operation over several years. In the Fildes Peninsula Region, a similar approach could be used. The German research project ‘Risk assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas’ was presented by Hans-Ulrich Peter, Osama Mustafa, Christina Büsser and Simone Pfeiffer. 
In a final podium discussion, preliminary results of the research project, a risk assessment and management ideas for the Fildes Peninsula were discussed constructively. The participants strongly appreciated the work undertaken and supported the intention to continue with the research and to develop an effective management of the region. 


Workshop Program
 
08:30 – 08:45		Opening of the workshop, introduction

08:45 – 09:05		Peter Convey, Cambridge/UK:
			How vulnerable are Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems to biological 					invasions?
09:05 – 09:25		Kevin Hughes & Bethan Stallwood, Cambridge, Bangor/UK:
Oil spills in Antarctic terrestrial environments – the impact on soil microorganisms
09:25 – 09:45		Enn Kaup, Tallinn/Estonia:										Human impacts in catchments and lakes of Schirmacher, Thala and 					Larsemann oases	

09:45 – 10:15		Coffee break
10:15 – 10:35		Maria Gavrilo & Victor Pomelov, St.Petersburg/Russia:
			Environmental activities of the Russian Antarctic Expedition

10:35 – 10:55	 	Sally Poncet, Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas): 
			Albatross and Prion Islands, South Georgia: a management challenge

10:55 – 11:15		Michaela Mayer, Bremen/Germany:
			Environmental impacts of Polar tourism

11:15 – 11:35		Marienne De Villiers & John Cooper, Cape Town/South Africa:
			Human impacts at the sub-Antarctic Prince Edward Islands

11:35 – 11:55		Nick Holmes & Melissa Giese, Hobart, Kingston/Australia:
			Investigating the variation in penguin responses to human activity on 					Macquarie Island

11:55 – 13:30		Lunch break

13:30 – 14:00	Rolf Weber, Cristina Engel Alvarez, Antonio Batista, Martin Sander et al., São Paulo, Vitória, Santa Cruz do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Viçosa/Brazil:
			Environmental assessment in the vicinity of Cmte. Ferraz Station 					(Brasil), Admiralty Bay, King George Island – Concepts and 						achievements in an integrated methodology

14:00 – 14:15		Wang Zipan, Hans-Ulrich Peter & Anne Froehlich, Shanghai/China 					Jena/Germany:
			Impacts of station garbage on the diet of Antarctic Skuas on Fildes 					Peninsula of King George Island

14:15 – 14:35		Ji Hee Kim & Hosung Chung, Ansan/Korea:
A baseline survey for long-term monitoring of terrestrial vegetation around King Sejong Station, King George Island	 

14:35 – 14:55		Dmitry Vlasov & Vycheslav Krylenkov, St. Petersburg/Russia:
			Mycobiota of the Antarctic Polar Stations area on the King George 					Island

14:55 - 15:15		Rod Downie, Cambridge/UK:
			Deception Island- a trailblazer in Antarctic site management


15:15 – 15:45		Coffee Break	

15:45 – 15:50		Hans-Ulrich Peter, Jena/Germany:
			Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the 						development of management plans for designation as Antarctic 						Specially Protected or Managed Areas – a short introduction		

15:50 – 16:10 		Osama Mustafa, Christina Büsser, Simone Pfeiffer & Hans-Ulrich 					Peter, 	Jena/Germany:
			Mapping of traffic activities on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island – 					methods and results

16:10 – 16:30  		Christina Büßer, Uwe Grunewald, Tiemo Kahl, Osama Mustafa, 					Simone Pfeiffer & Hans-Ulrich Peter, Jena/Germany:
			Environmental data and human activities on Fildes Peninsula and 					Ardley Island

16:30 – 16:45		Hans-Ulrich Peter, Christina Büsser, Osama Mustafa & Simone 					Pfeiffer, Jena/Germany:
Biological data and risk assessment (Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island)

16:45 – 17:10		Simone Pfeiffer, Christina Büsser, Osama Mustafa & Hans-Ulrich 					Peter, 	Jena/Germany:
			Possible elements of a drafts Management plan for the south-western 					part of 	King George Island

17:10 – 18:00		Discussion and conclusions



Appendix 2

Workshop

“Possibilities for Environmental Management of 
Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island”

3 February 2006

Findings
    (1) There was general agreement among all participants that the Fildes Peninsula Region (including Fildes Peninsula, Ardley Island and other adjacent smaller islands) needs a multiple use management system.
    (2) There was also a consensus amongst participants that an ASMA for the Fildes Peninsula Region would provide the most comprehensive approach for managing the area. 
    (3) Some participants suggested that from their point of view it would be better to have a ‘step by step approach’, namely to start with the development of guidelines, followed by a zoning system and finally by a Management Plan for a Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA. 
    (4) Some participants suggested a Maxwell Bay ASMA would provide a more comprehensive ecosystem approach in order to include the marine components. 
    (5) The Management Plan for the Fildes Peninsula Region could be incorporated into a future Maxwell Bay Management Plan if appropriate.
    (6) It was noted that further ASPAs in the Fildes Peninsula Region may be needed. Results of recent scientific research could be reflected in the revision of existing ASPAs. 
    (7) From a practical point of view, there was strong support to have information readily available at stations in order to provide information to visitors, station residents and to coordinate activities. This information should also be used for educational purposes prior to arrival.
    (8) In addition, it was suggested that an integrated web based information system would allow for input of all scientific, tourist and logistical activities in the Fildes Peninsula Region. 
    (9) Some participants stressed the lack of implementation of already existing guidelines and recommendations within the Antarctic Treaty System.
    (10) Concerns were raised that not all parties present in this area were represented in the discussions at the workshop. The participants would welcome the participation of all parties with stations or huts in the Fildes Peninsula Region in the discussion process.

Recommendations from the workshop
    • Participants were asked to provide their governments with the findings of this workshop. Interested parties will jointly table a paper to the next ATCM containing the summary and the recommendations of this workshop. 
    • A Working Paper will be the appropriate input to achieve a decision by the CEP to establish an International Working Group. 
    • According to Paragraph 90 of the Final ATCM XXVIII Report “this International Working Group should be composed by those parties with stations and huts in the area, parties with interests in the area as well as observers to the Antarctic Treaty”.
    • Further workshops may be necessary. An earlier consideration of Chile, as a country with one of the largest and long-date installations in King George Island, to host a workshop on the projected Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA is most appreciated.

Workshop
‘Possibilities for Environmental Management of the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island’


Bellingshausen Station, King George Island, Antarctic

30 January to 3 February 2006


List of invited Participants and Guests*


Country/ Organization
Name
Institution
Contact details
Brazil
Tania Brito
Programa Antártico Brasileiro/MMA 
Diretoria de Áreas Protegidas - SBF 
Ministério do Meio Ambiente 
tania.brito@mma.gov.br
Chile
Maria Jose Rosello*
Instituto Antártico Chileno (INACH)
mjrosello@hotmail.com
chicarosello@yahoo.com
China
Jiang Xiaodong
Chinese Arctic & Antarctic Administration
xjiang@pric.gov.cn
Korea
Jaeyong Choi*
Chungnam National University
jaychoi@cnu.ac.kr
Korea
Sang Joon Lee
Ministry of Environment
Isjsws@me.go.kr
Korea
Ji Hee Kim*
Korea Polar Research Institute
jhalgae@kopri.re.kr
Korea
Jeong-Hoon Kim*
Kyun Hee Univerity
stiltkim@hotmail.com
Korea
Wanho Lim*
DMZwild Co., Ltd.
Nature Documentary Production 
Wanho21@hanmail.net
Korea
Jun Woo Park*
DMZwild Co.,
Nature Documentary Production
blackisa@empas.com
Russia
Oleg Sakharov
Base Commander of Bellingshausen Station
R1ANF@Winlink.org
Russia
Mikhail P. Andreev*
Komarov Botanical Institute
lichenbin@yandex.ru
andreevmp@yandex.ru
Russia
Victor E. Lagun*
Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute
lagun@aari.nw.ru

Russia
Maria Gavrilo
Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute
mashuka@aari.nw.ru
Russia
Alexander Orup*
Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute
aorup@yahoo.com
Russia
Maxim Moskalevsky*
Russian Academy of Sciences
moskalevsky@mail.ru
Russia
Nikolay Osokin*
Russian Academy of Sciences
osokinn@mail.ru
Spain
Manuel Ballestros*
University of Barcelona
mballesteros@ub.edu
Spain
Javiar Cristobo*
Instituto Espanol de Oceanografia
fjcristobo@yahoo.es
Uruguay
Daniel Antúnez
Uruguayan Antarctic Institute
danantun@gmail.com
danantun@hotmail.com
Uruguay
Longino Sosa* Arancet
Base Commander of Artigas Station
bcaa@iau.gub.uy
l_arancet@hotmail.com
Uruguay
Gustavo Caubarrere*
Uruguayan Antarctic Institute
Servicio Geografico
sgm@iau.gub.uy
gustavocaubarrere@adinet.com.uy
IAATO
Denise Landau
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
iaato@iaato.org
ASOC
Ricardo Roura
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
ricardo.roura@worldonline.nl 
‘Mission Antarctica’
Garry Evans*

garry.evans@evans-consulting.co.uk
Germany
Axel Szelinski
Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety
axel.szelinski@bmu.bund.de
Germany
Antje Neumann
Federal Environmental Agency
antje.neumann@uba.de
Germany
Fritz Hertel
Federal Environmental Agency
fritz.hertel@uba.de
Germany
Wolfgang Dinter
Federal Agency for Nature Conservation
wolfgang.dinter@bfn-vilm.de
Germany
Michaela Mayer
RS Research Shipping GmbH
mm@michaela-mayer.de
Germany
Steffen Vogt
Institute for Geography/ University of Freiburg
steffen.vogt@geographie.uni-freiburg.de
Germany
Hans-Ulrich Peter
Institute for Ecology/ University of Jena
hans-ulrich.peter@uni-jena.de
Germany
Simone Pfeiffer 
Institute for Ecology/ University of Jena
simone.pfeiffer@uni-jena.de
Germany
Christina Buesser
Institute for Ecology/ University of Jena
christina.buesser@uni-jena.de
Germany
Osama Mustafa
Institute for Ecology/ University of Jena
osama.mustafa@uni-jena.de



Workshop

“Possibilities for Environmental Management of 
Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island”

Meeting agenda


January 30 to February 3, 2006



Supported by the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE)
Valery Lukin, Director of RAE


Location
Russian Station Bellingshausen

Kindly hosted by the Base Commander of Bellingshausen Station
Oleg Sakharov


Convenor
The Federal Environmental Agency, Germany

and

The Federal Ministry of the Environment, Germany



Office in charge of organisation
The Federal Environmental Agency, Germany 
Mr. Fritz Hertel/ Mrs. Antje Neumann
Fachgebiet I 2.4 
Woerlitzer Platz 1
D- 0 6 8 4 4   D e s s a u
Germany
Tel.: ++49 340-2103-2688 / -2395
Fax: ++49 340-2104-2688 / -2395
Email: fritz.hertel@uba.de, antje.neumann@uba.de
Website: www.umweltbundeamt.de



Workshop

‘Possibilities for Environmental Management of 
Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island’

Bellingshausen Station, King George Island, Antarctic
January 30 to February 3, 2006


Sunday, January 29, 2006

Arrival of participants at the Russian Station Bellingshausen.


Monday, January 30, 2006

09.30 - 10.00	Addresses of welcome 
Chair: H.-U. Peter 
- Oleg Sakharov (Base Commander of Bellingshausen Station, Russia)
- Axel Szelinski (Federal Ministry of the Environment, Germany)


10.00 - 12.00 	Technical information and introductions
Chair: H.-U. Peter 

- Introduction to the workshop (Antje Neumann, Federal Environmental Agency, Germany)

- Introduction to the survey area (H.-U. Peter & colleagues, University of Jena, Germany) 

12.00 – 13.00 	Lunch break

Afternoon
Excursion: Visiting Ardley Island (H.-U. Peter & colleagues, University of Jena, Germany)


Evening
Ice Breaker Party


Tuesday, January 31, 2006

Note: All oral presentations are limited to 20 minutes plus 10 min. for discussion!

09.00 - 10.30	Environmental management within national programmes
Chair: M. Mayer

    • “Environmental Management Approaches in Uruguayan National Antarctic Programmes” (Daniel Antúnez; Uruguayan Antarctic Institute, Uruguay) 

    • “Environmental Management Approaches in Chinese National Antarctic Programmes” (Jiang Xiaodong; Chinese Arctic & Antarctic Administration, China)

    • “Environmental Initiatives in the Brazilian Antarctic Programme” (Tania Brito, Ministério do Meio Ambiente, Brazil) 

Coffee break

11.00 - 12.00	Environmental management at research stations
		Chair: Mikhail P. Andreev 

    • "Environmental Monitoring Programmes of King Sejong Station King George Island" (Jaeyong Choi, Chungnam National University, Korea) 

    • “Cleaning-Up Operations at the Russian Station Bellingshausen 1999-2002” (Oleg Sakharov, Base Commander of Bellingshausen Station, Russia)

Lunch break

14.00 - 15.30	Aspects of environmental situation of Fildes Peninsula & Ardley Island
		Chair: S. Pfeiffer

    • “Population Fluctuation of Pygoscelid Penguins during 1994-2005 at Ardley Island, South Shetland Islands” (Maria José Rosello, Instituto Antártico Chileno, Chile) 

    • “Peculiarities of the lichen flora and vegetation of the Fildes Peninsula and of King George Island” (Mikhail P. Andreev; Komarov Botanical Institute, Russia) 

    • “King George Island Climatology (Bellingshausen and Arctowki station data comparison results)” (Victor E. Lagun, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, Russia) 

Coffee break

16.00 - 17.30	Aspects of environmental management on Fildes Peninsula & Ardley Isld
		Chair: A. Szelinski

    • “Managing Tourism on the Fildes Peninsula from an IAATO Point of View” (Denise Landau, International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators –IAATO)

    • “Environmental Reports of Fildes Peninsula, 1988-1997: Benchmarks for Environmental Management” (Ricardo Roura, The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition –ASOC)

    • “Environmental Studies (monitoring) in the Russian Antarctic Program: ‘Positive experience and still missing linkages’” (Maria Gavrilo, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, Russia) 


Wednesday, February 1, 2006

09.00 - 12.00		
Chair: F. Hertel

    • “Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula & Ardley Island and development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas” (Hans-Ulrich Peter, Ossama Mustafa, Christina Buesser, Simone Pfeiffer, University of Jena, Germany), discussion

Lunch break

Afternoon
- Excursion: Western part of Fildes Peninsula (Hans-Ulrich Peter & colleagues, University of Jena, Germany)


Thursday, February 2, 2006

09.00 - open end	
Chair: A. Neumann

    • “Modules for designing Fildes Peninsula & Ardley Island as an Antarctic specially managed area (ASMA), discussion of possible alternatives” (Simone Pfeiffer, University of Jena, Germany)
    • Discussion 
Each participant is welcome to present his views in this discussion!


Friday, February 3, 2006

09.00 - 12.00		
Chair: A. Szelinski

    • Conclusions and results of the workshop (Antje Neumann and Fritz Hertel, Federal Environmental Agency, Germany), discussion included

Lunch break

14.00 	Wrap up and Finals
Chair: H.-U. Peter

    • Other business (N.N.)

    • Closing of the workshop (Oleg Sakharov, Base Commander of Bellingshausen Station, Russia and Axel Szelinski, Federal Ministry of the Environment, Germany)

Evening
Farewell Party


Saturday, February 4, 2006

Begin of departure. 


Please note: 
The agenda is flexible depending on contributions still due and other circumstances (e.g. weather conditions).

