


Report of the CEP Intersessional Contact Group on Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica




Report of the CEP Intersessional Contact Group on Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica
CEP Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
    1. This paper summarises the views received during the 2005-06 UK co-ordinated CEP Intersessional Contact Group on Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica.  As a result of the ICG’s work, the four Site Guidelines adopted under ATCM Resolution 5(2005) have been revised.  In addition, draft Site Guidelines have been prepared for a further seven sites. These drafts are attached at Annex A.  The key ICG recommendations are that:
    a) the CEP should advise the ATCM of the revisions to the four Site Guidelines listed in Resolution 5(2005) (as required by paragraph 4 of that Resolution); and
    b) the CEP should recommend that the drafts of the 7 new Site Guidelines be adopted by the ATCM.

Background
    2. The concept of Site Guidelines for Visitors was adopted by Resolution 5(2004).  That Resolution lists four sites for which Site Guidelines had been prepared.  On adopting these Site Guidelines, the ATCM mandated the CEP to undertake a review of those texts, plus any further Site Guidelines proposals.  The United Kingdom was asked to co-ordinate an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to conduct such reviews.

    3. The Terms of Reference (TOR) for the ICG are attached at Annex B.  Participants were identified from Argentina; Australia; Chile; China; France; Germany; Italy; Japan; Korea; New Zealand; Norway; Romania; Sweden; Ukraine; United Kingdom; United States; SCAR; ASOC; and IAATO; with an observer from the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. 

    4. The ICG conducted its work using the on-line CEP Discussion Forum.  There were three rounds of discussions on the full range of issues identified in the TOR.  Full reports of the comments provided during each round are attached at Annex C.  

    5. In addition, the three Parties (Argentina, Australia and Norway) and one Invited Expert (IAATO) who provided comments in the first two rounds of discussion, joined the UK and a US NGO representative (who had been involved in the preparation of the existing Site Guidelines), on an on-site review during January and February 2006.  This on-site review team was able to visit the 4 sites for which Site Guidelines were adopted in 2005 plus a further 6 of 7 sites for which new Site Guidelines had been submitted to the ICG for consideration.  The review team submitted a detailed report of their findings as part of the third round of ICG discussions.  (In addition the on-site review team have also prepared a separate paper on some of the wider policy issues relating to Site Guidelines.  This is submitted as a separate Working Paper: XXIX/WP002.)

ICG Conclusions
    6. The ICG identified a number of ways of improving the clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness of Site Guidelines.  These are incorporated in the reformatted and redesigned Guidelines, attached at Annex A, and included:
    • Keeping the overall length of Site Guidelines to two A4 pages (this would provide the potential for visitors to print laminated versions of the Guidelines to take on-site);
    • Regional location maps;
    • Shorter descriptions, focusing on topographic, fauna, flora and scientific/historical/cultural features;
    • Consistent format to enable visitors to see the key site management provisions at a glance;
    • Use of aerial photographs and photographs of key features, where available.

    7. With regard to the specific content of the four adopted and the seven newly proposed Site Guidelines, the comments received have also be incorporated in the attached reformatted Guidelines.  In summary, these were largely focused on:
    • Ensuring only site specific information is included;
    • Removing ‘Sensitivity Ratings’ and instead highlighting the key features of each site, especially those which may be vulnerable to visitor disturbance (but see para 8 below);
    • Including detailed ‘Landing Restrictions’, covering ship size and number of visitors ashore at any time.  Also introducing a new concept of specifying the maximum number of ships to visit each site each day (midnight to midnight), as well as the concept of a ‘rest period’ which would largely close a site between specified times, in order to ensure minimal or no disturbance to wildlife a certain number of hours per day;
    • Introducing a concept of ‘zoning’ sites to clarify visitor behaviour in different areas of a site;
    • Focusing on specific and instructive management provisions for the ‘Visitor Code of Conduct’ sections.

    8. In considering the issue of site sensitivity ratings for the Site Guidelines, it was considered that site sensitivity would be a useful tool in assessing the need for guidelines for specific sites, but that the sensitivity rating in itself was not directly pertinent to site management.  The ICG suggest, however, that the CEP give the matter of site sensitivity rating further consideration.

Ongoing Review of Adopted Site Guidelines
    9. The CEP should note that the Site Guidelines submitted for adoption are based on the current level of visitation to each site.  Consequently, although the sites each have a recommended maximum daily visitation rate, under the current patterns of tourism, none of the sites would be visited up to those maximum visits on more than a handful of days each season.  Were that position to change, the ICG would recommend that the CEP should undertake a further review of the concept of maximum daily visitation rates in the Site Guidelines. (This issue is also highlighted in ATCM XXIX/WP002).  The ICG would suggest that the CEP recommend to the ATCM that any text adopting new Guidelines should highlight this point.

    10. In addition, the following points were raised during the ICG discussions which are relevant to the future review of Site Guidelines:
    • Maps – whilst the sketch maps included in the Site Guidelines are useful for general orientation, they are not topographically accurate and provide only an approximation of the key features.  When/if they become available, the ICG concluded that it would be desirable to replace these sketch maps with accurate topographic maps;
    • Aerial Photographs – these were only available for some of the sites, yet provide considerable information in addition to the sketch maps.  The ICG concluded that it would be desirable to include more aerial photographs of the sites as they become available;
    • Photographs of Key Features – these were very useful in showing the detail of key features, but should not be used to replace text because of the potential poor quality in reproductions of the Guidelines.  However, as some features (such as melt-water pools) would change within and between seasons, it may be useful to make more photographs available to those visiting the sites.  The ICG would suggest that consideration be given to establishing a website onto which more photographs of sites could be made available to those planning visits;
    • Additional detailed background information about each site – the ICG noted that there was quite a large amount of very useful information in the original (draft) versions of the Guidelines that would be largely removed in the reformatting.  Whilst the reformats include the key information about the site, it was noted that more detailed information could be useful for Expedition Leaders and guides in planning/managing visits and in explaining to visitors the reason behind the various management provisions for each site. The ICG therefore suggests that further relevant site specific information and links to existing information could also be made available on a website (see bullet above).

Development of New Site Guidelines
    11. In order to maintain the clarity and consistency of Site Guidelines, the ICG recommends that all future draft Site Guidelines be prepared along the lines of those attached at Annex A.  

Overall Conclusions
    12. In conclusion, the ICG successfully fulfilled its Terms of Reference during the intersessional period from June 2005-April 2006.  The ICG reviewed 11 Site Guidelines and now submits redrafted versions of the 4 Site Guidelines adopted in 2005, plus a further 7 new Site Guidelines, for the CEP’s consideration.  The ICG proposes that the CEP should now recommend these texts for adoption by the ATCM, as set out in the summary above.



April 2006

Annex A

REVISED AND NEW SITE GUIDELINES TO BE INSERTED HERE

THESE INCLUDE REVISED SITE GUIDELINES FOR:

        1. BARRIENTOS ISLAND (AITCHO ISLANDS)
        2. CUVERVILLE ISLAND
        3. JOUGLA POINT
        4. PENGUIN ISLAND

NEW SITE GUIDELINES FOR:

        5. HANNAH POINT
        6. NEKO HARBOUR
        7. PAULET ISLAND
        8. PETERMANN ISLAND
        9. PLENEAU ISLAND
        10. TURRET POINT
        11. YANKEE HARBOUR









Annex B

CEP ICG ON SITE GUIDELINES FOR VISITORS TO ANTARCTICA 
TERMS OF REFERENCE

    1. To review the four Site Guidelines adopted under Resolution 5(2005) on ‘Site Guidelines for Visitors’, to consider their content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness, taking into account the extent to which they meet the environmental principles of the Protocol, including its Annex V;
    2. To consider any new proposed Site Guidelines, submitted to the ICG before 30 November 2005, as per paragraph 1; and
    3. To report back to CEP IX.



CEP ICG on Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica
July 2005



Annex C

SUMMARY OF ICG COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING STAGE 1 OF ICG DISCUSSIONS:

ICG Workplan Stage 1:
    • Comparison of 4 adopted Site Guidelines, plus 7 additional draft Guidelines already prepared, against IAATO Site Specific Guidelines set out in ATCM XXVIII/IP090, focusing on any differences in respect of site sensitivity, ship categories and recommendations.  Consider scope for incorporating IAATO recommendations into adopted (and new) texts.

    1. In order to facilitate discussion on the above issues, the ICG considered 6 questions, as set out below.  Argentina, Australia, Norway and IAATO provided comments during this first stage of ICG Discussions.   UK views are incorporated into the summary below.

(a) The adopted (and 7 new) Guidelines and the IAATO Site Specific Guidelines rate the sensitivity of each site as low, medium or high. Where there are differences between the ratings, and considering the reasons set out to justify the ratings, which ratings are the most appropriate? 

    2. Respondents noted minor differences between the sensitivity ratings of the 4 adopted Site Guidelines, plus 7 draft Guidelines, and the IAATO Site Guidelines.  Where there were differences, the general suggestion was to take the precautionary approach and use the higher sensitivity rating.  Comments were as follows:

(i) The Four Site Guidelines adopted at ATCM XXVIII:
Site
ATCM
IAATO
Comments
Penguin Island
High
High
No Difference
Aitcho Islands
High
High
No Difference
Cuverville Island
Low to moderate, depending on conditions
Low early season, medium late season
Parties suggest that the ATCM rating is retained, as this is the clearest and most precautionary.  The ATCM rating also takes account of daily fluctuation in sensitivity due to tide differences, and early season sensitivities depending on access conditions (snow and melt).  
IAATO noted that there is greater sensitivity in late season because of the wider dispersal of moulting adult penguins and exposed moss after the snow melts.  During high water early in the season, passengers are landed away from groups of birds and moved away from the beach area immediately.
Jougla Point, 
Wiencke Island
Low
Low / medium
Parties noted that the difference between the ATCM and IAATO ratings is minor, but also noted IAATO’s concerns regarding restricted movement due to local topography and gentoo penguin and shag breeding groups.  There was greater support for revising the ATCM rating to low/moderate.

(ii) The Seven new draft Guidelines under ICG Review:
Site
Drafts
IAATO
Comments
Turret Point
King George Island
High
Medium
IAATO stated that the majority of the wildlife at this site is located in distinct groups and away from the landing beach.  Parties, however, agreed that since there is a relatively high number of species (including southern giant petrel on the ACAP species list) at this site, it would be appropriate to retain a high sensitivity rating.
Yankee Harbour
Low
Low
No Difference
Hannah Point
Livingston Island
High
High
No Difference
Paulet Island
Moderate to high, depending on conditions
High
Parties noted that there is a relatively high number of species at this site (including blue-eyed shag), all of which are easily approached and disturbed in sensitive periods.  IAATO also highlighted the high number of Wilson storm-petrel burrows on the scree slope behind the penguin colony, which are easily damaged.  It was therefore agreed that a high sensitivity rating was more appropriate. 
Neko Harbour
Low
Low / medium
Noting the relatively high number of species, all of which are easily approached and could be disturbed in sensitive periods, and the restricted visitor movement at high water, there was agreement to upgrading the proposed rating to low / moderate, or moderate.
Plèneau Island
Moderate
Medium
No Difference
Petermann Island 
(Wilhelm Archipelago)
Moderate
Medium
No Difference

    3. However, notwithstanding the comments above, following further discussion, the general view was that site sensitivity assessments did not contribute to site management and should therefore not be included in the Site Guidelines (see also responses to point (f) below).  Whilst the ICG recognised that such ratings would be useful for site assessments in advance of producing Site Guidelines, it was agreed that this was an issue that the CEP should consider separately to the specifics of the Site Guidelines under review, possibly in the context of the monitoring ICG. 

(b) Both formats for Guidelines have suggestions for the size of ship that may visit each site. Where there are differences, which approach should be followed? 

    4. The only site at which the proposed ship restrictions varied between the adopted and draft Site Guidelines and IAATO Guidelines was Plèneau Island.  IAATO had proposed a lower restriction – of ships carrying less than 200 passengers – because of the tern colony at the NE end of the island and because the local topography and location of penguin, tern and shag breeding groups can restrict movement in the snow free areas.  It was therefore generally agreed that this lower restriction on ship size should apply at Plèneau Island.

(c) Are the specific recommendations in the IAATO Guidelines already included in the adopted (and new) guidelines? If not, should they be included in the Guidelines for each site? 

    5. It was noted that for three of the sites, IAATO had some additional recommendations in their guidelines.  It was agreed that these would be useful additions to the Site Guidelines under review:

Site
IAATO recommendations not covered in adopted and draft ATCM Guidelines
Comments
Cuverville Island
    • Beware remains of old whaler’s dam
    • Be extra sensitive when hiking above plateau behind landing beach – Skua nests, moss beds
    • Restricted movement among moulting birds
Parties agreed it would be useful to highlight the remains of the old whaler’s dam in the Guidelines, particularly on the map.  The second bullet point is covered by Restricted zone B in ATCM Guidelines.
IAATO also suggest that specific reference be made to the moulting penguins later in the season, which can restrict movement over a significant portion of the site.
Paulet Island 
    • If visit occurs at high tide, no more than 50 passengers ashore at one time.
Parties agreed that the IAATO restriction on numbers ashore would be a useful addition to the draft Site Guideline for Paulet Island.
Plèneau Island
    • Be sensitive to nesting tern sites
Although the draft Guidelines make the tern nest site a restricted zone, it was noted that these birds can shift their breeding site and that it would therefore be advisable to include the IAATO recommendation in the Guidelines. It would also be worth highlighting that terns are very easily disturbed, even from a distance, in the ‘visitor code of conduct’

(d) Is it useful to have sketch maps accompanying the Guidelines? Should any additional information be included in the maps? 

    6. It was agreed that maps should be an integral part of Site Guidelines.  Such maps must be of a high standard and should use consistent symbology.  Maps to show the location of the sites in a larger perspective would be useful.  It was also important that the guidelines make clear whether they relate only to the area covered in the specific maps, or a wider region (for example, the wildlife recorded for some of the Guidelines refers to species normally found outside of the area covered by the maps).

    7. It was also agreed that where possible, aerial photographs should also be included in the Site Guidelines.  

(e) Given the responses to the bullet points above, is it appropriate to incorporate the IAATO recommendations into the adopted (and 7 new) Guidelines? 

    8. It was agreed that the revised ATCM adopted and draft Guidelines should include the additional information and recommendations set out in the IAATO Guidelines along the lines as set out in the responses to the above points.

(f) For the purpose of informing future development of Site Guidelines, what are the key principles for assessing a site as high, medium or low? Is this the best way to identify relative sensitivities of sites? Should there be more of a clear distinction between requirements of visitor conduct at all sites (for example, what you should and should not do when visiting sites of high/medium/low sensitivity) and the specific requirements of individual sites? 

    9. On the question of the key principles for assessing the sensitivities of sites, it was suggested that there needed to be clear criteria to assess whether sites were at a level of sensitivity which suggested that Site Guidelines needed to be developed.  Such criteria should include consideration of the site characteristics, including the number and diversity of flora and fauna; the amount of space available for visitors and the presence of any specific hazards, such as steep slopes or unstable soils.

    10. The existing classification of high/moderate/low was useful for assessing sites, but the Site Guidelines themselves should include clearer and more detailed up-front information about the specific sensitivities at each site.  The overall sensitivity rating did not contribute to the management of the site and should therefore not be included in the Site Guidelines.

    11. Finally, it was agreed that the key benefit of site-specific guidelines was to manage behaviour of visitors at that particular place.  Whilst therefore it may be useful to highlight more general guidelines from site-specific guidelines, the particular details of each site must remain the focus.




CEP ICG on Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica
October 2005
SUMMARY OF ICG COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING STAGE 2 OF ICG DISCUSSIONS:

ICG Workplan Stage 2:
    • Consider clarity and consistency of adopted and draft Site Guidelines, with reference to ATCM XXVIII/IP81 comments on strengths and weaknesses.  Consider options for the format of the Guidelines to maximise their clarity, for example to ensure that site specific requirements are clearly identifiable from standard practice for all sites;

    1. The ICG considered four specific questions relating to the above issues.  Argentina, Australia, Norway and IAATO provided comments during this stage of ICG Discussions and UK views are incorporated into the summary below:

    (a) Does the first section of the Guidelines (location, sensitivity, key features, description, wildlife) provide for the clearest description of the site?  How might this information be made more succinct, and how might the key sensitivities of the site be made clearer?

    2. There was agreement that the Guidelines should be succinct and focused on the management provisions of the site. There was general agreement that a regional map should be included to show the general location of each site.  The descriptive elements should be brief and split into topography, wildlife, vegetation and any historic/cultural/scientific issues.  These should focus on the specific visitor area covered by the Site Guidelines.  For the wildlife descriptions, distinction should be made between those species breeding at the sites and those likely to be observed.  It was suggested that this could be shown in a tabular format. 

    (b) Is the information on potential visitor impacts clear?  Is all the information contained in this section vital to the management of the specific sites?

    3. There was agreement that this section of the original Guidelines could be more focused on the particular features of each site which are vulnerable to disturbance.  The section should avoid repeating other sections, particularly the Code of Conduct section and could be shortened.  It was agreed that the information about previous visitor numbers would become quickly out of date and was not necessary for management purposes.

    (c) Is the Visitor Code of Conduct as clear as it can be in providing instructions on visitor management?  Are the sub-headings clear and structured?  Might there be a better way of making clear which is general information (such as the ‘Distance and other limitations for approaching wildlife and flora, and avoiding potential hazards’ section) and the site-specific information (which we agreed in Stage 1 of Discussions should be the focus for the Site Guidelines)?

    4. It was generally agreed that the Visitor Code of Conduct could be more clearly structured, setting out the clear management provisions applicable to each site.  A number of options were put forward as to how sub-headings could be used to identify these provisions more clearly, for example to include Landing Area, size of ships permitted to visit each site, and the number of passengers ashore.

    5. It was also suggested that rather than using the concept of ‘proposed walking routes’ the Site Guidelines should adopt a ‘zoning’ approach, identifying areas which should be closed to visitors, areas where visitors could roan freely – but under supervision, and guided walking areas.  

    6. The ‘distance to wildlife limitations’ should be more specific to those species actually present at each site.  The language should be more instructive and recommended distances from wildlife should be used to provide specific guidance.  

    7. The time ashore provisions of the ‘seasonal limitations’, were discussed in more detail during the third round of discussions.  However, during this second round, IAATO proposed an alternative way of managing visits to each site by specifying the number of ship visits allowed to each site, depending on the size of the ship. 

    (d) In addition to the comments on the maps made during the first stage of ICG discussions, any further suggestions for additional information to be included on the maps?

    8. It was generally agreed that if topographic maps of the areas covered by Site Guidelines were available, then these should be used.  As no such maps have yet been identified, it was agreed that sketch maps instead were helpful in supplementing the Guidelines.    It was also suggested that aerial photographs should be used wherever possible.
Criteria for Site Selection
    9. The ICG also raised the issue of determining site sensitivity ratings for the sites.  Whilst it had been generally agreed during the first round of discussions that these should not be used within the Guidelines, it was noted that in order to develop sensitivity ratings, consistent criteria would first need to be developed.  Although the ICG did have some further discussion as to what such criteria might include, it was agreed that since site sensitivity ratings were not directly pertinent to site management, further discussion of the issue was outside the TOR of the ICG.  Instead the ICG suggest that the CEP give this matter further consideration.



CEP ICG on Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica
March 2006

SUMMARY OF ICG COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING STAGE 3 OF ICG DISCUSSIONS:

ICG Workplan Stage 3:
    • Consider effectiveness of Guidelines, incorporating comments from first season of ATCM adopted Site Guidelines, focusing on implementation of the ‘Visitor Code of Conduct’ provisions;

    1. The United Kingdom proposed that this final stage of discussion should focus on the site-specific detail of each Site Guideline, and in particular the management provisions set out in the ‘Code of Conduct’ sections of the Site Guidelines.  The following questions were suggested:
    • Do you agree with the proposed Preferred Landing Areas? 
    • Are the Restricted Zones appropriate and clearly identifiable from the maps? 
    • Are the Seasonal Limitations proposed appropriate for the sites? Should the number of ship visits and the time ships stay at the sites be controlled in this manner? 
    • Should the size of the ships to each site be controlled? 
    • Should each site have different requirements for the number of visitors ashore or the distance from wildlife and flora, or should these be the same for all sites?
    2. During this stage of the ICG, the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, Norway, an NGO representative (‘Oceanites’) from the US CEP Delegation and IAATO undertook an on-site review of 10 of the 11 sites for which Site Guidelines had been adopted or proposed.  During this review visit, further discussions took place on the comments submitted by these Parties and Invited Experts during the earlier ICG discussion rounds.   The key conclusions of this review team are attached at Appendix 1.

    3. As a result of the on-site visits, the team proposed redrafts of the 10 Site Guidelines for those sites visited.  In addition, the UK proposed a redraft for the final site along the same lines.  These were submitted to the ICG and further comments were invited.  In addition to those participating in the on-site review, Germany and ASOC also provided comments during this final round of ICG Discussion.

    4. Many of the comments during this stage of discussion focused on specific issues relating to the redrafted guidelines.  The question of whether it should be proposed that Hannah Point is closed to visitors until mid-January was a key issue.  Whilst it was acknowledged that such an proposal was based only on a precautionary management approach and not on detailed scientific study, the majority view was that we should propose a voluntary closure of the site until after the early penguin incubation phase.  Significantly, the tourist industry is prepared to support this level of protection at Hannah Point as a test of assessing the effectiveness of ‘voluntary’ closure as a visitor management tool.  If this is agreed, the CEP should keep this under close review.  It was also suggested that the CEP seek further views from SCAR biology experts on when the most sensitive stages are for Antarctic wildlife. 

    5. It was also proposed that consideration be given to using the zoning terminology used in the development of Management Plans, for example ‘restricted’, ‘sensitive’ and ‘tourist zones’.  However, following discussion it was agreed that the proposed language in the Site Guidelines (of closed areas, guided walking areas, and free roaming areas) was clearer for the purposes of visitation management.

    6. Some concern was expressed about the permitting of camping activities on some of the sites.  This was also a point of considerable discussion during the on-site reviews.  On balance, the on-site review team felt that there was no evidence of harm caused by camping activities in the past, and therefore at some sites, camping could be allowed.  However, there was concern expressed in the ICG that this was not consistent with the provision of a rest period for the sites.  The CEP may wish to give this issue further consideration (it is also highlighted as an issue in ATCMXXIX/WP002).

    7. As convenor of the ICG, the UK has subsequently taken on board all of the specific comments received on each site and has developed final versions of the Site Guidelines.  These final versions are based on the redrafted content, but also incorporate all of the ICG suggestions on the format and layout of the Site Guidelines.  They are attached to this ICG Report for the CEP’s consideration.



CEP ICG on Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica
April 2006

Appendix 1
FINDINGS OF ON-SITE REVIEW OF SITE GUIDELINES
(JANUARY-FEBRUARY 2006)

Input in to CEP ICG on Site Guidelines, submitted by the On-Site Review Team (which included representatives from Argentina; Australia; Norway; UK; USA and IAATO)

Key Conclusions of On-Site Review Team

Audience of the Site Guidelines
    1. As a follow-up to the second round of ICG discussions, the review team considered the issue of the target audience for the Site Guidelines. The team’s conclusion was that the Guidelines should primarily be directed at expedition leaders and guides, but that they also should be presented in a way that is meaningful to individual passengers, yachts and any other visitors (including representatives of Governments).  
Format and Usability of the Guidelines
    2. Also, as a continuation of the second round of ICG discussions, the review team considered format (for example length), focus and user-friendliness of the Guidelines. The team agreed that it would be useful to limit the length of the guidelines to ensure that the key management provisions were highlighted, noting that site descriptions and information were available from other sources. The review team concluded that it would be useful if the guidelines could be simplified and cover no more than 2 pages (where possible). 

    3. The review team agreed that maps were critical to underpinning the management provisions.  Whilst sketch maps are extremely useful in that regard, in future, consideration should be given to the development of accurate topographic maps for each site covered by Site Guidelines.  The review team also agreed that, where available, aerial photographs (ideally oriented to show the landing beach) would be extremely valuable.  In addition, in some instances photographs of specific features may also be useful to illustrate the guidelines.
Site Sensitivity and Site Description
    4. For each site, following the on-site visits, the review team has suggested a revision of the site description in the guidelines, attempting in particular to limit information that is likely to change relatively rapidly, thus avoiding the need for frequent updates of the Guidelines. The revision has also been done to avoid repetitious language and with a focus on brevity.

    5. The team had lengthy discussions regarding the use of a sensitivity index for the sites.  It concluded that such a rating would not necessarily be useful, unless it was underpinned by detailed criteria.  Given that the rating itself did not denote particular management actions, it was agreed that the ratings should be removed and rather the site description and management provisions would indicate the relative sensitivity of each site.
Management Provisions
    6. The review team considered a range of potential management tools available for each site, noting that those chosen for a particular site would depend on the specific values and nature of each site.  The tools explored by the team for each site included:
    • zones within which different levels of visitor supervision should be employed (expanded below); 
    • visitor codes of conduct, including acceptable approach distances to wildlife;
    • landing requirements; and
    • limits on visits and rest periods for wildlife (expanded below).

Zoning

    7. Zoning is a commonly used management tool to provide appropriate protection of particular (sensitive, valuable, etc.) attributes of a site. The review team concluded that, in the context of the Site Guidelines, a division into three zones would be useful:

    1. Free roaming under supervision: This category to be used in areas where there is sufficient space for visitors to move around and there are no highly sensitive species present. In this zone there should, at a minimum, be 1 guide to 20 people ensuring compliance with the visitor code of conduct;
    2. Guided Groups along designated paths or within designated areas: Typically this zone would contain some sensitive features, but disturbance can be avoided with experienced guides, or where visitor space is constricted, or there are safety concerns. Group size and ratio of guides to visitors should be specified in individual Site Guidelines depending on site specifics;  
    3. Closed Areas: Areas which typically contain species that are particularly susceptible to disturbance, or hazardous areas. There should be no entry into such areas, except in an emergency.  
Limits on visits
    8. Several ways to limit visits were considered as potential tools for the sites in question: 

    1. Capping the number of visits per day: To limit the number of approaches to wildlife - potentially one of the more disturbing elements of site visits - and also to limit degradation of vegetation. This can be achieved by limiting the number and size of ships.  
    2. Time limits for hours spent ashore per visit: This would ensure a defined and limited period for wildlife to be exposed to visitors.  This mechanism can be used for the most sensitive sites, though it was recognised that this was not necessarily the most effective tool for all sites.
    3. Seasonal limitations: These would provide protection of sites at more sensitive times of the year. 
    4. Rest Periods for Wildlife:  These would provide a guaranteed period during which no visitors are walking among wildlife.  Whilst the rest periods proposed in the guidelines are for 6 hours, it was recognised that under the normal level of visitor pressure, this would usually be significantly higher.  This was nevertheless considered a useful tool, as there have been occasional visits of up to 17 hours in a day to a single site.

    9. The Guidelines, as currently drafted, all contain limits on visits by specifying the limits on total hours on shore (as well as a limit on the size of ship). The review team considered, however, that a more effective way to complement on-site visitor management is to limit the number of landings per day, and to set aside a “rest period” for more sensitive sites. For instance, a set of guidelines could limit visits to two landings per 24 hours (midnight to midnight), with no visitors ashore after 10pm or before 4am, in order to establish a rest period for the wildlife at the site. It was agreed, however, that some sites may require other measures to visit limitations due to particular circumstances at the site. It was also noted that as some sites are becoming popular for camping-related activities (organised overnight stays from cruise ships).  This type of activity must be taken into account when considering the use of a “rest period” provision, recognising that such activities do not involve large numbers of visitors walking about the site or among the wildlife. 

Current Tourism Levels
    10. In considering the various management provisions appropriate for each site, the team had in mind the current level and operation of the tourist industry.  Therefore, whilst up to three visits per day are proposed for some of the sites, these are designed to be the maximum for any 24 hour period.  It would not be desirable for any of the sites to receive such a high level of visitation every day.  The team therefore proposes that the text adopting any new Site Guidelines must specify that the Guidelines be reconsidered if there is likely to be a significant future change in the nature and extent of the tourist industry.

Site Specific Comments and Redrafts
    11. The site specific comments for each site, considering such issues as landing areas, appropriateness of the suggested restricted zones, seasonal limitations, ship size, etc. are included in the revised Site Guidelines to be submitted to the CEP as part of the final ICG Report.



On-Site Review Team
February 2006
