










Draft Elements for the Edinburgh Declaration

International Polar Year 2007-2009





Draft Elements for the Edinburgh Declaration

International Polar Year 2007-2009

This document does not include draft language for a Declaration. It suggests some basic components and provides reasons to justify their inclusion. Because of its substance, it should be treated as a working paper (WP) rather than as an Information Paper (IP) . Paragraphs requiring ATCM action, if considered and accepted, may be included in the Final Report.

    1. An introductory paragraph noting the importance of Polar Regions for the Earth System as a whole. In particular, the role of Polar Regions in global climate change processes, their origin, complexities and responses. It is essential that the international community  increases its understanding of the such processes in all parts of the planet on which the human kind lives, as well as its understanding of the importance of anthropogenic influences, and the consequent interactions between each part on all other parts of the Earth..

    2. Research has shown that significant interactions exist among the Polar Regions, and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings have included in their agendas specific items about their recyprocal influences. Since the AGY it is also acknowledged that significant interactions occurr between polar and temperate regions, which are particularly manifest in studies in climatology and oceanography, but also in the whole spectrum of the geophysical, biological and earth sciences.

    3. The International Polar Year (IPY) is also a commemoration of 125 years, the 75th anniversary of the Second IPY and the 50th anniversary of the International Geophysical Year (AGY), as well as an opportunity for the planning of a new international research programme of  a broader, more incise and global scope: the IPY 2007-2009.

    4. Commemoration is a tradition in the ATS. A Commemorative Stamp was issued on the ocassion of the Tenth Anniversary , on the ocassion of the twentieth anniversary of the Treaty´s Entry into Force,  and on the Thirtieth Anniversary of the Treaty. The Twentieth Anniversary of the signature of the Treaty and the Thirtieth Anniversary of the IGY were also commemorated but no stamps were considered although some individual Treaty Members may have issued them. The recommended format for these  commemorations applied mutatis mutandis to the forthcoming IPY 2007-2009 should include:

    (a) a common date e.g. 23 June 2006 or otherwise decided by the RCTA.
    (b) The following words, in the language or languages of each issuing country: “International Polar Year 2007-2009”.
    (c) Within the most prominent features of the design consideration should be given to the following themes:
    • International Cooperation in Polar Scientific Research
    • Global Climate Change
    • Protection of the Antarctic Environment and Dependent an Associate Ecosystems.
    (d) Incorporate in the design the Antarctic Treaty emblem representing a map of Antarctica which appears on the official RCTA documents.
    (e) Any additional matter consonant with the provisions and spirit of the Treaty and the Protocol.

    5. Commemoration should not be a purely symbolic exercise. One should take stock of the history of polar scientific international cooperation to strengthen, improve and update that tradition. SCAR has established an Action Group on the History of Antarctic Research and it would be appropriate to extend the ATCM´s support to the work of the Action Group, initiated with a I. Workshop in Munich, Germany (2005) to be continued by the II Workshop to be held in Santiago, Chile (2006). A text on the history of international scientific polar cooperation is attached, in Spanish only, as an illustration.

    6. One suggestion for the thrust of the Edinburgh Declaration is to orient itself towards matters of education, outreach and difussion of knowledge concerning the Polar Areas, and the role of the Antarctic Treaty System with regard to the general public. The question of elaborating a “WHITE BOOK” on the history and achievements of the Antarctic Treaty System, considering both the legal and political background and the significance of Antarctic science,  was discussed during several ATCM´s with no consensus reached on the matter and individual Contracting Parties were encouraged to prepare appropriate publicity materials on the national level. A Chilean Outline containing some broad headings such as “The History of International Polar Scientific Cooperation”, “The Antarctic Treaty System and its Operation”, “The Antarctic Treaty System and the Public”, and “The Future of the Antarctic Treaty System” was presented at the XVth ATCM and the Meeting suggested that Contracting Parties might, individually, use these elements for publication of relevant information..

    7. The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat has been entrusted with the publication and updating of a new HANDBOOK OF MEASURES IN FURTHERANCE OF THE PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY”. It was initiated by John Heap with the support of  the British Government and subsequently the US Government took over this important function. In the process of regularly updating the Handbook, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat may consider a special chapter or division concerned with developments associated to the IPY, its background, features and results.

    8. As a token of solidarity with the advent of the IPY, the Antarctic Treaty Parties should be reminded of their commitment to provide, on request and in accordance with national laws and regulations, up-to-date information concerning:

    (a) the location of depositories of data, samples and collections resulting from scientific research in Antarctica;
    (b) the nature and location of bibliographies or other information sources concerning reports and published works related to Antarctic matters, including those related to scientific research activities in Antarctica.
(Recommendation XIII-1 Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Information).

During the IPY, exchanges should be fostered among national authorities and academic institutions and, in particular, Polar Archives, Libraries and Museums

    9. Considering that results of scientific research in Antarctica and the surrounding Southern Ocean are freely available within the international scientific community  –not only between scientists of ATS countries but to scientists of all other countries-  accesibility of such scientific knowledge acquires great importance, before, during and after the IPY. Public attention should be drawn to initiatives which constitute data banks, reference systems, links with other international programmes and global change programmes  ( i.e. SCAR´s Open Science Conferences., Antarctic Master Directory (AMD),  Marine Biodiversity Information Network, SCAR, SCOR, IOC Coordination in Oceanography and Atmospheric Science,.International Coordination by SCAR with IGBP, WCRP, IASC and other ICSU bodies, scientific activities undertaken in Geosciences, Life Sciences and Physical Sciences ).

    10. While there is broad recognition for the need of scientific research in Antarctica and the surrounding ocean, few nations possess the sophisticated technologies, the scientific resources, the human and logistic capabilities to undertake significant programmes in the harsh and difficult Antarctic regions. Efforts deployed by the Council of Managers of Antarctic National Programmes (COMNAP) in matters concerning outreach, capacity-building, training, air and marine safety, environmental protection, best practices for stations, refuges, and expeditions, and overall coordination and assistance when facing emergencies and other adversities, should also be emphasized during the IPY and at all times. Appreciation in that regard should be extended to to the ongoing SCALOP Symposiums.

    11. The role of ATCMs  with regard to Antarctic Science should not stop with the mere reception of an overview from SCAR and international agencies with competence in the field.. Within the examination of the Operation of the ATS, consideration should be given to the paramount role of the ATCM concerning international scientific cooperation. Particularly relevant antecedents  can be found in three declarations made at the XVth ATCM (Paris, 1989):  XV-14. Promotion of International Scientific Cooperation; XV-15. Facilitation of International Scientific Cooperation and the Declaration on the Ozone Layer and Climatic Change; and the Decade of Antarctic Scientific Cooperation ( Report of the XVI ATCM, Bonn, 1991). In practical terms, future ATCMs may  decide to include the IPY as a chapter of the overview and proceed with discussion of its progress and development within its Operational Group.




