


Regulation of Land-Based Infrastructure to Support Tourism in Antarctica





Regulation of Land-Based Infrastructure to Support Tourism in Antarctica

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand and Australia

This Working Paper is offered as a contribution to progressing consideration by the Consultative Parties of the regulation of land-based infrastructure to support tourism in Antarctica.  It (1) recalls key elements of previous discussion of the subject by the Parties and invited Experts, (2) canvasses some of the approaches that appear to be available and (3) poses a number of questions that could be useful to examine.
Discussion within the Antarctic Treaty System
The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica (ATME), which was convened at Tromso from 23 to 25 March 2004 in response to Decision 5 of ATCM XXVI, agreed that within the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) there was the need to consider further the question of a regulatory framework for tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica and stressed that “establishing the regulatory basis for the industry was the primary responsibility of the State Parties.”1
The issue of land-based tourism facilities was raised by New Zealand under Topic iii: Jurisdiction, industry self-regulation, and an analysis of the existing legal framework and identification of gaps. New Zealand commented upon problems around jurisdiction which could be provoked by land-based infrastructure to support tourism, as well as the possible assertion of property and usufructuary interests (i.e. long-term use of a site by private interests might be claimed to give rise to a legal right to use and derive profit from it) and the risk of disruption to the Antarctic Treaty System that might ensue. 2  
While the Meeting of Experts noted that the Environmental Protocol did not specifically prohibit establishment of private or commercial land-based facilities, in discussion it was argued that the designation of Antarctica by the Environmental Protocol as a “natural reserve” (Article I) and its Environmental Principles (Article III) allowed for the drawing of a distinction between tourist and scientific activities.  Those who made this argument stated that priority should be accorded to science and that this should be reflected in States Parties’ domestic legal processes. Some suggested that Parties could agree to permit only non-scientific activities that had no more than a minor or transitory impact.  One Party noted that the development of permanent facilities for tourism was not consistent with its domestic law as all the permits it issued were restricted to a finite period.  Another Party commented it was important to avoid setting up a dual system of EIA.  
Discussion around land-based infrastructure to support tourism continued in the Working Group on Tourism at ATCM XXVII at Cape Town, where the Report of the Chairman of the ATME was received.  The International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) noted that its members subscribed to the principle that each of their planned activities should have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment and since 2004 this has been reflected in a change to IAATO’s by-laws.  It was also noted the construction of any structure would require submission of a CEE.   A possible definition of land-based tourism as “the creation of permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure ashore in order to promote and support tourism activities” was offered.
At ATCM XXVIII three Parties (Australia, Germany and New Zealand) and one Expert (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)) presented papers which considered aspects of land-based tourism3. The Working Group acknowledged that the issue of land-based tourism involving permanent infrastructure in Antarctica needed to be addressed.  Many delegations were prepared to recommend that the Parties implement the Environmental Protocol in such a way as to prevent the construction of infrastructure to support activities primarily for the conduct or support of tourism.  Some Parties requested a more in-depth analysis and felt that the ATCM should devote more time to discussing the issue before deciding whether or not to take binding actions.  The meeting agreed to re-visit the matter at ATCM XXIX.
1)	Key Elements of the Discussion of Land-Based Tourism
Tourism is a major activity in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Tourism continues to expand and diversify rapidly, and the tourism industry is an increasingly significant actor there.  The Consultative Parties generally have accepted that tourism will continue to operate in Antarctica and that it needs to be managed to preserve the intrinsic values of Antarctica and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research.  
Legal admissibility of land-based tourism
Germany took the position at ATCM XXVIII4 that viewing the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol in conjunction gave grounds for assuming that land-based tourism in Antarctica might be regarded as non-permissible under international law.  Although the Protocol expressly assumed that tourism in general is among the permitted activities, land-based tourism constituted a new form of tourism that was not compatible with the environmental principles set forth in its Article 3(1).  In the case of activities that may be harmful to the environment and whose impacts had not yet been researched, the application of the precautionary approach was in line with the proactive approach of the Antarctic Treaty System and in keeping with the objectives of the Protocol.
Environmental Impact
In discussion to date, many Parties, but not all, have taken the view that the Protocol and its “Environmental Principles” (Article 3) set a clear hierarchy of values against which proposed activities must be measured.  The Protocol has designated Antarctica as a “natural reserve, devoted to peace and science.”  The Environmental Principles establish that Antarctica’s “intrinsic value” including its “wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential to understanding the global environment, shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.”5  Tourism is recognised as a legitimate activity, as long as it takes place in a manner consistent with these principles.
A number of Parties regarded the development of permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure to promote or support tourism in Antarctica as inconsistent both with Antarctica’s status as a “natural reserve” and with the protection of its “wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research.”  Science, by virtue of the requirements of the Treaty to share scientific results, contributes a positive output for all Parties, whereas tourism is not subject to such a test.  Furthermore, when proposals for science infrastructure come before the CEP in a CEE, an important underlying consideration is that the negative environmental impact caused is out-weighed by the contribution made to “research essential to understanding the global environment.” (Article III of the Protocol)
Jurisdiction
The key to the Antarctic Treaty remains Article IV, an effect of which is that claims to territorial sovereignty can be neither enhanced nor diminished during its life, and which has served to set aside disputes over those claims.  The Washington Conference of 1959 did not produce an agreed rule on the exercise of jurisdiction in the Antarctic, and Article VIII of the Treaty provides that where a dispute over jurisdiction arises, the countries concerned “shall immediately consult together with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable solution.”
ASOC observed that the implications of an alleged crime (or civil action) involving the citizens of different states ashore in Antarctica, where there was neither an accepted territorial nor flag-state to exercise jurisdiction (and where there might also be an assertion of jurisdiction across a sovereignty position) posed a potentially significant jurisdictional issue. 6 
Property Rights
Private or commercial land-based facilities in Antarctica also raise the issue of private property rights on the continent.  A private entity might seek to sell Antarctic infrastructure, or enforce its right to the infrastructure against another entity.  This could lead to domestic pressure to require a country to endorse that private property right, as private property rights depend on a territorial sovereignty for actuation.  Some argue that the ATS’s legal framework is currently insufficient to deal effectively with this situation.  
Usufructuary Rights
Where there is tourism infrastructure, there is also the possibility that a private operator might seek to enforce use-rights.  Where tourism operators have a history of trading in particular areas, expectations of exclusive access to sites or exclusive management responsibilities could lead to court processes seeking to enforce those rights.  At the ATME, IAATO argued for instance that a particular tourism company had been operating successfully for twenty years “and should be allowed to continue to do so”.7  
2)	Possible Approaches to Land Based Tourism in the Future
Self Regulation
As noted above, IAATO has amended its by-laws to the effect that its members’ planned activities should have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment8. IAATO currently plays a large role in setting and maintaining industry standards and the merit of this role was recognised by the ATME.  Nevertheless the ATME also recognised that establishing the regulatory basis for the industry was the primary responsibility of the States Parties. 
A further practical consideration is that IAATO’s membership does not include all companies active in Antarctic tourism.  In addition, as membership of IAATO consists of industry players, there is a potential conflict of interest.  
There is the further conceptual concern that were the ATCM to delegate responsibility to a non-governmental organisation for the regulation of its own members’ activity in Antarctica the Treaty System’s authority would be weakened.  
Voluntary Restraint
At ATCM XXVIII it was proposed that Parties could voluntarily decline to authorise any applications to construct permanent land-based infrastructure to support tourism and non-governmental activities.  There was strong support for this approach from many Parties, pending the conclusion of further discussions on this matter. This approach effectively treats permission for tourism infrastructure as being a state discretion. 
A voluntary restraint approach gives Parties a straightforward method of establishing an interim “moratorium” on such development.  This approach, further supported by language in the report of an ATCM, would be useful but incomplete, as it would still allow private entities to apply to different Parties for a permit until their application was met with success.  One jurisdiction might choose to deny permission, another jurisdiction might choose to approve that same application.
Binding Measure
A binding Measure among all the Parties banning tourism infrastructure in Antarctica is the outcome with the strongest effect.  It would also be consistent with the ATS’s historical approach to protecting Antarctica – as demonstrated by the prohibition on mining in the Protocol.  

The great disadvantage to this approach is that Measures, by their nature, can take considerable time to negotiate and further time to become effective, even after being agreed to by all Parties.  In the time interval that it could take for such a Measure to come into effect, there would be significant opportunity for construction to occur.  While a measure would be a definitive outcome, it should be preceded by a resolution giving interim protection.
Resolution
The adoption of a resolution urging the Parties not to approve proposals for land-based infrastructure to support tourism should be achievable in a relatively short timeframe.  It would also be of considerable value to many Parties in respect of their domestic legal processes.  Several Parties have stated that under their current domestic laws it is difficult to prohibit permanent and semi-permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental activities without recourse to an appropriate statement from the ATCM.
3)	Discussion Questions
It would be useful to examine the following questions during ATCM XXIX:
1) Current situation:
    • What is the current extent of land-based tourism activities in Antarctica and what are the trends?
    • Are Parties/Experts aware of proposals to develop land-based infrastructure to support tourism?
    • What level of environmental impact assessment is being applied during the permitting process (i.e. PEE/IEE/CEE?) to proposed land-based tourism activities?
    • What responsibility do those national programmes accommodating tourists at their stations in Antarctica undertake towards them?

2) Potential implications of future developments:
    • How would land-based infrastructure to support tourism affect national programmes?
    • What are the likely cumulative environmental impacts of temporary or permanent land-based tourism facilities and activities?
    • Is land-based infrastructure to support tourism philosophically inconsistent with the obligation to protect Antarctica’s wilderness and aesthetic values?
    • What potential consequences do jurisdictional issues raised by land-based tourism have for the Antarctic Treaty System?

