


Revision of Management Plan for ASPA 134 
Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula 




Revision of Management Plan for ASPA 134 
Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula 
Working paper for the CEP presented by Argentina

Background
In accordance with Resolution 1 (1998), Argentina has assumed the responsibility of revising the Management Plans for several of the Specially Protected Areas (SPA) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), today renamed as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA).  

Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 134, Cierva Point, was originally designated as SSSI No. 15 in ATCM Recommendation XIII-8, after a proposal by Argentina. During the XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Christchurch, 1997), the revised Management Plan for the Area was adopted in accordance with the format established by Annex V and Measure 3 (1997). During the XXV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Warsaw, 2002), and once Annex V entered into force, the Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 15 became, by Decision 1 (2002), Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 134.  
Proposed changes to the Management Plan      
In sum, the principal modifications to the Management Plan written before the establishment of ASPA 134 consist of:  
     The expansion of the limits of the ASPA, with the inclusion of Penguin or Sea Island. The inclusion of this island is due to the diversity and rarity of the non-marine algal species there found, as well as to the geographic continuity of the island with the insular portions of the ASPA;
     The updating of maps and charts;
     The expansion of the description of the values of the Area, as well as of the data relating to each one of them;
     The updating of the Permit Conditions section, through the inclusion of explanatory texts and a more complete description of the procedures in force;
     The incorporation of editorial changes, through modifications in the drafting of certain paragraphs.
During the preparation of the project, a detailed evaluation of the site values and the necessary measures to protect these sites was carried out. Between February and April 2003, a field visit to the Area was conducted that permitted the verification of information contained in this revision. 

The presentation of the current draft of the revised Management Plan is in response to Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and is attached to this Working Paper for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP).  
