


The Replacement of Fuel Tanks at Vernadsky Station




The Replacement of Fuel Tanks at Vernadsky Station

1. Introduction
According to the Memorandum of Understanding between BAS and ARC (now NASC) the fuel tanks at Akademik Vernadsky1 Station should have to be replaced for new ones. 
The Resolution No 3 (2005) and Inspection Team noted that the 1993, 1999 and 2005 Inspection Reports had recommended the replacement of these tanks as soon as possible. The new tanks should correspond to the international requirements of spill prevention with modern, safe fuel tanks with secondary containment (e.g. bunding or double skinned).
Because of the lack of resources of the National Ukrainian Antarctic program NASC couldn't provide this work in due time. It is planning to finish project works for production and assembling containment for 200 m3, and to determine the executor of this work on basis of the tender, and also to provide execution and delivery of constructions to the station this year. 
 The executor has to provide project evaluation by State sanitation services; and also to prepare materials with Environmental Impacts Assessment for submitting to Consultative Parties as required by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to Antarctic Treaty.

2. Design competition for fuel containment and fulfillment works term
In the building project is planed that production, integration and delivery metal construction tanks will be carried-out in the 4th quarter 2006, and tanks assembling and testing – in the 1st quarter 2007. 
The beginning of assembling works is planed in the December 2006. The finishing works – January-April 2007.

3. Preparatory and geodesic preproject works 
It is carried-out:
    • the plan-affixment main living and technical buildings Vernadsky Station, existent fuel conduits with altitude indexes and linear dimensions;
    • topographical survey of the building site with basements for fuel tanks and affixment of the new conduits line  (see Appendix);
    • crossover assemblies exist and future conduits (in plan, and at a height);
    • theodolite survey for future unloading installation track taking into account building site relief. 
 
4. Building works are carried-out
The building activity of new tanks started in 1998. During the summer season 1998 the concrete basement for new fuel tanks was constructed. Corresponding documentation of Scientific-Technical and Project-Technological Center are found in NASC.

Taking to the account the significance of building new fuel containment with assembling 25 tons metal construction, the main problem is the need of materials handling equipment. After preparatory and geodesic preproject works was carried-out affixment basement for lifting crane. With the purpose to short time for seasons works execution in assembling fuel containment and to pave the conduits, three columnar basement 1Н, 2Н, 3Н (see Appendix) were made. Technical and economical expediency documentation are found in NASC.

5. Description of the Environment 
Argentine islands has appeared as a result of the volcanically activity and contains the magmatic and metamorphic rocks. From the view of the relief description it’s an undulating ground with only one hill (54 m). The island’s relief is typical hilly with the ice process. Actual approximately 80% of the island is covered by the ice cap; its average thickness is 40 meters. In summer ice melts slightly and as a result of this the small, not so deep lakes are appeared on the island. There are curly rocks and erratic blocks in the surface of the island. The station is built on rocky ground about 7 meters above sea level at Marina Point, the north west corner of Galindez Island.
The Antarctic climate is rather moderate at the island: 
 
	- average annual temperature			- minus 4,50 С (degrees Centigrade)
	- average summer temperature			- from minus 10 С to plus 20 С
	- max. summer temperature			- to plus 120 С
	- average annual winter temperature		- from minus 50 С to plus 200 
	- min. winter temperature			- to minus 380 С
- average wind speed				- 35 meters per second
	- max. wind load				- to 45 meters per second
	- max. snow load				-  2,0 meters
	- seismicity			                          - to 6 point

According to statistics, within the last century the temperature has come up for 3 degrees. In whole the climate has become warmer. Average seawater temperature is -1 degree Centigrade in winter and its up only 1-2 degrees in summer. The altitude of the tidal wave is 1,5 meters. This is rather important for the natural phenomenon for the seaside’s ecosystem. The terrain around the station consists of exposed rocky knolls interspersed with moss and lichens beds. The animal world is more variety. The sea fauna is represented by seals, whales, krill, worms, crustacean, mollusk and different fishes. 7- species of fish have been found in the coastal water of the island. There are three sorts of penguins: adelie, gentoo, chinstrap and seagulls, sheatbills. Some species of migratory birds are petrels, albatross, king penguins and blue-eyed cormorants. 

6. Building characteristic and constructive decisions

At Vernadsky Station exist two metal sectional tanks “Braithwaite” raised off the ground. Storage capacity is respectively 145,000 liters (tank was constructed in 1978) and 33,000 liters (tank was constructed in 1958). Tanks are connected by liners, one of which is of steel and the other one is of neoprene.  

The new tank with 200 m3 volume is projected with two-wall, two bottoms and roofs taking into account new directions in construction of tanks with the purpose to increase their operational, environmental and emergency safety.
The tank is intended for reception and storage fuel with geometrical parameters:
		 - nominal volume 		-200 m3
		 - height of the wall 		-5,96 m
		 - internal diameter 		-6,63 m
		 - the area of a mirror product         -34,5 m2
		 - the area of the building    	-35,5 m2
Distance between walls of the internal and external tank is 0,16 m.
The tank is projected in the form of the vertical cylinder consisting of the bottom, the wall and the roof. The space between the bottoms of the internal and external tank is filled by a heater. The roof of the tank (internal and external) is consisted of two boards which are based onboard corner walls. The boards are joined to each other  scarf welding. The bottoms and walls of the tank are made by separate sheets. The tank is mounted on existing ferroconcrete basement. The total weight of containment designs is 25 tons. Used material is steel of different marks. 

7. Impact Assessment and Environmental Monitoring 
All construction works and operational activities at Vernadsky Station will be in compliance with, the requirements of the Environmental Protocol. Stringent environmental conditions will be included in the building contract for fuel containment, and will be enforced through careful contract supervision by NASC. Appropriate environmental education, training and guidance will be provided for all staff and contractors working at station. All activities at Vernadsky will be subject to a permit issued by the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine under the decrees of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine on "Maintenance of Ukraine international obligations in connection with acceding of the Ukraine to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” (2003).
After the completion of the detailed design and technical specifications for fuel tank, NASC will establish a station environmental monitoring programme to measure the actual impacts of the project in Antarctica. NASC plans are to undertake an environmental impacts assessment of tank during construction in 2006/07 and during future operations. 

8. Further information
Comments and requests for further information about the replacement of fuel tanks at Vernadsky Station should be directed to:


Mr. Anatoly Glavatsky, 
Head of experimental-technical group,
National Antarctic Scientific Center,
Blvd. Tarasa Shevchenka, 16, of. 101
01601, Kyiv, UKRAINE 


Telephone:	+38 044 246 38 10
Fax:		+38 044 246 38 80
E-mail:                 uac@uac.gov.ua
Web site:	www.uac.gov.ua



Appendix A

Technological scheme of the fuel tank and pipeline location



Note: all altitude for comparatively conditional zero – clean floor diesel (in decimeters)





Appendix B




The concrete basement for new fuel tank




    


  

The pipeline location

