


Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Hawker Island, Vestfold Hills, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica






Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Hawker Island, Vestfold Hills, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica
Working Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by Australia
    1. Introduction
Australia proposes the designation of Hawker Island Amanda Bay, Vestfold Hills, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) under Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
The management plan primarily aims to protect the breeding colony of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus) on the island – one of only four known breeding locations for the species on the Antarctic continent. The overall decrease in the Hawker Island population since its discovery is consistent with global trends for southern giant petrels. Long-term protection and monitoring of the colony at Hawker Island will contribute to the development of appropriate regional and global conservation strategies for the species and will provide information for comparisons with populations elsewhere.
The designation of Hawker Island as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area completes a suite of protected areas that safeguard all known southern giant petrel breeding locations in East Antarctica.
    2. Management plan format
The management plan has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of Annex V to the Madrid Protocol and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, appended to Resolution 2 (1998) of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXII. 
    3. Intersessional review
The draft management plan is submitted for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection. Australia would be pleased to convene an intersessional contact group to discuss the draft plan for full consideration at CEP X.
MANAGEMENT PLAN
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XXX
Hawker Island, Vestfold Hills, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica
    1. Description of Values to be Protected
Hawker Island, lying some 300 m off the Antarctic mainland, is located 7 km south-west from the Australian Davis station in the Vestfold Hills on the Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica at 68°35’S, 77°50’E (Map A). The island supports a breeding colony of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus) which is the southernmost colony of the species on continental Antarctica. The island also supports a colony of Adélie penguins and a limited number of flying birds.
The southern giant petrel colony was discovered in December 1963; at that time there were 40-50 nests present, “some with eggs”. Seventeen population counts were undertaken between 1963 and 1999 (see Figure 1). A maximum of 90 nests with eggs was recorded in 1970/71. The recorded number of nests with eggs had decreased to 10 in 1983, but the two most recent surveys, conducted in 1987 and 1999, recorded 21 and 25 respectively.








Figure 1: Population records for southern giant petrels (breeding pairs) at Hawker Island
Hawker Island is one of only four known breeding locations for southern giant petrels on the coast of continental Antarctica. The other locations have all been designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs): ASPA 102, Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac Robertson Land (67º36’S, 62º53’E) – near Mawson Station; ASPA 160, Frazier Islands, Wilkes Land (66°13’S 110°11’E) – near Casey station; and ASPA 120, Pointe Géologie, Terre Adélie (66º40’S, 140º01’E) – near Dumont d’Urville. Southern giant petrels on the Antarctic continent comprise less than 1% of the global breeding population. The current population for continental Antarctica is estimated at approximately 290 pairs, comprised of 25 pairs on Hawker Island, 3 pairs on Giganteus Island (part of the Rookery Islands group), 248 pairs on the Frazier Islands and 16 pairs at Pointe Géologie .
Southern giant petrels also breed on islands in the southern Indian and Atlantic Oceans an in the Antarctic Peninsula.
As indicated above, the breeding population of southern giant petrels at Hawker Island decreased following its discovery in the early 1960s by personnel from nearby Davis Station. Human disturbance has been implicated in the observed decreases at all four southern giant petrel breeding sites on continental Antarctica. The disturbance to colonies near the Australian stations arose primarily through early efforts (1950s-1970s) to band adults and chicks at the nest. The population decrease at Pointe Géologie has been attributed to station construction at Dumont d’Urville Station.
Southern giant petrels breeding in East Antarctica are particularly sensitive to disturbance at the nest. Restrictions in activities permitted at breeding sites, including a prohibition of banding, were introduced in the mid-1980s. While the population at Hawker Island has not recovered to the same extent as that on the Frazier Islands, it is showing signs of long-term recovery.
Reductions in breeding populations of southern giant petrels at other locations in the Antarctic and subantarctic have been attributed to activities associated with research stations. The bycatch of southern giant petrels in longline fisheries operating in the Southern Ocean is also likely to have contributed to observed population decreases. Decreases in breeding populations of southern giant petrels have also been observed at sites where human disturbance has been minimal, such as Heard Island.
The global breeding population of southern giant petrels is estimated at around 31,300 pairs, and is inferred to be declining at a rate of 20-50% over the past three generations. A total of 30 populations contain 500 or fewer breeding pairs, and at 15 of these sites there are 50 or fewer breeding pairs.  It is believed that the global decrease in population is primarily due to fatal interactions with longline fisheries, although the species is also sensitive to other forms of human-induced disturbance such as scientific research and visitor activities, ship movements and overflights. The species is listed as Vulnerable under IUCN criteria and has conservation status under a number of international agreements (see Table 1).
Table 1: The conservation status of southern giant petrels by various authorities using IUCN criteria.
Authority
Conservation Status under IUCN criteria
IUCN Red List 2004
Vulnerable
Garnett, S.T. and Crowley, G. M. (2000) The Action Plan for Australian Birds 
Vulnerable (global population)Endangered (Australian population only)
Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP)
Annex I
Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (Bonn Convention)
Unfavourable conservation status listed in Appendix II.
The overall decrease in the Hawker Island population of southern giant petrels since its discovery is consistent with global trends and suggests that continued and formalised protection of the colony is warranted. Long-term protection and monitoring of the colony at Hawker Island will contribute to the development of appropriate regional and global conservation strategies for the species and will provide information for comparisons with populations elsewhere.
The designation of Hawker Island as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area completes a suite of protected areas that safeguard all known southern giant petrel breeding locations in East Antarctica.
    2. Aims and Objectives
Management of Hawker Island aims to:
minimise human disturbance to assist stabilisation and recovery of the breeding colony of southern giant petrels;
protect the value of Hawker Island as a reference area for future comparative studies with other breeding populations of southern giant petrels; and
minimise the possibility of the introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to Hawker Island.
    3. Management Activities
The following management activities will be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
one research visit should be conducted to census the southern giant petrels and other seabird populations in each five year period to enable monitoring of breeding populations. The visiting group should be restricted to the lowest number required to safely conduct the activity, and should include an ornithologist who is associated with an approved national program or who has previous field experience with southern giant petrels;
information on the location of Hawker Island ASPA (stating the restrictions that apply) shall be produced and prominently displayed at Davis station and copies of this Management Plan shall be available at the station. Informative material and the Management Plan shall be provided to ships visiting the vicinity; 
clothing (particularly all footwear) and field equipment shall be appropriately cleaned before entering the Area; and 
the Management Plan shall be reviewed at least every five years and updated/modified as required. 
    4. Period of Designation 
Designation is for an indefinite period.
    5. Maps
Map A: Vestfold Hills, showing the location of Hawker Island and protected areas within the region.
Map specifications:
Projection: UTM Zone 49
Horizontal Datum: WGS84
Map B: Hawker Island, Antarctic Specially Protected Area showing distribution of seabird nesting sites.
Map Specifications:
Projection: UTM Zone 49
Horizontal Datum: WGS84
    6. Description of the Area
6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
Hawker Island is located at 68°35’S, 77°50’E, approximately 300 m offshore from the Vestfold Hills. The Vestfold Hills is a roughly triangular ice-free area of approximately 512 km2, of bedrock, glacial debris, lakes and ponds. The Vestfold Hills are bound by the ice plateau to the east, the Sørsdal Glacier to the south, and Prydz Bay to the west. The Vestfold Hills contain low hills (maximum height 158 m at Boulder Hill) and valleys, and are penetrated deeply by fjords and lakes. Numerous islands fringe the coast of the Vestfold Hills, and Hawker Island lies in the south-west, between Mule Island and Mule Peninsula. 
Hawker Island is an irregularly shaped island of low elevation (maximum elevation of nearly 40 m), with two parallel ranges of hills running in a north south direction terminating in two small southern peninsulas. A third peninsula lies directly west and terminates with a 40 m hill with steep cliffs to the sea on the western and southerly aspects. A number of small fresh-water lakes lie between the ranges of hills on the northern part of the island, with a number of small lakes lying on the flatter terrain on the eastern sector of the island. At its maximum extent the island is 2 km north to south and 1.7 km east to west.
The Hawker Island ASPA comprises the entire terrestrial area of Hawker Island, with the seaward boundary at the low water mark (Map B). The total area of the Hawker Island ASPA is approximately 1.9 km². There are no boundary markers.
Human History
The first recorded sighting of the Vestfold Hills was by Douglas Mawson on the BANZARE voyage of the 'Discovery' on the 9 February, 1931. Four years later, on the 20 February, 1935, Captain Klarius Mikkelsen of the Lars Christensen Company tanker ‘Thorshavn', sighted and landed in the area, he named many features, and the area, the Vestfold Hills after his home province in Norway. The Vestfold Hills were again visited by Mikkelsen in early 1937, while undertaking n aerial survey of the coast.
In January 1939 the American explorer, Lincoln Ellsworth, and his Australian adviser, Sir Hubert Wilkins were the next recorded visitors to the area in the motor ship 'Wyatt Earp', Ellsworth flew some 400 km inland. In early 1947 the 'USS Currituck' visited the Ingrid Christensen Coast as part of Operation Highjump. Photographic flights were to survey the coastline.
The first Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions (ANARE) to the area was led by Dr Phillip Law on 'Kista Dan' and reached the Vestfold Hills on 1 March, 1954.  During January, 1956, members of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition landed on the Ingrid Christensen Coast, in preparation for the IGY moving on to establish Mirny Station 595 km to the east. Australia established Davis station in the Vestfold Hills in 1957. Hawker Island was named for A.C. Hawker, radio supervisor at Davis station in 1957.
Climate
Meteorological data for the Area are confined almost entirely to observations at Davis station, 7 km northwest of Hawker Island. The Vestfold Hills area has a polar maritime climate that is cold, dry and windy. Summer days are typically sunny, with a midday temperature from -1°C to +2.9°C and a summer maximum of +5°C, but temperatures are below 0°C for most of the year falling to as low as −40.7°C in winter. The maximum temperature recorded at Davis station from 1957 to 2001 was +13°C. Long periods of relatively calm, fine conditions occur throughout the year. Winds are generally light. The yearly average is around 20 km/h. Violent winds and blizzards can commence with little warning, and gusts of over 200 km/h have been recorded. Snowfall averages 78 mm/yr, with the greater proportion of annual accumulation resulting from wind blown drift. Apart from several permanent ice banks, the Vestfold Hills are virtually snow free in summer and lightly covered in winter. The record illustrates the seasonal climate expected for high latitudes, but on average Davis station is warmer than other Antarctic stations at similar latitudes. This has been attributed to the “rocky oasis” which results from the lower albedo of rock surfaces compared to ice, hence more solar energy is absorbed and re-radiated.
Geology
The Vestfold Hills consist of Archaean gneiss, upon which thin and often fossiliferous Pliocene and Quaternary sediments occupy depressions. The oldest known Cenozoic strata in the Vestfold Hills are the mid-Pliocene Sørsdal Formation, which contains a diverse marine fossil flora and fauna. Other younger Cenozoic strata attest to repeated glaciation, and several marine transgressions and regressions. The three major lithologies forming the Vestfold Hills are (in order of age) Chelnock Paragneiss, Mossel Gneiss and Crooked Lake Gneiss. This is repeated in units from east-north-east to west-south-west. Intruded into these, are groups of mafic dykes in a rough north-south orientation. The dykes are a major feature of the Vestfold Hills. Hawker Island comprises an extension of the Crooked Lake Gneiss of the northern portion of Mule Peninsula above Laternula Inlet. In common with the Archaean gneisses in the Vestfold Hills, the Hawker Island Crooked Lake Gneiss is cut by very distinctive, middle to early Proterozoic dolerite dykes. 
Southern Giant Petrels
The Hawker Island southern giant petrel colony is situated on level ground about 20 m above sea-level. Rocks and boulders break the relief but provide little shelter. The same area has been used for nesting since the first records were made in 1963/64. The eastern side of the breeding area forms a slight ridge with the ground dropping away below, providing a good area for take-off into the prevailing north-easterly winds. Nests are built from pebbles and are relatively widely dispersed, about 5-10 m apart. Records of the number of nests with eggs are shown in Figure 1.
The breeding season for southern giant petrels on Hawker Island commences with laying during the second half of October. Following an incubation period of about 60 days, hatching starts in the second half of December. Hatching continues over a period of three to four weeks until mid-January and, with a fledging period of 3½-4 months. Young birds leave the colony from late March to early May. 
Seventeen counts, or on average one visit every two years occurred between 1956 and 1999 (see Figure 1). In the mid 1980s, a management strategy was implemented for all three southern giant petrels breeding localities in the vicinity of the Australian stations, to minimise human disturbance. The strategy involved the Australian Antarctic Division restricting census visits to one in every three to five year period and implementing tight administrative controls over all other visits. This three to five year interval was considered an appropriate compromise between the risk of disturbing the birds through census work and the need to obtain meaningful population data. The strategy is believed to have contributed to the stabilisation and recovery observed in one of the three populations in Eastern Antarctica during the late 1980s onwards.
Other Birds
Adélie penguins breed along the Vestfold Hills coastline and on at least 17 offshore islands, including Hawker Island. The total number of Adélie penguins in the Vestfold Hills has been estimated at 130000 pairs. The Hawker Island colony is located in the vicinity of a small hill midway on the western side of the island and has been estimated at 2500 to 7500 pairs. There is evidence that the colony or some of the breeding groups within the colony have moved location periodically. The deserted areas are marked by deep deposits of guano, frozen eggs and the dehydrated carcasses of chicks. The first Adélie penguins usually appear in the area by the middle of October with eggs being laid about four weeks later. The interval between laying of the first and second egg is 2½ to 4½ days, and the incubation period is in the range of 32 to 35 days. The last moulted adults depart Hawker Island by the end of March.
A small colony of Cape petrels has been recorded on Hawker Island on the southern tip of the south western peninsula. Cape petrels are absent from the area in winter. Cape petrels return to nesting sites during October with egg laying late in November to early December and fledging in late February and early March.
Snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) breed on most islands and several mainland sites in the Vestfold Hills but there are no records of them breeding on Hawker Island. Antarctic fulmars (Fulmarus glacialoides), Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica antarctica) and Emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) are infrequent visitors to the Vestfold Hills in the summer months. South polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) nest on nearby Marine Plain and occasionally around the waters edge.
Seals
Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) breed in the Vestfold Hills and on the south-east part of Hawker Island. The seals start to appear inshore in late September and early October, and pupping occurs from mid-October until late November. Throughout summer, moulting Weddell seals continue to frequent firm sea-ice and haul out onto land. Most of the local population remains in the Vestfold Hills throughout the summer. Non-breeding groups of southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) haul out during the summer months in the vicinity of the south-western peninsula on Hawker Island. Crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) and Leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) appear occasionally at the Vestfold Hills on sea-ice and beaches.
Vegetation
The flora of the Vestfold Hills comprises at least 82 species of terrestrial algae, six moss species and at least 23 lichen species. The lichens and mosses are distributed chiefly in the eastern or inland sector and their distribution patterns reflect the availability of drift snow, time since exposure of the substrate from the ice plateau and time since the last glaciation, elevation and proximity to saline waters. Very few occurrences of lichens or mosses have been noted towards the salt-affected coastal margin including Hawker Island where the low terrain is densely covered with extensive sand and moraine deposits.
Terrestrial algae are widespread and are major primary producers in the Vestfold Hills. Sublithic (or hypolithic) algae has been reported from Hawker Island, developing on the undersurfaces of translucent quartz stones that are partially buried in soil. The dominant algae, Cyanobacteria, particularly oscillatoriacean species, Chroococidiopsis sp., and Aphanothece sp. occur with the greatest frequency together with the Chlorophyta species, cf. Desmococcus sp.A and Prasiococcus calcarius. The endaphic alga Prasiola crispa, occurs as green crumpled sheet-like strands at melt flushes, usually associated with the diatom Navicula muticopsis and oscillatoriacean algae. The ornithocophilous lichen Candelariella flava has been reported from Hawker Island, associated with sea bird nesting sites.
Invertebrates
An extensive survey of terrestrial tardigrades has been undertaken in the Vestfold Hills in 1981 from which four genera and four species of tardigrade were recovered. Although no tardigrades were recovered from the Hawker Island sample site it has been suggested that, as two species of tardigrade, Hypsibius allisonii and Macrobiotus fuciger? were recovered from Walkabout Rocks, they may be found in other coastal areas of similar ecology, associated with Prasiola crispa. The mite, Tydeus erebus is associated with breeding sites of Adélie penguins on the island.
6(ii) Special zones within the Area
There are no special zones within the Area.
6(iii) Location of structures within the Area
There are no structures within or adjacent to the Area and none are to be erected.
6(iv) Location of other protected Areas within close proximity
The following Protected Areas are located near Hawker Island:
Marine Plain, Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 143 (68°36’S, 78°07’E).
    7. Permit Conditions
Visits to Hawker Island ASPA are prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate National Authority. National Antarctic Programs operating in the region shall consult with each other to ensure that the frequency of visits does not exceed that permitted in the Management Plan. Permits to enter the Area may be issued during the non-breeding period for southern giant petrels, specifically from 1 May to 30 September, for compelling scientific research that cannot be undertaken elsewhere, or for essential management purposes consistent with the objectives and provisions of the Management Plan. Permits are only to be issued for research that will not jeopardise the ecological or scientific values of the Area, or interfere with existing scientific studies.
Only one Permit is to be issued for the purpose of conducting a seabird census in each 5 year period. The Permit issuing authority is to refer to the provisions under section 3 of this management plan when issuing Permits. Censuses are to be conducted from beyond the limits of the southern giant petrel colonies, wherever practicable. In most cases there are vantage points from where the nesting birds may be counted. The maximum time to be spent on Hawker Island is 12 hours in total; however, the census may involve several visits to the islands. Only persons named in the Permit may be ashore within the Area at any time. Others, such as boat operators, should remain at the nominated landing sites.
Permits should include a condition that the Permit or a copy shall be carried at all times when within the Area. Additional conditions, consistent with the objectives and provisions of the Management Plan, may be included by the issuing authority. The principal Permit Holder for each Permit issued is required to submit to the Permit issuing authority a visit report detailing all activities undertaken within the Area, and including all census data obtained during the visit.
7(i) Access to, and movement within or over the Area
Vehicles use is prohibited within the Area
Access to Hawker Island may be by watercraft or vehicle depending upon seasonal conditions. Watercraft landings or parking of vehicles must be made at one of the two small bays at the southern end of the island. Boats used to visit the islands must be left at the shoreline. Movement within the Area is by foot only. Only personnel who are required to carry out scientific/management work in the Area are to leave the landing/parking site;
The minimum (closest) approach distances set out in Table 2 are to be maintained when approaching any wildlife on, or in the vicinity of Hawker Island, unless a closer approach distance is authorised in a Permit. These distances are a guide and should an activity disturb wildlife, a greater distance is to be maintained.
Persons permitted to approach southern giant petrels to obtain census data or biological data, should maintain the greatest practical separation distance and should in no case approach closer than 20 m;
To reduce disturbance to wildlife, noise levels including verbal communication is to be kept to a minimum. The use of motor-driven tools and any other activity likely to generate noise and thereby cause disturbance to nesting birds is prohibited within the Area during the breeding period for southern giant petrels (1 October to 30 April); and
Landing of aircraft in the Area is prohibited at any time.
Table 2: Minimum distances to maintain when approaching wildlife at Hawker Island
Species
Distances (m)

People on foot / ski
Quad/ Skidoo
Hagglunds
Giant petrels
100
150
250




Emperor penguins in colonies
30


Other penguins in colonies
Moulting penguins
Seals with pups
Seal pups on their own
Prions and petrels on nest
South polar skua on nest
15


Penguins on sea ice
Non breeding adult seals
5



7(ii) Activities which are, or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place
The following activities may be conducted within the Area from 1 May to 30 September as authorised in a Permit:
scientific research consistent with this Management Plan that will not jeopardise the values for which the Area has been designated or the ecosystems of the Area; 
compelling management activities, including monitoring; and 
sampling, which should be the minimum required for approved research programs. 
7(iii) Installation, modification, or removal of structures
No permanent structures are to be erected in the Area.
7(iv) Location of field camps
Camping is prohibited in the Area except in an emergency.
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that may be brought into the Area
Fuel is not to be depoted in the Area. Boat refuelling is permitted at shoreline landing sites. A small amount of fuel may be taken into the Area for an emergency stove. 
No poultry products, including dried food containing egg powder, are to be taken into the Area. 
No herbicides or pesticides are to be brought into the Area. 
Any chemical which may be introduced for compelling scientific purposes as authorised in a Permit shall be removed from the Area, at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted. The use of radio-nuclides or stable isotopes is prohibited.
No animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions; all equipment and clothing should be thoroughly cleaned before entering the Area.
7(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and fauna, is prohibited unless specifically authorised by permit issued in accordance with Article 3 of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
Disturbance of southern giant petrels should be avoided at all times.
7(vii) Collection or Removal of Anything not Brought into the Area by the Permit Holder
Material may only be collected or removed from the Area as authorised in a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.
Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or otherwise authorised, may be removed unless the impact of the removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ. If such material is found the appropriate National Authority must be notified.
7(viii) Disposal of Waste
No wastes, including human wastes, are to be deposited or left in the Area.
7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan continue to be met
One census of southern giant petrels should be conducted in each 5 year period. Censuses of other species may be undertaken during this visit provided no additional disturbance is caused to the southern giant petrels.
The length of time spent at Hawker Island to conduct a bird census should be minimised. A survey should be able to be completed in less than a 12 hours.
GPS data shall be obtained for specific sites of long-term monitoring for lodgement with the Antarctic Master Directory through the appropriate National Authority.
7(x) Requirement for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal Permit Holder for each Permit submits to the appropriate National Authority a report on activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form contained in Appendix 4 of Resolution 2 (1998)(CEP I).
Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of this Management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the Plan of Management and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
A copy of the report should be forwarded to the National Party responsible for development of the Management Plan to assist in management of the Area, and monitoring of bird populations. Additionally visit reports should provide detailed information on census data, locations of any new colonies or nests not previously recorded, a brief summary of research findings and copies of photographs taken of the Area.
    8. Supporting documentation
Some or all of the data used within this paper was obtained from the Australian Antarctic Data Centre (IDN Node AMD/AU), a part of the Australian Antarctic Division (Commonwealth of Australia).
Adamson, D.A. and Pickard, J. (1986). Cainozoic history of the Vestfold Hills. In Pickard, J., ed. Antarctic Oasis. Terrestrial environments and history of the Vestfold Hills. Sydney: Academic Press, 63–97.
Adamson, D.A. and Pickard, J. (1986). Physiology and geomorphology of the Vestfold Hills. In Pickard, J., ed. Antarctic oasis: terrestrial environments and history of the Vestfold Hills. Sydney: Academic Press, 99–139.
ANARE (1968) Unpublished data.
Birdlife International (2000). Threatened birds of the world. Barcelona and Cambridge U. K: Lynx Edicions and Birdlife International.
BirdLife International (2004). Macronectes giganteus. In: IUCN 2004. 2004 IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. <www.iucnredlist.org>. Downloaded on 30 March 2006.
BirdLife International (2005) Species fact sheet: Macronectes giganteus. Downloaded from http://www.birdlife.org on 30 March 2006
(Broady 1986 p 167)
Cooper, J., Woehler, E., Belbin, L. (2000). Guest editorial. Selecting Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: Important Bird Areas can help. Antarctic Science 12: 129.
Cowan, A.N. (1981). Size variation in the snow petrel. Notornis 28: 169-188.
Cowan, A.N. (1979) Giant Petrels at Casey. Australian Bird Watcher 8: 66-67.
Croxall, J.P., Steele, W.K., McInnes, S.J., Prince, P.A. (1995). Breeding Distribution of the Snow Petrel Pagodroma nivea. Marine Ornithology 23: 69-99. 
Environment Australia (2001). Recovery Plan for Albatrosses and Giant Petrels. Canberra.
Environmental Code of Conduct for Australian Field Activities, Environmental Management and Audit Unit, Australian Antarctic Division.
Fabel, D., Stone, J., Fifield, L.K. and Cresswell, R.G. (1997). Deglaciation of the Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica; preliminary evidence from exposure dating of three subglacial erratics. In RICCI, C.A., ed. The Antarctic region: geological evolution and processes. Siena: Museo Nazionale dell'Antartide, 829–834.
Garnett, S.T., Crowley, G.M. (2000). The Action Plan for Australian Birds 2000. Commonwealth of Australia, Environment Australia, Canberra
Gore, D.B. (1997). Last glaciation of Vestfold Hills; extension of the East Antarctic ice sheet or lateral expansion of Sørsdal Glacier. Polar Record, 33, 5–12.
Hirvas, H., Nenonen, K. and Quilty, P. (1993). Till stratigraphy and glacial history of the Vestfold Hills area, East Antarctica. Quaternary International, 18, 81–95.
IUCN (2001). IUCN Red List Categories: Version 3.1. IUCN Species Survival Commission. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK.
Jouventin, P., Weimerskirch, H. (1991). Changes in the population size and demography of southern seabirds: management implications. In: Perrins, C.M., Lebreton, J.-D. and Hirons, G.J.M. Bird population studies: Relevance to conservation and management. Oxford University Press: 297-314.
Johnstone, Gavin W.; Lugg, Desmond J., and Brown, D.A.; (1973). The biology of the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica. Melbourne, Department of Science, Antarctic Division, ANARE Scientific Reports, Series B(1) Zoology. Publication No. 123.
Law P. (1958). Australian Coastal Exploration in Antarctica The Geographical Journal CXXIV: 151-162.
Leishman, Michelle R.;and Wild, Christie (2001). Vegetation abundance and diversity in relation to soil nutrients and soil water content in Vestfold Hills, East. Antarctic Science, 13(2): 126-134
Micol, T., Jouventin, P. (2001). Long-term population trends in seven Antarctic seabirds at Point Géologie (Terre Adélie): Human impact compared with environmental change. Polar Biology 24: 175-185.
Miller, J.D.;et al. (1984). A survey of the terrestrial Tardigrada of the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica.  In Pickard, J., ed. Antarctic Oasis. Terrestrial environments and history of the Vestfold Hills. Sydney: Academic Press, 197-208.
Murray, M.D. (1972). Banding Giant Petrels on Frazier Island, Antarctica. The Australian Bird Bander 10(3): 57-58.
Murray M.D., Luders D.J. (1990). Faunistic studies at the Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica, 1959-80. ANARE Research Notes 73: 1-45.
Orton, M.N. (1963). Movements of young Giant Petrels bred in Antarctica. Emu 63: 260.
Patterson D.L., Woehler, E.J., Croxall, J.P., Cooper, J., Poncet, S., Fraser, W.R. (in press) Breeding distribution and population status of the Northern Giant Petrel Macronectes halli and the southern giant petrel M. giganteus. Marine Ornithology.
Pickard, J. ed., 1986. Antarctic oasis: terrestrial environments and history of the Vestfold Hills. Sydney: Academic Press.
Puddicombe, R.A.; and Johnstone, G.W.;(1988). Breeding season diet of Adélie penguins at Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica. In Biology of the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica, edited by J.M. Ferris, H.R. Burton, G.W. Johnstone, and I.A.E. Bayly.
Rounsevell, D.E., and Horne, P.A., (1986. Terrestrial, parasitic and introduced invertebrates of the Vestfold Hills. Antarctic oasis; terrestrial environments and history of the Vestfold Hills, Sydney: Academic Press, 309-331
Stattersfield, A.J., Capper, D.R. (2000.) Threatened Birds of the World. Birdlife International, Lynx Publications
Woehler, E.J. (1990). Status of southern giant petrels at Casey. ANARE News 61: 18.
Woehler, E.J. (1991). Status and Conservation of the Seabirds of Heard and the McDonald Islands. In: Croxall, J.P. (ed.) Seabird Status and Conservation: A Supplement. ICBP Technical Publication No. 11: 263-277.
Woehler E.J., Croxall J.P. (1997) The status and trends of Antarctic and subantarctic seabirds. Marine Ornithology 25: 43-66.
Woehler, E.J., Johnstone, G.W. (1991). Status and Conservation of the Seabirds of the Australian Antarctic Territory. In Croxall, J.P. (ed.) Seabird Status and Conservation: A Supplement. ICBP Technical Publication No. 11: 279-308.
Woehler, E.J., Martin, M.R., Johnstone, G.W. (1990). The Status of southern giant petrels Macronectes giganteus at the Frazier Islands Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. Corella 14: 101-106.
Woehler, E.J., Riddle, M.J. (2003). Long-term population trends in Southern Giant Petrels in the Southern Indian Ocean. Poster presented at 8th SCAR Biology Symposium 2001, Amsterdam.
Woehler, E.J., Riddle, M.J., Ribic, C.A. In press. Long-term population trends in Southern Giant Petrels in East Antarctica. Proceedings 8th SCAR Biology Symposium.
Woehler, E.J., Cooper, J., Croxall, J.P., Fraser, W.R., Kooyman, G.L., Miller, G.D., Nel, D.C., Patterson, D.L., Peter, H-U, Ribic, C.A., Salwicka, K., Trivelpiece, W.Z., Wiemerskirch, H. (2001). A Statistical Assessment of the Status and Trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic Seabirds. SCAR/CCAMLR/NSF, 43 pp.
Woehler, E.J. (1990). The distribution of seabird biomass in the Australian Antarctic Territory: Implications for conservation. Environmental Conservation 17, 256-261. 
Woehler, E.J. and Johnstone, G.W. (1991). Status and conservation of the seabirds of the Australian Antarctic Territory In: Seabird status and conservation: a supplement. Ed. Croxall, J.P., ICBP Technical Publication 11, 279-308. 
Woehler, E.J. (1993). Antarctic seabirds: their status and conservation in the AAT. RAOU Conservation Statement 9, 8pp. 
Woehler, E.J., Martin, M.R. and Johnstone, G.W. (1990). The status of Southern Giant-Petrels, Macronectes giganteus, at the Frazier Islands, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. Corella 14, 101-106. 
Woehler, E. (2001) Breeding populations of Southern Giant Petrels at Heard Island, the McDonald Islands and within the AAT, Australian Antarctic Data Centre, SnoWhite Metadata
( http://aadc-maps.aad.gov.au/aadc/metadata/metadata_redirect.cfm?md=AMD/AU/SOE_seabird_candidate_sp_SGP
 


