


Wildlife Awareness Information for Aircraft Operations in Antarctica



Wildlife Awareness Information for Aircraft Operations in Antarctica

CEP Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Background

    1. ATCM Resolution 2(2004) sets out Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft Near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica.  The Guidelines have also been incorporated into the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM), produced by COMNAP.  The aim is to ensure that pilots do not disturb concentrations of wildlife unnecessarily, and thus, to the maximum extent practicable, avoid ‘harmful interference’ under Annex II of the Environmental Protocol.

    2. The Guidelines include minimum recommended separation distances for aircraft operations close to concentrations of wildlife.  However, they rely on pilots having prior knowledge of where such wildlife concentrations are, or taking evasive action once wildlife concentrations are identified from the air.  

    3. In order to facilitate the planning of flight operations in accordance with the Guidelines, the United Kingdom has developed a comprehensive Wildlife Awareness Manual to identify clearly the location of known breeding groups of major wildlife concentrations on the Antarctic Peninsula.  This manual has been submitted to CEP IX / ATCM XXIX in a separate Information Paper (ATCM XXIX/IP1).   The Manual’s aim is to supplement the technical information provided in the AFIM.  It is primarily targeted at helicopter operations, as helicopters are more likely to need to fly at low altitude, or land in proximity to wildlife areas for scientific and logistical reasons.

    4. The Wildlife Awareness Manual has been found to be a very useful tool by the helicopter pilots who support the UK’s national programme in Antarctica.  The Manual provides more detailed information at specific sites with high wildlife concentrations, or those sites that are most likely to be visited by the UK programme.  Wherever possible, the most suitable flight path to, and landing site at, Antarctic research stations was agreed with the Station Leaders on site at the time of the last visit.  In addition, Protected Areas are shown and any formally adopted flying restrictions are highlighted in the summary, with reference to relevant Management Plans.  The Manual has enabled pilots to plan their flight paths in more detail prior to take off.  This has meant that, wherever possible, flight plans can either avoid wildlife concentrations or, where proximity is unavoidable for operational reasons, that the pilots can ensure full compliance with Resolution 2(2004).   The manual is also small and robust and designed specifically to fit inside a pilot’s flight suit for easy reference in the air.

Proposal

    5. The United Kingdom proposes that the CEP consider whether detailed information about the location of wildlife concentrations could be made available to pilots for Antarctica as a whole, not just the Antarctic Peninsula.   Such information could be developed in a format along the lines of the UK’s Wildlife Awareness Manual, or possibly as a complementary document to the AFIM (though it would be important to consider the format, to ensure effective in-flight accessibility). The UK proposes that as a first step, the CEP should request COMNAP to consider: 
    • options for providing readily accessible information about the location of wildlife concentrations for all areas of Antarctica in which aircraft operations may take place;
    • options for how such information could best be presented to aircrew for both fixed and rotating wing aircraft; and
    • the practicalities of how such a product might best be developed and updated.



April 2006
