


Policy Issues Arising from On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula




Policy Issues Arising from On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, Norway and the United States (in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators)

Summary
    1. On the invitation of the United Kingdom, a team of representatives from five Parties and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) conducted an on-site review of those sites for which “Site Guidelines for Visitors” were adopted by ATCM Resolution 5(2005).  The team also visited a further six sites, for which draft Guidelines had been prepared, in the north and west of the Antarctic Peninsula (see map at Annex A).  The site-specific findings were fed into the CEP ICG on Site Guidelines (set out in the ICG Report - ATCM XXIX/WP1).  

    2. The team has also recommended that a number of policy issues warrant further consideration by the CEP.  These are discussed below.

Background 
    3. ATCM XXVIII adopted Resolution 5(2005) on Site Guidelines for Visitors.  This listed four sites for which such Guidelines had been developed.  The CEP was requested to convene an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to review the four Guidelines, as well as any further Guidelines submitted to the ICG for consideration (cf. para. 161 of the final report of ATCM XXVIII).  The ICG’s Terms of Reference were, in essence, to consider the content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness of the adopted and proposed Site Guidelines.
    4. The United Kingdom, as nominated convenor of the ICG, invited those Parties and organisations that were actively involved in the work of the ICG to visit those sites for which Guidelines had been developed.  The aim of the visits was to review in-situ the management provisions of the Guidelines and to provide up-to-date information to inform the ICG deliberations.  
    5. The participants were:

Jane Rumble
Polar Regions Unit
UNITED KINGDOM
Rolo Sanchez
Dirección Nacional del Antártico
ARGENTINA
Stephen Powell
Australian Antarctic Division
AUSTRALIA
Birgit Njaastad
Norwegian Polar Institute
NORWAY
Ron Naveen
Oceanites
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Kim Crosbie
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)

    6. Using the UK’s Ice Patrol Vessel, HMS Endurance, as a platform, the team visited 10 of the 11 sites for which the ICG was considering Guidelines.  (Paulet Island was the only such site not visited by the team).  The itinerary for the site visit was:
30 January 2006
Penguin Island ( South Shetland Islands)
30 January 2006
Turret Point, King George Island (South Shetland Islands)
31 January 2006
Barrientos Island, Aitcho Islands (South Shetland Islands)
31 January 2006
Yankee Harbour (South Shetland Islands)
2 February 2006
Hannah Point, Livingston Island (South Shetland Islands)
6 February 2006
Neko Harbour, Andvord Bay
6 February 2006
Cuverville Island
7 February 2006
Jougla Point, Wiencke Island 
9 February 2006
Petermann Island, Wilhelm Archipelago
9 February 2006
Plèneau Island

On-Site Review of the Site Guidelines
    7. The review team spent up to 4 hours at each site, focusing on:
    • the accuracy and appropriateness of the key features and the descriptions of the topography, flora and fauna and other values included in the Guidelines; 
    • the accuracy and ease of use of the sketch maps;
    • whether there were any discernable visitor impacts and the likelihood of potential impacts due to human visitation; and
    • the value and relevance of the management provisions proposed.
    8. The team also had the opportunity to observe tourists landing from ship at Cuverville Island and Jougla Point.  At Jougla Point, the team was also able to visit a small sailing yacht.
    9. The team noted that there were a range of potential management tools appropriate for use at each of the sites.  These included:  
    • zones - within which different levels of visitor supervision could be applied, for example, supervised ‘free roaming’; guided areas; or areas which should be closed to visitors; 
    • visitor codes of conduct - including acceptable approach distances to wildlife and, where appropriate, precautionary notes about any specific safety risks within the visitor site area;
    • landing requirements – including the identification of the most appropriate landing sites, as well as limiting access to ships carrying fewer than a given maximum number of passengers, and specifying the number of people ashore at any one time;
    • visit limitations per day – including capping the number of visits per day (noting that these would indicate a maximum capacity per day (midnight to midnight), not an expected visitation rate, taking into account that the majority of all tourist landing sites currently have an average visitation rate of significantly less than one ship visit per day); limiting the time ashore for ship visits; and establishing a ‘rest period’ for the wildlife at each site when new landings would not occur.
    10. The team also considered how best to format and present the Guidelines in order to maximise their comprehension and accessibility by all those visiting the sites, with a primary focus on expedition leaders who organise tourist visits to the sites from cruise ships.  

    11. Based on the findings of the site visits, and following lengthy discussions about the most appropriate management tools for the specific characteristics of each site, the team redrafted the Guidelines under consideration by the ICG.  These redrafts, together with the detail of the findings of the site visits, and a synopsis of the reasons for selecting the different management tools for each of the sites, were submitted to the ICG for further consideration (cf. ATCM XXIX/WP 1). 

Wider Policy Issues for Further Consideration
    12. During the course of the on-site visits, the team identified a number of other policy issues that were outside the scope of the ICG’s Terms of Reference.  These issues are summarised under the headings below for further consideration by the CEP and ATCM.  Many of these issues were environmental and the team would suggest that there is a clear role for the CEP in the ongoing development of Site Guidelines.  
Recommendation:  that the CEP adds Site Guideline issues to its wider consideration of area protection and management and works with SCAR to look at options for further studies on the potential impacts of Antarctic tourism.

Review of Site Guidelines 
    13. As the team considered the appropriateness of different management tools for each site, they had in mind the current level and pattern of visitation to the sites.  On average, none of the sites visited have yet received more than one tourist ship per day per season (end October – late March).  However, occasionally some of the sites have received three ship visits in a single day.  The review team therefore proposed a maximum visitation level that, in their view, each site and its wildlife could cope with in a single day.  The outcome was agreement by the team to propose a limit on the number of ship visits that would be acceptable in a single day.  Such limits were based on the expectation that any day of multiple visits would typically be followed by several days with no visits (even the most heavily visited site received no visits on 20 percent of all days in a season).  The team did not consider that continual visitation up to these limits was desirable for any of the sites.  
Recommendation:  that the CEP considers options to work with the tourist industry to develop realistic likely future scenarios of Antarctic tourism; and that in the meantime, if there is any significant change in the current level and type of visits to any of the sites, the Site Guidelines should be reviewed.

    14. The management tools proposed for each site are precautionary.  Nevertheless, the team believed that it would be important to keep the Guidelines under review, and update them as necessary (e.g. if new management techniques were developed, further visitor impacts are observed or tourism operations change significantly), to ensure that they remain relevant and appropriate.  
Recommendation: that the CEP considers establishing a framework for reviewing Site Guidelines.

    15. The team acknowledged that they had only been able to get a snap-shot of each site, based on a single visit towards the end of the summer season.  The team was mindful of how sites change during the course of a season, and between seasons, and considered carefully the breeding patterns of wildlife.  There was evidence of visitor impacts at Barrientos Island in the Aitcho Islands, Penguin Island and Hannah Point, in the form of worn tracks.  However, of these, only the track at Barrientos Island was on vegetation.  The team also observed that the penguins at some of the more highly visited sites appeared to have become habituated to visitors, and the team discussed whether habituation should be considered a visitor impact.
Recommendation: that the CEP considers options for systematic and regular monitoring of the sites.

Site Coverage and Selection
    16. The fifteen most frequently visited sites in the Antarctic Peninsula, as identified in ATCM XXVIII/IP081, submitted by IAATO, are set out in the table below.  Of these, Site Guidelines have been adopted for three sites and Guidelines for a further five of these fifteen sites have been submitted to CEPIX/ATCMXXIX. Three sites are within Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs).  Port Lockroy has visitor Guidelines prepared by the UK and Argentina manages visits to Half Moon Island (Camara Station) and Brown Base. 

    17. Consequently, only one of the top fifteen visited sites does not currently have either site specific visitor guidelines, or management by a National Operator.  However, IAATO member tourist visits to Brown Bluff are undertaken in line with guidelines prepared by IAATO and Recommendation XVIII-1.
Recommendation: that priority be given to preparing visitor Guidelines for Brown Bluff.

    18. In addition, the review team agreed that the three Site Guidelines under ICG review which cover less frequently visited sites, were also relevant and appropriate.  This suggested that Site Guidelines could be used as a tool for all visited sites with high concentrations of breeding wildlife or other features which may be vulnerable to visitation, which are not already covered by other forms of site management (such as, for example, management by National Operators or through an ASMA).  The CEP may wish to consider developing a long-term process of reviewing all visited sites to determine whether Site Guidelines are appropriate.  
Recommendation:  that:
    • CEP Members, Observers and Experts with specific knowledge of visited sites not already covered by visitor guidelines, or other forms of site management, undertake site reviews and draft Site Guidelines, using a consistent format, as appropriate;
    • the CEP establishes a framework for the consideration of all newly proposed Guidelines; and
    • the CEP encourages those preparing new management plans (ASMAs) to look at those visitor management issues addressed by the Site Guidelines review ICG.

Wider implication of Site Guidelines 
    19. In discussing whether it would be appropriate to restrict the number of ship visits at the ten sites reviewed, the team were conscious that such an approach may – in some cases - deflect visitor pressure to other sites in the vicinity, some of which may not be commonly visited.  Several options were discussed for mitigating this effect, such as:
    • not restricting the number of visits to any site, but to rely on the other proposed management tools.  Whilst this may be an option for those sites which do not have significant concentrations of breeding wildlife or vegetation, on balance the team did not conclude that this should be the only option for addressing this issue;
    • preparing Site Guidelines for all visited landing sites (as these are more likely to have breeding wildlife, vegetation, fragile geological features, historic artefacts and scientific facilities), giving priority to those in the vicinity of sites subject to ship visit limitations.  Whilst the team viewed this as an appropriate longer-term aim, it was recognised that such an approach would take some time; and
    • extending some of the general management tools to all visitor landing sites in advance of their detailed assessment and adoption of site specific management measures.  For example, this might include extending the behaviour ashore provisions, limits on numbers ashore and ratio of visitors to guides to all visited sites, or applying a standard number of ship visits per day to all visited sites, until site-specific limits are in place.  It was suggested that such an approach might be considered in the context of Recommendation XVIII-1.
Recommendation: that the CEP give further consideration to these, and consider other options, to ensure effective visitor management at all landing sites in Antarctica.

Education and training
    20. The review team noted that whilst it is possible to set minimum standards for visitor management, the wildlife and vegetation cover at each site was likely to change during the season, and from year to year.  Therefore, the effective management of each landing would continue to depend on the experience and vigilance of expedition leaders and tour guides. Expedition leaders should assess the site prior to landing passengers to ensure that visits are managed in a way which minimises any disturbance to wildlife and prevents trampling of vegetation.  The vast majority of expedition leaders currently working in the tourist industry are highly experienced and extremely competent.  However, if the industry continues to expand, it may be that less experienced expedition leaders and guides will begin working in the field. 
Recommendation: that the CEP work with IAATO (and other interested Observers and Experts) to consider the issue of training for expedition leaders. 

Evaluation of impacts and monitoring
    21. There have been limited comprehensive and large-scale studies on wildlife disturbance and the impact of tourism on Antarctic flora and fauna.  In the absence of such scientific studies, management decisions need to be taken on a precautionary basis.  However, the review team would suggest that further work is needed to consider whether the management tools proposed in the Site Guidelines are effective in minimising impacts, or whether they need to be strengthened, or even relaxed.  
Recommendation: that the effectiveness of the proposed management tools in minimising visitor impacts be further considered by the CEP, potentially in the context of the work of the ICG on monitoring and reporting.  

Camping
    22. The review team agreed to recommend establishing a precautionary ‘rest period’ for each site during which no new visitor landings take place.  Although the current level of tourism means that sites rarely get long periods of visitation, it was still possible for some sites to receive as many as 17 hours of visits in a day (e.g. Petermann Island in January 2006).  Whilst it seemed most appropriate and straightforward to propose a rest period during the night, this raised the question of camping trips ashore.  Overnight tourist camping trips are increasingly part of a cruise itinerary.  Normally these involve a small number of tourists going ashore after dinner and being recovered before breakfast, so no food is consumed ashore and all waste is removed to the ship.  For each site, the review team considered whether tourists sleeping ashore (not moving about) would be appropriate. 
Recommendation: that future reviews of the Guidelines also consider the appropriateness of camping-related tourism activities and any measures necessary to ensure minimisation of environmental and wildlife impacts.

Cautionary Notes
    23. The focus of the Site Guidelines is to ensure that tourist landings are sustainable and environmentally responsible.  However, the team noted that some sites were adjacent to particularly hazardous areas (e.g. crevassed and/or tide water glaciers).  Where such hazards were directly related to the landing sites under review, they have been highlighted in the ‘Cautionary Notes’ (e.g. the reference in the Site Guideline for Neko Harbour to glacier calving).  However, for those hazards adjacent to the sites, which were often highly variable depending on the conditions, the review team expected that expedition leaders would be competent to assess the risks.
Recommendation:  that, in due course, the ATCM consider whether any further guidance/advice should be developed for specific hazards.

Conclusions
    24. In conclusion, the review team agreed that the site visits were highly successful. It was agreed that such in-situ work by a number of CEP Members was extremely useful, both in terms of collaborative working, and for the opportunity to have detailed open discussions about emerging policy issues.   Wherever possible, the team would encourage all CEP Members to seek opportunities for other collaborative expeditions to consider environmental issues in-situ in Antarctica.
    25. Participants in the on-site reviews agreed that Site Guidelines provide a useful tool for managing tourism in Antarctica. In undertaking the review of the Guidelines, a number of other policy issues were raised, as highlighted above.  Given the scarcity of scientific information on the potential impacts of Antarctic tourism, the CEP should consider the need for further studies and more detailed monitoring to underpin the Site Guidelines and mitigate potential impacts.

April 2006
Annex A

Map of Sites Visited by Review Team on HMS Endurance (excluding Paulet Island)

