


Establishment of “areas of special tourist interest”





Establishment of “areas of special tourist interest”


Summary: 
Since tourist and non-government interests play an important role in Antarctic activities, it is essential to reconcile freedom of access to Antarctica, freedom of scientific research and environment protection. In order to limit conflicts of usage, the definition of “areas of special tourist interest” bears consideration. Selected as attractive for tourists yet limiting their spread in Antarctica, these areas would be managed according to a space-and-time approach (organization of tours limited in time and space). Not only would this limit the presence of tourists inside well-defined sites, but also permit the establishment of structures to improve their visit and limit their impact on the environment. Furthermore, such sites could become privileged study sites on the cumulative environmental impact of human activities on Antarctica. Thus, the process of specially managed areas could be applied to the specific creation of “areas of touristic interest”.

Antarctica’s attractiveness is due to its natural, cultural and historical heritage. Its various characteristics involve competing space usage modalities (such as science, logistics, tourism…), thus creating conflicts amongst users of the region. Antarctica supports activities whose environmental impact is far from insignificant (for instance various types of pollution, permanent or semi-permanent infrastructures), which justifies implementing regulations. Therefore, we need to figure out how to reconcile free access to Antarctica, freedom of scientific research and environmental protection. 
France submitted the document (XXVIII ACM/IP 12) on “the establishment of areas of special tourist interest”.  Since the “Parties welcome the document and decided to consider such option when reviewing the question of tourism regulation” (para 175 of the Final Report of the Twenty-Eighth Consultative Meeting (Stockholm, 2005)), we should first determine whether such operation is worthwhile.  The durability of the tourism industry demands an integrated and coordinated definition. Left without control or clearly stated operational modalities, touristic activities may be damaging to environmental protection. The question regarding cumulative impact of human activities in Antarctica repeatedly comes up.  Yet it is difficult to identify sites for potential studies of this issue.
The question of impacts due to human activities, and even more so of cumulative impacts, is a major stake. Not only would the definition of “areas of special tourist interest” limit tourist activities inside given sites, it would also allow for a study of cumulative impacts of human activities on the environment in Antarctica.
A. Areas of special tourist interest
The Protocol on Environment Protection (Madrid, 1991) makes Antarctica a “natural reserve dedicated to peace and science”. Its Annex V on areas protection and management sets up “Antarctica’s specially protected areas” (ASPA) and “Antarctica’s specially managed areas” (ASMA). 
While the Protocol is today the reference for human activities management in Antarctica, it is important to remember the regulatory steps that led to positive law. Some measures that were challenged a one time or another may acquire renewed interest many years later. Such is the case of “special tourist interest areas”. Adopted in 1975 (1), they form a precedent which may attract today renewed interest due to potential usage conflicts between scientific and touristic activities (2). 
1. The existence of precedents: touristic areas
While there were “areas of special tourist interest” prior to the Madrid Protocol (a), tourists are sometimes limited to certain sites under specific zoning (b)

a) “Areas of special tourist interest” (recommendation VIII-9, 1975)

In 1972, the Consultative Parties recommended that their governments carry out consultations on the possible designation of  “an adequate number of areas of special touristic interest where tourists would be encouraged to visit1”. 
In order to direct tour-operators towards sites where tourists could be controlled and better managed, Areas of Special Tourist Interest (ASTI)) were established2. Travel agents were requested to land tourist ships only in such areas as defined in Annex B to this recommendation which specified:  “2. They request all organizers of tourist groups, except in an emergency, to: a) visit only those Antarctic stations for which permission has been sought and granted in accordance with Recommendation IV-27; b) land only within the Areas of Special Tourist Interest listed or defined in Annex B to this Recommendation “.
However, the 1975 zoning had no real impact since no such area was considered. Nevertheless, “tourist areas” are sometimes defined by management plan for protected or managed areas. 

b) Tourist areas inside other areas of Antarctica

Whether a region is designated “Antarctica’s specially protected area” or “Antarctica’s specially managed area”, a management plan needs to be submitted to the Consultative Parties meeting. Such management plans include “a) a description of the value(s) justifying the request for special protection or management;   b) a description of the management plan’s goals and objectives to protect or manage such value(s).”
Upon reading some of the management plans, it appears that the zoning selection may be due to the presence of tourist or non-government activities. Indeed, some of the reasons provided for the designation of an area include: 
    • the presence of science stations “frequently visited by groups of tourists” (ASPA n°125. Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands) ,
    • the fact that “long term research programs may be endangered by interferences from nearby Palmer station and tourist ships” (ASPA n°139. Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago) ,
    • the fact that the area is  “attractive for tourist activities” (Antarctica’s specially protected area n° 150:  Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King Georges Island).
Depending on their chosen objective, within the framework of Annex V to the Madrid Protocol, States have the option to establish “Antarctica’s specially protected areas” or “Antarctica’s specially managed areas”;  in some of them, tourist areas were set up. Regardless of their designation (“area reserved for tourism”, “tourism area”, “tourist area”), they are characterized by the fact that tourists are only allowed in a section of the delineated area. 
An example may be provided for each category:
    • within Antarctica’s specially protected area no 150 (Ardley Island):
This site includes one area reserved for visitors, with a science station and one area reserved for tourists. It is indicated that in the area reserved for tourists: “Tourist visits shall be limited to this area and shall take place under the supervision of authorized personnel in compliance with the provisions of the permit delivered for each visit.  Access to bird reproduction areas shall be limited to scientific activities,”
    • within Antarctica’s specially managed area n° 2 - McMurdo Dry Valleys, Terre Southern Victoria:
The management plan includes a “tourism area”3, located in an “area of great aesthetic value […] where easy visits and access can be reasonably guaranteed with minimal impact on scientific activities or the natural environment.  The area was established following consultations with national programs operating in the area and tour-operators. In the past, carefully managed visits were organized on site by tourism agencies.  Tourist activities shall be limited to this area.”
Tourism activities must be limited to the designated area.  Annex D to Measure 1 (2004) includes “guidelines applicable to activities executed in the tourism area”.  Among others, they state that “tourist movements within the area shall be done in small guided groups; tour operators must make sure that pathways located within the tourism area a clearly marked and that visitors stay on them.  Markers used to define tourist routes and remarkable sites shall be removed at the end of each visit; tours shall land on the area located at 77,6358° south latitude, by 163,0656° east longitude.  Tourist groups may not camp inside the tourist area except for reasons of survival and safety. River beds and ponds are to be avoided. Should waterways need to be crossed, such crossing must take place at designated areas, including existing rocks; and activities considered and executed in the area must be in strict compliance with ACTM recommendation XVIII-1 de la RCTA.”
Since such precedents exist, one may ponder the interest of “tourist interest areas.”

Interest of “tourist interest areas”
Since private activities in Antarctica are becoming increasingly frequent, it is important to determine the possible interest of “tourist interest areas.”

a) Avoiding usage conflicts

The Madrid Protocol provides science with a special place.  Activities are organized and carried through in order to “give priority‎y to scientific research and to preserve the value of Antarctica as an area dedicated to research, including research considered fundamental to understanding the global environment4.”  While scientific research remains dominant and mostly “a priority” in the southern region, it is not the only peaceful activity allowed.
This rule is all the more essential than tourism may constrain scientific research.  The arrival of hundreds of tourists in a science station where only a few dozen people live usually is bound to be disruptive, particularly when such visits occur several times during the season or happen unannounced.  Such presence may be disruptive to the station’s life, especially when logistic and scientific staff members are requested to welcome the tourists and escort them, or in case of technical or medical emergency situations.  Finally, the presence on the field of several poorly escorted or unescorted visitors may be incompatible with some research activities, a in the area of life sciences (sites for vegetation follow-up, bird colonies, etc).
In order to better control the presence of tourists in Antarctica and limit possible interference, it might prove interesting to direct tour-operators towards regions considered as the most favorable or areas set aside for tourism.
Thus tourist activities would be limited to spaces of tourist interest without disrupting scientific activities.  It may prove difficult to separate tourist attractions from scientific interests:  a bird colony or a seal gathering site is of interest both for scientists and tourists, whose activities are often considered incompatibles5. 
The Consultative Parties acknowledged that “in some cases, it would be advisable to resort to Antarctica’s specially protected areas in order to make sure that tourism and nongovernmental activities do not interfere with scientific research and have no negative effect on Antarctica’s environment6.”  The management plan required for “multiusage planned activities areas” (MPAA) already demanded specific measures to prevent or minimize interferences and cumulative incidences, especially when measures applicable to visitors need to be included.  They may include the designation of areas within which tourist and other visitors would be allowed limited or no access, and/or areas to which access would be recommended to give the tourists or visitors a good overview of the area’s characteristics7.
b) Study of human activities’ cumulative impacts on the environment
Within the framework of environmental impact evaluations required under the Madrid Protocol (article 8), it is to the States’ advantages to take into account not only the isolated effects of a given activity, but also their combination with the impact of other activities planned or underway. An impact evaluation is a review of “all possible impacts of this activity on the environment, including taking into account cumulative impacts that may occur due to existing activities as well as known planned activities8.”
Yet, understanding the activities’ cumulative nature may present difficulties.  Indeed, the establishment of “areas or special tourist interest” may enhance the evaluation of human activities’ impacts on the environment, in particular for cumulative impacts. Shouldn’t we seize the opportunity of the work carried out to define guidelines for frequently visited sites, to measure risks and set up a true follow-up over several years to study the impact of human activities on Antarctica’s environment?
Since monitoring measures need to be considered in the framework of environmental impact evaluations, it would be interesting to turn “tourist interest areas” into reference sites to study cumulative environmental impacts of human presence (science and tourism); such studies, carried out as a priority on these sites, may improve our knowledge in an area still poorly evaluated and then be applied to other situations. 
Even though using the designation “tourist interest areas” does present some interests, we must now turn to the selection of the sites. 
B. L’importance du choix des sites 
Deciding whether visitors should be directed towards a limited number of sites or if, on the contrary, they should be distributed over a large number of sites remains an open question.  If the idea of “tourist interest areas” was accepted, it would be tantamount to “specifically dedicating” such areas to tourism.  Areas would be open to tourists, and the environmental consequences of their presence would thus be accepted. 
Accessibility, the presence of wildlife, the scientific and historical interest of the area, the beauty of the landscape are among reasons why tourists prefer some areas to others.  Therefore, the selection of « tourist interest areas » must be studied and evaluated.  In fact, not only does the area have to be attractive for the tourists (1) but we must ensure that deciding to delineate such areas will not lead to constant opening of new tourist areas (2).  This is why it seems appropriate to rely on what already exists (3).
1. An attractive site for tourists
A travel agent who would only offer his clients areas with no tourist interest would not be able to function.  Any site chosen as part of a “tourist interest area” must be attractive. The preference of a travel agent for a given area is linked to a number of elements, often tied to one another, such as the presence of animals, of witnesses of the past, the area’s geological formation, the landscape, but also sites testifying to a contemporary human activity. 
It is also essential that theses sites be selected in a way that facilitate organization and management of tourist activity while minimizing human impacts on the environment and, as applicable, on historical sites and monuments.  The presence of tourists requires special equipments(landing strips, helicopters…).  Once on the continent, landing and mobility must be practical.  Beside the infrastructures mentioned above, a clear, relatively lasting determination of a site as « touristic » would lead to the establishment and the development of indispensable equipment to welcome tourists (information signs, shelters against natural disasters, stands to observe wildlife) and environmental protection (garbage cans, slatted wood paths, etc).
This is why the selection of « tourist interest areas » needs to be done in close cooperation with tour operators, keeping in mind environmental risks likely to be caused by the expansion of tourist activities mostly focused on the Antarctic Peninsula9 towards other regions as interest wanes in a given site. 
2. Consider not opening new sites to tourists
Sites open to tourists could also be diversified.  The point is to determine whether it is appropriate to allow tour operators to continue opening to tourists heretofore unused sites.  First we need to assert the site’s scientific interest and then, again verify the visitors’ environmental impact. 
Impact monitoring on specific sites may be used to determine whether tourists may be allowed to continue visiting a given area.  Such elements would feed the management plan needed to set up an “Antarctica’s specially protected area (ASPA)” or an “Antarctica’s specially managed area (ASMA)”.
This is the main reason why, when selecting a site as a “tourist interest area”, it is advisable to rely on what already exists. 
3. Rely on what already exists: 
Guidelines for Antarctica sites frequented by tourist were adopted during the Twenty-Eighth Consultative Meeting (Stockholm, 2005)10.  Four sites were selected (Penguin Island, Aitcho Island, Cuverville Island, Pointe Jougla, Wiencke Island).  They are subjected to their own code of conduct.  The States decided that in the future, other sites may be subjected to such guidelines and that said guidelines would be studied by the Polar Environment Committee.
Since such guidelines are considered for Antarctica’s sites frequently visited by tourists, such sites could be set aside for tourists, provided this was compatible with planned or existing scientific activities.
It would be interesting to develop the concept of these guidelines following a specific site approach and apply it to other sites, with a tourist-related environmental monitoring.  We would then need to define, in collaboration with the scientists, the areas that could be dedicated to such action, and be used as experimental areas to measure the impact of tourism.  This would be a complementary tool to be added to touristic sites. 
Since states have elected to define guidelines for sites frequently visited by tourists, it would be interesting to select a site as a basis for a “tourist interest area.”  Since we know where tourists go and since a code of conduct applies, tourists would be taken to such sites. 
Regardless of the selected site, a space-and-time approach will need to be chosen for the management of the  “tourist interest area.”  

C. Management: a time-and-space approach
Setting up tourist sites is only viable provided they represent a true management area.  The importance of impacts on a site not only depends on the type of activity, but also, for a large part, on the duration of the disruption, its frequency and its intensity; on its interactions with other activities; on the people’s behavior on the site, and on the sensitivity of animal and vegetal species concerned.
Thus, restrictions may be imposed on the duration of use of a given area, such as limiting the length of visits, restrictions based on seasons or the times of day, usage (restrictions on certain activities), usage intensity (thresholds, limitation of the number of people allowed).
This is why a time-and-space approach to tourist and nongovernmental activities could be considered.  It would allow for the adoption of regulatory measures applying to travels and organizations of sojourns on the basis of time and space. 
1. A time-based approach
To limit excessive pressure on symbolic monuments, cultural and natural sites and most desirable areas, one solution is to reserve access thereof.  Regulating the number of tourists could be considered if we take into account repeated tourist groups on one site. 
So it is possible to limit the number of daily visits.  We need to take into account the sometimes important receiving capacity of tourist-carrying ships in the southern region.  Not all operators belong to the Antarctica International Tour Operator Association.  The number and/or the size of the ships could be limited in a given area. 
Also, the duration of visits may be limited, be it during the day or during the selected season, for instance banning access during the nesting season.  To this end, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat could be entrusted with the management of a yearly numerus clausus. 
This time-based approach could be associated with a geographical regulation of tourism, taking visitors to determined sites. 
2. A space-based approach
A space-based approach could be combined with a time-based one.  In the selected site, some areas could be subjected to different levels of protection (or tourist access). 
A concentric approach may be considered.  Reserves of biosphere selected by UNESCO (UN Organization for Education, Science and Culture) provide a good example.  These reserves are organized in successive areas:  a central area where nature is protected in parks or natural reserves, for instance; an environmental buffer zone around the central area; a transition area with sustainable resource development. 
Of course, such a set-up requires a vast enough expanse to satisfy environmental protection goals.  Several central areas could coexist on one site.  However one must remember that Antarctica’s fauna are mostly marine, found on land only during the reproductive season and whose access to the sea must be protected.  Therefore a sharing may be better than a concentric approach. 
Not only should satisfactory sites be identified for tourism purposes, but they also require a management capable of sustaining tourist activity on the long term.  It would not be acceptable to consider keeping open sites from which animals that could be observed at one point had disappeared or substantially diminished. 
Therefore, it is necessary to delineate a perimeter that clearly isolates environmental protection activities and to avoid usage conflicts between scientific and tourist activities. 
Concerning fauna, for instance, a distance must be established that is not too wide between animals and tourists to allow the latter to observe the former but still limits environmental disruption. This is how we can define:
- areas closed to tourists because of the fragility of the site, the fauna or the flora, or because of scientific activities incompatible with tourist visits, 
- managed areas where tourists’ presence could only be considered under strict management by proven guides.  Such areas may include marked trails and stands or blinds,
- open areas in which tourists could move more freely while abiding by the customary rules of environmental protection and remaining under the tour operators’ responsibility. 
Clear identification of tourist sites may ease the installation of specific improvements to enhance tourists’ visits and people’s safety while contributing to reinforce site protection, suing for example observation stands or blinds. 
Since infrastructures, whether permanent or not, are to be avoided, except for those needed for scientific activities or related logistics, only light equipment may be considered.  For example, we could use wood bridges that would prevent treading and observation stands or blinds to limit animal stress.  A stand needs to be positioned in a strategic area; its establishment requires preliminary scooping in collaboration with the scientists in order to ensure the regular presence of the species we want to photograph.  Such improvements would aim at protecting the natural habitat by controlling human traffic.  This would allow visitors access to the site, sometimes in much better conditions than today and increase their awareness of the visited site’s ecosystem.
Such space-and-time based management should be specified at the time of the definition of the tourist interest area.  Issues relating to this management and needed infrastructures will also need to be discussed.
	
D. ESTABLISHMENT OF TOURIST INTEREST AREAS

On the basis of “Agreed measures”», a number of areas enjoy a strengthened protection. “Sites of specific scientific interest” (SSSI)11, historical sites and monuments12, “special reserves”13 and “multiusage planned activities areas” (ZAPP)14 have been set up. Annex V to the Madrid Protocol simplifies the system. Existing nomenclature of protected areas shall be replaced with “Antarctica’s specially protected areas (ASPA)” and Antarctica’s specially managed areas (ASMA)”15. 
The objective of “Antarctica’s specially protected areas” is to “protect regions for their exceptional environmental, scientific, historical or aesthetic values or their untouched natural condition, or any combination of such values, as well as all current or programmed scientific research16.” The Consultative Parties shall try to incorporate spaces of certain values, including for instance, pristine areas and representative examples of the main terrestrial and marine ecosystems. 
“Antarctica specially managed areas (ASMA)” are designated to “facilitate activities planning and coordination, avoid possible conflicts, improve cooperation between the Parties and reduce to a minimum any repercussions on the environment.”  They may be used to limit risks of mutual interferences and cumulative repercussions on the environment, manage sites or monuments of recognized historical value17. They may include “Antarctica specially protected areas (ASPA).”
Consultative Parties recognized that “in some cases it would be advantageous to use Antarctica’s specially protected areas to make sure that tourism and nongovernmental activities do not interfere with scientific research and have no negative effects on Antarctica’s environment”18.  The management plan required in “multiusage planned activities areas” (ZAPP) already demanded the inclusion of specific measures to prevent or minimize interferences and cumulative incidences, in particular when it was necessary to include measures applicable to visitors. They could include the designation of areas within which the access of tourists or visitors could be limited or prohibited, and/or areas to which access would be recommended to provide tourists and visitors with an overview of the area’s specific characteristics19.
When several activities take place on one site, conflicts need to be avoided, cooperation must be established at the States’ level and impact must be reduced to the minimum. 
This objective could be reached without setting up a new procedure of ecological zoning or a new type of classification: the procedure of Antarctica’s specially managed areas could be utilized for the specific creation of “tourist interest areas”. 


