


Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 136 - Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land




Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 136 - Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
Background
In accordance with Resolution 1 (1998), Australia has revised the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 136, Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land (formerly SSSI No.17).
The Management Plan for Clark Peninsula was adopted by ATCM XIII under Recommendation 8 (1985) and a revised edition was adopted by ATCM XXIII under Measure 1 (2000).
The review process involved a re-assessment of the values of the Area and an evaluation of the measures needed to protect them. The amendments outlined below were identified through consultation with the main researchers working in the Area and a site visit for management purposes carried out in March 2006.
Changes proposed in the revised Management Plan
There are no substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan, although the new format has required some sections of the Plan to be enhanced. The main changes include:  
Allowing over-snow vehicular access to a small portion of the ASPA to facilitate safe access to Stephenson Cove for scientific research or management activities which will not compromise the values of the Area;
An updated description of the values of the Area, particularly regarding population numbers and trends; and
The preparation of a new series of maps to provide for better interpretation of the management measures. 
It is recommended that Parties adopt the revised Management Plan.





MANAGEMENT PLAN
Antarctic Specially Protected Area N° 136
Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
Introduction
Clark Peninsula was originally designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest under Recommendation 8 (1985) and a revised Management Plan was adopted under Measure 1 (2000). The Area is approximately 9.75 km2 in area and is adjacent to the Windmill Islands on the Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica (Map A). Scientific research within the Area has focused on plant communities and long term population studies of Adélie penguin colonies. The protection of this flora and fauna within the Area allows for valuable comparison with similar plant communities and penguin colonies closer to Casey Station (approximately 5 kilometres to the south-west) which are subject to greater levels of human disturbance.
1. Description of Values to be Protected
With the exception of the Antarctic Peninsula, the largely undisturbed terrestrial ecosystem of Clark Peninsula supports one of the most extensive and best developed plant communities on continental Antarctica. The Area has rich associations of macrolichens and bryophytes that occupy very specific ecological niches. Within the relatively complex plant communities, 33 species of bryophytes and macrolichens have been found with 11 cryptogamic associations being identified. This vegetation forms a continuum of ecological variation along environmental gradients of soil moisture, soil chemistry and microclimate. As such, the Area has intrinsic ecological value and scientific importance, particularly in the fields of botany, microbiology, soil science and glacial geomorphology.
Moss and lichen communities in the Area are used as control plots to monitor the environmental impacts of Casey Station. The Area provides baseline and comparitive data with which to compare changes in similar plant communities in the immediate surroundings of Casey Station. The cryptogamic plant communities are also being monitored in relation to short-term microclimate fluctuation and long-term climate change in the region since deglaciation 8000-5000 years before present (BP).
Significant and relatively undisturbed breeding populations of Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) and South Polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) are present within the Area at Whitney and Blakeney Points. In addition, breeding Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) and Snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) are present in most ice-free areas. The monitoring of the breeding populations of Adélie penguins at Whitney Point since 1959 provides valuable comparative data for assessing and measuring human impacts and disturbance of penguin colonies on Shirley Island which is within the Station Limits of Casey Station. These long term population data on Adélie penguin numbers are amongst the longest in the Antarctic.
The Area supports exceptional vegetation cover for a continental Antarctic coastal ice-free location, and exhibits a wide range of plant communities. The Area requires protection because of its ecological importance, its significant scientific value and the limited geographical extent of the plant communities. The Area is vulnerable to disturbance from trampling, scientific sampling, pollution and alien introductions, while being sufficiently distant from Casey Station to avoid immediate impacts and disturbances from activities undertaken there. It is because of the scientific and ecological values, and the usage of the Area for long term monitoring, that it should continue to be protected.
Primary Reason for Designation
Clark Peninsula provides a unique and visible time sequence of the emergence of the area of the Windmill Islands from the sea since the Holocene deglaciation. Prior to the emergence of Whitney Point and Blakeney Point, the central ridge between them consisted of islets that were occupied by Adélie penguins. Soon after the emergence of the two points, the penguins began to occupy them. This historical penguin presence is understood to have lead to the current abundance and density of the plant communities in the Area, the nature of which is not seen anywhere else in the Antarctic. The obvious interaction of these two phenomen provides an exceptional stage for research.
2. Aims and Objectives
The aim of this Management Plan is to provide continued protection to the features and values of Clark Peninsula. The objectives of the Plan are to:
avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by minimising human disturbance;
protect a part of the natural ecosystem as a reference area for the purpose of comparative studies and to assess direct and indirect effects of Casey Station;
allow scientific research on the ecosystem and elements of the ecosystem, both geological and biological, while ensuring protection from over-sampling and disturbance;
prevent or minimise the introduction of non-native species into the Area; and
allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the Management Plan.
3. Management Activities
The following management activities will be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
signs illustrating the location and boundaries, and clearly stating entry restrictions, shall be placed at appropriate locations at the boundaries of the Area to help avoid inadvertent entry;
information about the Area, including a statement of the special restrictions that apply and a copy of this Management Plan, shall be displayed prominently at the adjacent abandoned Wilkes Station, the "Wilkes Hilton" (unofficial name) Refuge Hut on Stonehocker Point, "Jack's Donga" (unofficial name) Refuge Hut and at Casey Station. Copies of this Management plan will also be provided to visiting ships;
markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition and removed when no longer required; 
visits shall be made as necessary for management purposes; and
the Management Plan shall be reviewed at least every five years and revised as required.
4. Period of Designation
Designated for an indefinite period.
5. Maps
Map A: Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Windmill Islands, East Antarctica
Map B: Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 136, Clark Peninsula, Windmill Islands, East Antarctica. Topography and distribution of birds.
Map C: Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 136, Clark Peninsula, Windmill Islands, East Antarctica. Distribution of major vegetation types.
Map D: Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 136, Clark Peninsula, Windmill Islands, East Antarctica. Geology.
Specifications for all Maps: 
	Horizontal  Datum: WGS84	Projection: UTM Zone 49. 
6. Description of the Area
6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Clark Peninsula is an area of rock exposures and permanent ice and snow fields situated on the north side of Newcomb Bay at the east end of Vincennes Bay on Budd Coast, Wilkes Land. The Area covers approxiamtely 9.75 km2 and is located at latitude 66°15'S and longitude 110°36'E.
The Area comprises all the land on Clark Peninsula within the southern boundary line connecting the east side of Powell Cove at a point which originates at latitude 66°15’16” S, longitude 110°32’ E, to trigonometrical station G7 at latitude 66°15’29” S, longitude 110°33’24" E thence to a point to the east-south-east on the Løken Moraines. The eastern boundary is the westernmost limit of the Løken Moraines as far north as a point due east of Blakeney Point, and thence to the coast, returning along the coast to the point of origin. The boundary of the Area will be indicated by prominent markers, and is shown on Maps A, B, C and D. 
Topographically, the Clark Peninsula comprises low lying, rounded ice-free rocky outcrops (maximum altitude approximately 40 metres above sea level). The intervening valleys are filled with permanent snow or ice, or glacial moraine and exfoliated debris and contain water catchment areas. The peninsula rises in the east to the Løken Moraines (altitude approximately 130 metres above sea level). 
The Windmill Islands offshore from the Area represent one of the easternmost outcrops of a Mesoproterozoic low-pressure granulite facies terrain that extends west to the Bunger Hills and farther west to the Archaean complexes in Princess Elizabeth Land, and eastward to minor exposures in the Dumont d'Urville area and at Commonwealth Bay. 
The rocks of the Windmill Islands area comprise a series of migmatitic metapelites and metapsammites interlayered with mafic to ultramafic and felsic sequences with rare calc-silicates, large partial melt bodies (Windmill Island supacrustals), undeformed granite, charnockite, gabbro, pegmatite, aplites and late dolerite dykes. Clark Peninsula distinguishes the northern transition of a metamorphic grade transition which separates the northern part of the Windmill Islands area from the southern part.
Outcrops of metapelitic rock and leucocratic granite gneiss are dominant on Clark Peninsula. The metapelitic rock is generally foliated, migmatized and fine to medium grained. Mineralogy of the metapelitic rock involves biotite-sillimanite and biotite-sillimanite±cordierite. The sillimanite is strongly lineated in the foliation and the cordierite is generally pinnitized. The early granite gneiss is white, medium grained and foliated, it comprises two felsic to intermediate intrusions which predate and/or are synchronous with the deformation in the Windmill Islands. The larger intrusion, which occupies most of central Clark Peninsula is a quartz, K-feldspar, biotite, white mica and opaque-bearing granitic augen gneiss. Small outcrops of mafics and metapsammite occur. The rock beds lie in a south-west north-east orientation. The surface geology of Clark Peninsula is shown at Map D.
Gravels and soils appear to be derived from marine sediments deposited in the Pleistocene with a thin cover of weathered rock. Subfossil penguin colonies are common along the central ridge aligned south-west to north-east on Clark Peninsula, and at both Whitney Point and Blakeney Point. In the vicinity of abandoned penguin colonies, the soils are pebbly and rich in organic matter derived from penguin guano with some silts. Melt streams and pools and small lakes are prevalent in summer. The distribution of lakes on Clark Peninsula is shown at Map B. 
Conditions on Clark Peninsula, in comparison with many other continental Antarctic areas, are sufficiently mild to have allowed the formation of relatively stable, complex, well developed, and species-rich vegetation. The ice-free rocks support an extensive cover of lichen, while mosses predominate in lower lying areas. Principal factors responsible for the distribution of vegetation on Clark Peninsula are exposure to wind, availability of water and the location of abandoned penguin colonies.
To the north-east of the Peninsula, well-developed Umbilicaria decussata, Pseudephebe minuscula, Usnea sphacelata communities dominate. Farther from the coast, U. sphacelata is dominant and forms extensive carpets over the metamorphic rocks and gravel beds in association with P. minuscula and U. decussata, together with scattered bryophytes. The bryophytes comprise, Bryum pseudo triquetrum, Schistidium antarctici and Ceratodon purpureus. Within these communities, well-developed bryophyte patches dominate in moist, sheltered sites and locally form closed stands comprising a moss turf up to almost 30 cm depth.
In the north-western and western coastal areas where Adélie penguin colonies are present, Xanthoria mawsonii, Candelariella flava and Buellia frigida are more common. On the abandoned penguin colonies in the southern coastal areas, this community type contains a higher proportion of U. decussata and U. sphacelata.
In the centre of Clark Peninsula the vegetation is dominated by U. decussata, P. minuscula, B. soredians and B. frigida, with scattered occurrences of Pleopsidium chlorophanum. The vegetation distribution of Clark Peninsula is shown at Map C. The microflora comprises algae, with Botrydiopsis constricta and Chlorella conglomerata dominating, together with bacteria, yeasts and filamentous fungi.
Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) colonies are present at two localities in the Area, Whitney Point and Blakeney Point. Approximately 9,000 breeding pairs were present in 2004/05 at Whitney Point, and approximately 4,600 breeding pairs were present at Blakeney Point in 1991. The breeding populations of Adélie penguins at Whitney Point and at Blakeney Point have increased since studies commenced in 1959/60. This is in contrast to nearby Shirley Island (3 km to the southwest and close to Casey Station), where the breeding population of Adélie penguins has remained stable since 1968. Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), South Polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) and Snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) breed within the Area as shown on Map B.
Terrestrial invertebrate microfauna comprises protozoa, nematodes, mites, rotifers and tardigrades. The invertebrates are mainly confined to the moss beds, lichen stands and moist soils.
The climate of the Windmill Islands area is frigid-Antarctic. Meteorological data from Casey Station on nearby Bailey Peninsula show mean temperatures for the warmest and coldest months to be 0.3° and -14.9°C, respectively, with extreme temperatures ranging from 9.2° to -41°C. The climate is dry with a mean annual snowfall of 195 mm.year-1 (rainfall equivalent). There is an annual average of 96 days with gale-force winds, which are predominantly easterly in direction, off the polar ice cap. Snowfall is common during the winter, but the extremely strong winds generally scour the exposed areas. Snow gathers in the lee of rock outcrops and in depressions in the substratum and forms deeper drifts farther down the slopes.
6(ii) Special Zones within the Area 
There is one special zone within the Area. To allow access from the plateau to the sea for scientific research or management purposes, over-snow vehicle access is permitted within the Transit Zone north east of a line that runs from the ASPA boundary at the Løken Moraines at 110°38'34"E 66°14'47"S and runs north-west to meet the coastline at 110°36'54"E 66°14'31"S. Vehicles must travel only on ice or snow covered ground to avoid disturbance to vegetation and relic penguin colonies. Use of this Transit Zone may be subject to specific permit conditions. 
6(iii) Location of Structures within and adjacent to the Area
The only structure known to exist in the Area is a severely deteriorated wood and canvas hide, known as the "Wannigan" (colloquial name) located on "Lower Snow Slope" (unofficial place name) on the western facing slope of Whitney Point. This hide was constructed in 1959 for behavioural studies of breeding Adélie penguins by R L Penney. There are a number of boundary markers along the southern boundary and a number of survey markers within the Area.
The "Wilkes Hilton" refuge hut is located approximately 200 m south of the southern boundary. Approximately 1 km to the southwest is the abandoned Wilkes Station on Stonehocker Point. Another Refuge Hut, "Jack's Donga" is located approximately 1.5 km north of the northern boundary of the Area.
6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas in the vicinity
Other protected areas within 50 km include (see Map A):
Antarctic Specially Protected Area 135, Northeast Bailey Peninsula (66°17'S, 110033"E): 2.5 km southwest of Clark Peninsula, across Newcomb Bay, adjacent to Casey Station;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area 103, Ardery Island (66°22'S, 110°27'E), and Odbert Island (66°22'S, 110°33'E,) Budd Coast: located in Vincennes Bay, 13 km south of the former Wilkes Station; and
Antarctic Specially Protected Area 160, Frazier Islands (66°13’S 110°11’E): approximately 16 km to the NW in Vincennes Bay.
7. Permit Conditions
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate National Authority.
A permit to enter the Area may only be issued for scientific research or for essential management purposes, consistent with the objectives and provisions of this Management Plan.
Permits shall be issued for a specified period and the permit or an authorised copy shall be carried within the Area. Additional conditions, consistent with the Management Plan's objectives and provisions, may be included by the issuing Authority.
7(i) Access to and Movement within or over the Area
Access into the Area should be from "Wilkes Hilton" Refuge Hut in the southwest, "Jack's Donga" Refuge Hut in the northeast, or from the over-snow route between Casey Station and "Jack's Donga" by descending the western slope of Løken Moraines in the vicinity east of Stevenson Cove.
Access from Casey to abandoned Wilkes Station is via a well-defined marked cane route outside the southern boundary of the Area. As the Casey-Wilkes route is very close to the boundary, pedestrian and vehicular traffic should take care not to stray northward of it. 
Access to the sea ice by oversnow vehicles for scientific purposes or management activities is permitted within the Transit Zone that is north east of a line that runs from the ASPA boundary at the Løken Moraines at 110°38'34"E  66°14'47"S and runs north-west to meet the coastline at 110°36'54"E  66°14'31"S. All vehicles must travel only on ice or snow covered ground to avoid disturbance to vegetation and relic penguin colonies. Vehicles are not allowed within the remainder of the Area (except for emergency situations) and access in all other circumstances should be by foot.
Helicopters  are not allowed to land within the Area, except in emergencies or for essential management activities.
Pedestrian traffic in the Area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the objectives of permitted activities. As much as possible, visitors should avoid walking on visible vegetation and in areas of moist ground, where foot traffic can easily damage sensitive soils, plant or algae communities, and degrade water quality.
To avoid disturbance, breeding penguins should not be approached within 30m during the breeding season – October to April – unless essential to the conduct of a permitted research activity.
7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place
The following may be conducted within the Area:
scientific research programs consistent with the Management Plan for the Area, and which will not jeopardise the values for which the Area has been designated;
essential management activities, including monitoring;
sampling, which should be the minimum required for the approved research program(s).
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected or scientific equipment installed within the Area, except for essential scientific or management activities as authorised in a permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be clearly identified by country, name of principal investigator, year of installation and expected date of completion of the study. Details are to be included in the visit report. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimum risk of contamination of the Area and must be removed at the completion of the study.
7(iv) Location of field camps
Camping is not allowed within the Area. Field parties should camp at either the "Wilkes Hilton" Refuge Hut or at "Jack's Donga" Refuge Hut.
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that may be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area, and all necessary precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions to the Area.
No poultry material, poultry products, herbicides or pesticides shall be taken into the Area. All chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the associated activity.
Fuel is not to be stored in the Area unless required for essential purposes connected with a permitted activity.  Such fuel storage is to be in containers of 20 litres or less. Permanent depots are not permitted. 
All material introduced to the Area shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of inadvertent release into the environment is minimised.
7(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
Taking of, or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a permit. Where authorised, the activity shall, as a minimum standard, be in accordance with the requirements of Annex II, Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 1991.
7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder
Material may only be collected or removed from the Area as authorised under a permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.
Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the permit holder or otherwise authorised, may be removed unless the impact of the removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ. The appropriate Authority must be notified and approval obtained before any material is moved or removed from the Area.
7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes generated in the Area, including human faeces and urine, shall be removed from the Area.
7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met
The following may be necessary to ensure the objectives of the Management Plan are met:
permits may be granted to enter the Area to undertake biological monitoring and Area inspection activities, which may involve the collection of samples for analysis or review; the erection or maintenance of scientific equipment and structures, and signposts; or for other protective measures.
all sites of long-term monitoring activities shall be appropriately marked and a Global Positioning System (GPS) location obtained for lodgement with the Antarctic Data Directory System through the appropriate National Authority. All GPS data are to be recorded in visit reports and lodged within 3 months of the end of field activities in which the GPS data were captured. 
to help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the plant communities found in the Area, visitors shall take special precautions against introductions. Of particular concern are microbial or vegetation introductions sourced from soils at other Antarctic sites, including Stations, or from regions outside Antarctica. To minimise the risk of introductions, visitors shall thoroughly clean footwear and any equipment, particularly sampling equipment and markers to be used in the Area, before entering the Area.
7(x) Mitigation Measures
It is not acceptable to abandon a site without restoring it, as far as is possible, to its original state.  Soil pits must be refilled to maintain the integrity of the area.  Likewise all markers should be removed at the conclusion of their related activity. 
7(xi) Requirements for reports
The principal Permit Holder for each permit is to submit to the appropriate National Authority a report on activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Plan of Management. 
Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be considered in any review of the Plan of Management and in organising the use of the Area. A copy of the report should be forwarded to the National Party responsible for development of the Management Plan (Australia) to assist in management of the Area, and monitoring of bird populations. Additionally visit reports should provide detailed information on census data, locations of any new colonies or nests not previously recorded, a brief summary of research findings and copies of photographs taken of the Area.
8. Supporting Documentation

Some of the data used within this paper and for mapping purposes was obtained from the Australian Antarctic Data Centre (IDN Node AMD/AU), a part of the Australian Antarctic Division (Commonwealth of Australia). The data regarding breeding seabird distributions are from the Australian Antarctic Program’s Science Project 1219, titled Monitoring for long-term or cumulative impacts in Southern Ocean seabirds, for the period 1999-2005.  
Adamson, E., and Seppelt, R. D., 1990. A Comparison of Airborne Alkaline Pollution Damage in Selected Lichens and Mosses at Casey Station, Wilkes Land, Antarctica. In: Kerry, K. R., and Hempel, G. (Eds.), Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological Change and Conservation, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 347-353.
Azmi, O. R., and Seppelt, R. D., 1997. Fungi in the Windmill Islands, continental Antarctica. Effect of temperature, pH and culture media on the growth of selected microfungi. Polar Biology 18: 128-134.
Azmi, O. R., and Seppelt, R. D., 1998. The broad scale distribution of microfungi in the Windmill islands region, continental Antarctica. Polar Biology 19: 92-100.
Beyer, L. and Bölter, M., 2002. Geoecolgy of Antarctic Ice-Free Coastal Landscapes. Ecological Studies, Vol. 154. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Beyer, L., Pingpank, K., Bolter, M. and Seppelt, R. D., 1998. Small-distance variation of carbon and nitrogen storage in mineral Antarctic Cryosols near Casey Station (Wilkes Land). Zeitschrift fur Pflanzenahrung Bodendunde 161: 211-220.
Blight, D. F., 1975. The Metamorphic Geology of the Windmill Islands Antarctica, Volumes 1 and 2, PhD thesis, University of Adelaide.
Blight, D. F. and Oliver, R. L., 1997. The metamorphic geology of the Windmill Islands Antarctica: a preliminary account. Journal of the Geological Society of Australia, 24: 239-262.
Blight, D. F. and Oliver, R. L.,1982. Aspects of the Geological history of the Windmill Islands, Antarctica. In: Craddock, C. (Ed.), Antarctic Geoscience, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI, pp. 445-454.
Cowan, A. N., 1979. Giant Petrels at Casey, Antarctica. Australian Bird Watcher 8: 66-67.
Cowan, A. N., 1981. Size variation in the Snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea). Notornis 28: 169-188.
Emslie, S. D., Woehler, E. J., 2005. A 9000 year record of Adélie penguin occupation and diet in the Windmill Islands, East Antarctica. Antarctic Science 17, 57-66.
Giese, M., 1998. Guidelines for people approaching breeding groups of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae), Polar Record 34 (191): 287-292.
Goodwin, I. D., 1993, Holocene deglaciation, sea-level change, and the emergence of the Windmill Islands, Budd Coast, Antarctica, Quaternary Research, 40: 70-80.
Heatwole, H., Saenger, P., Spain, A., Kerry, E. and Donelan, J., 1989. Biotic and chemical characteristics of some soils from Wilkes Land Antarctica, Antarctic Science 1: 225-234.
Hovenden, M. J., and Seppelt, R. D., 1995. Exposure and nutrients as delimiters of lichen communities in continental Antarctica, Lichenologist 27: 505-516.
Martin, M. R., Johnstone, G. W. & Woehler, E. J. 1990. Increased numbers of Adélie Penguins Pygoscelis adeliae breeding near Casey, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. Corella 14, 119-122.
Melick, D. R., Hovenden, M. J., & Seppelt, R. D., 1994. Phytogeography of bryophyte and lichen vegetation in the Windmill Islands, Wilkes land, Continental Antarctica, Vegetatio 111: 71-87.
Melick, D. R., and Seppelt, R. D., 1990. Vegetation patterns in Relation to climatic and endogenous changes in Wilkes Land, continental Antarctica, Journal of Ecology, 85: 43- 56.
Murray, M. D., and Luders, D. J., 1990. Faunistic studies at the Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, east Antarctica, 1959-80. ANARE Research Notes 73, Antarctic Division, Kingston.
Olivier, F., Lee, A. V. and Woehler, E. J., 2004. Distribution and abundance of snow petrels Pagodroma nivea in the Windmill Islands, East Antarctica. Polar Biology 27, 257-265.
Orton, M. N., 1963. A Brief Survey of the fauna of the Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, Antarctica. The Emu 63: 14-22.
Paul, E., Stüwe, K., Teasdale, J., and Worley, B., 1995. Structural and metamorpohic geology of the Windmill Islands, east Antarctica: field evidence for repeated tectonothermal activity. Australian Journal of Earth Sciences 42: 453-469.
Roser, D. J., Melick, D. R. and Seppelt, R. D., 1992. Reductions in the polyhydric alcohol content of lichens as an indicator of environmental pollution. Antarctic Science 4: 185-189.
Roser, D. J., Melick, D. R., Ling, H. U. and Seppelt, R. D. 1992. Polyol and sugar content of terrestrial plants from continental Antarctica. Antarctic Science 4: 413- 420.
Roser, D. J., Seppelt, R. D. and Nordstrom, 1994. Soluble carbohydrate and organic content of soils and associated microbiota from the Windmill Islands, Budd Coast, Antarctica. Antarctic Science 6: 53-59.
Smith, R. I. L., 1980. Plant community dynamics in Wilkes Land, Antarctica, Proceedings NIPR Symposium of polar biology, 3: 229-224.
Smith, R. I. L., 1986. Plant ecological studies in the fellfield ecosystem near Casey Station, Australian Antarctic Territory, 1985-86. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin, 72: 81-91.
Woehler, E. J. 1990. Two records of seabird entanglement at Casey, Antarctica. Marine Ornithology 18, 72-73.
Woehler, E. J. 1993. Antarctic seabirds: their status and conservation in the AAT. RAOU Conservation Statement 9, 8pp.
Woehler E. J., Riddle M. J. and Ribic C.A. (2003). Long-term population trends in southern giant petrels in East Antarctica. In: Huiskes AHL, Gieskes WWC, Rozema J, Schorno RML, van der Vies SM and Wolff W (eds) Antarctic Biology in a global context. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, pp 290-295.
Woehler, E. J., Martin, M. R. & Johnstone, G. W. 1990. The status of Southern Giant-Petrels, Macronectes giganteus, at the Frazier Islands, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. Corella 14, 101-106.
Woehler, E. J., Slip, D. J., Robertson, L. M., Fullagar, P. J. and Burton, H. R., 1991. The distribution, abundance and status of Adélie penguins Pygoscelis adeliae at the Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, Antarctica, Marine Ornithology 19: 1-18.
Woehler, E. J., Penney, S. M., Creet, S. M. and Burton, H. R., 1994. Impacts of human visitors on breeding success and long-term population trends in Adélie Penguins at Casey, Antarctica, Polar Biology 14: 269-274.




