


Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) – Tools for Protection and Management




Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) – Tools for Protection and Management

CEP Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary

    1. This paper highlights the importance of ensuring that marine areas are considered as part of the CEP’s work towards a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ of Antarctic Protected Areas.  CCAMLR has recently been focusing on the potential use of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in achieving its conservation objectives, and is now keen to work in partnership with the CEP to develop a collaborative approach.  The CEP is asked to consider the 5 recommendations set out at the end of this paper (paragraph 26) which propose actions for the CEP on the development of MPAs.

Background

    2. Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are being increasingly considered worldwide as important tools to achieve objectives including, inter alia:
    • Conservation of biodiversity and habitats;
    • Co-ordination of activities in multiple-use areas;
    • Maintenance of healthy ecosystems and sustainable fisheries.

    3. MPAs may range from strictly protected to multiple-use areas, and may be designated on a variety of spatial scales, including in both coastal and offshore (High Seas) areas.  They are flexible tools that can be applied under various management frameworks.  The term ‘MPA’ could be applied to the existing tools available under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (ASPAs and ASMAs), as well as to the area-based conservation and management measures utilised by CCAMLR.

    4. International agreements (e.g. the Convention on Biological Diversity; World Summit on Sustainable Development; World Parks Congress) have already committed States to the establishment of comprehensive, effectively managed, and ecologically representative networks of MPAs by 2012.

    5. Recognising these existing commitments of many, if not most, of its Members, CCAMLR has concluded that MPAs have considerable potential to further its objectives in applications including the protection of ecosystem processes, habitats and biodiversity, and the protection of species (including population and life history stages). Furthermore, CCAMLR has noted the importance of establishing a harmonised regime for the protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System.
   
    6. It is therefore timely for the CEP/ATCM to consider further how it might: (i) contribute to the achievement of international commitments and objectives using the existing provisions for Area Protection and Management under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, and (ii) engage with CCAMLR to develop a comprehensive system of MPAs for Antarctic waters.
 


Rationale for the Development of MPAs

    7. A small number of MPAs have already been designated in the Antarctic Treaty Area in the form of marine ASPAs, as well as ASMAs with marine components.  However, these areas have largely been developed on an ad hoc basis, with little methodical consideration of how they fit into a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ as required by Annex V of the Environmental Protocol.  No marine areas have been designated with the specific objective of protecting representative examples of marine ecosystems.

    8. The development of further MPAs in Antarctica would serve to protect and conserve marine areas of particularly high value or sensitivity, as well as to provide scientific reference areas.  The latter are particularly important for an improved understanding of marine ecosystem dynamics in areas without human interference, and to assist with distinguishing between the effects of human activities and natural environmental changes. 

    9. ATCMXXIX/IP 2 provides further background information on the rationale for development of an MPA system in Antarctica.

Progress Towards the Development of MPAs in Antarctica

    10. Within Antarctic waters, there are currently six fully marine ASPAs and a further nine ASPAs with small marine components, as well as three ASMAs with marine components (one of which is under voluntary compliance only).  These sites cover a total marine area of 1780 km2, equivalent to 0.012% of the marine area south of 60° S (information from ATCM XXVIII/WP011, submitted by New Zealand).  These are some of the only MPAs in existence worldwide that are established under a system of international governance.

    11. Some initial work has been made towards the consideration of a comprehensive, representative system of protected areas for Antarctica through, for example, a review of the existing Antarctic Protected Areas System (as set out in ATCMXXVIII/WP011, submitted by New Zealand), and ongoing work towards elaboration (for the terrestrial environment) of the ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ defined under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (ATCMXXVIII/WP002, also submitted by New Zealand).  Continued progress on this will be of considerable value in defining the requirements for a Protected Area System to include marine areas.

    12. MPAs have also been designated in sub-Antarctic waters, for example around Heard and McDonald Islands (Australia) and the marine reserve under proposal for the Prince Edward Islands (South Africa).  While these are not within the Antarctic Treaty area, they provide valuable models for how marine protection has been addressed in areas with similar ecosystem values and pressures.

    13. Recent discussions on MPAs within CCAMLR resulted in the convening of a CCAMLR Workshop on Marine Protected Areas in September 2005. Recommendations from that workshop have important implications for the development of MPAs throughout the Southern Ocean, and for further cooperation between the instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System.

Summary of Recommendations on MPAs agreed by CCAMLR-XXIV (2005)

    14. The 2005 CCAMLR Workshop on Marine Protected Areas resulted in a series of recommendations to be provided as advice to the CCAMLR Scientific Committee.  This advice was adopted at the 2005 CCAMLR Scientific Committee and Commission meetings, and has established the terms of reference for CCAMLR Members to take further action to elaborate the principles, practical guidelines and scientific requirements for MPA development.

    15. The recommendations adopted by CCAMLR clarified the responsibilities of its Members to take action on establishing MPAs within the CCAMLR area, and recognised the need for a harmonised approach to MPA design and implementation throughout the Southern Ocean, including co-ordination between the instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System.

    16. It was recommended that attention may need to be given to the protection of, inter alia, the following types of areas:
    • Representative areas;
    • Scientific areas to assist with distinguishing between the effects of harvesting and natural ecosystem changes, and to provide opportunities for understanding of the Antarctic marine ecosystem in areas not subject to human interference;
    • Areas potentially vulnerable to impacts by human activities, to mitigate those impacts and/or ensure sustainability of the rational use of marine living resources.

It was noted that these area types correspond closely to the types of areas to be included in the series of ASPAs under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, and furthermore that all Members of CCAMLR have agreed to certain obligations of the Antarctic Treaty.

    17. A series of key tasks necessary for the development of a system of MPAs was identified by the Workshop.  These tasks focused on the types of scientific information and analysis that would be required for a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean.  Bioregionalisation is a process to classify marine areas from a range of data on environmental attributes, resulting in a set of bioregions which can be used to identify representative areas for protection. (ATCMXXIX/IP 6 provides further details on approaches to bioregionalisation).  Such a process would contribute significantly to current efforts by the CEP to elaborate a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ of Protected Areas.

    18. Key tasks to be undertaken include:
    • Collation of existing data on coastal and oceanic provinces, including benthic and pelagic features and processes;
    • Determination of the analyses required to facilitate a bioregionalisation, including the use of empirical, model and expert data;
    • Development of a broad-scale bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, based on existing datasets;
    • Delineation of fine-scale biogeographic provinces within regions, where possible;
    • Identification of areas that might be used to achieve the objectives of protecting representative, scientific and vulnerable areas;
    • Determination of areas requiring interim protection.

    19. It was agreed that a Steering Committee should be established to coordinate and facilitate this work, focusing on bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean and working towards a proposed workshop to be held 2007.  The Steering Committee should include members of both the CCAMLR Scientific Committee and the CEP.

    20. Recognising the expertise of the CEP, it was suggested that the CEP be invited to undertake the initial work necessary to develop a bioregionalisation of the coastal provinces, to include examination of both benthic (and, where appropriate, pelagic) systems.



Implications of CCAMLR’s Recommendations on MPAs for the CEP

    21. The recent discussions and recommendations on MPAs adopted by CCAMLR are a major step forward in the development of a comprehensive marine protection strategy for Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. They also have important implications for interaction and cooperation between the instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System.  It is now timely for the CEP to clarify its potential role in achieving objectives relating to MPAs, particularly through cooperation with CCAMLR.

    22. It is important for the CEP to clarify its objectives for MPAs, and to define the most appropriate tools for achievement of those objectives.  This may include use of the existing ASPA and ASMA categories, as well as potential cooperation with the CCAMLR Commission on the use of other area-based management tools such as CCAMLR Closed Areas.

    23. Of specific relevance to the CEP is the proposed work towards bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean.  The CEP should consider how it could best contribute to this process in terms of expertise and data, particularly (although not exclusively) with regard to the coastal provinces.  Continuing work towards the development of a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ of Protected Areas, including marine areas, will be an important component of this process.  Consideration should also be given to how external organisations such as SCAR and IUCN could be invited to contribute to, or facilitate the process.

    24. Progress towards the proposed CCAMLR Workshop in 2007 should include nomination of CEP representatives to the Steering Committee.

    25. There is a clear need for a harmonised approach to the protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System.  The CEP has an important role to engage with CCAMLR on the development of a system of MPAs for Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, and the Parties are encouraged to welcome and support the achievement of this objective.

Recommendations

    26. The Committee on Environmental Protection is invited to consider the following recommendations for approval by the ATCM:

    1. That the CEP continues its work towards the elaboration of a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ of Protected Areas, and give further, specific consideration to the inclusion of marine areas within such a framework;
    2. That the CEP endorses co-operation with CCAMLR on the development of MPAs;
    3. That the CEP welcomes the proposal for a joint CCAMLR/CEP Workshop on MPAs in 2007, and engages fully in this process;
    4. That the CEP supports the formation of a Steering Committee to work towards the proposed CCAMLR Workshop on MPAs, and nominates CEP representatives to that Committee;
    5. That the CEP considers how it might best contribute to the proposed work towards a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean. Priority tasks should include the identification of appropriate sources of expertise and data.  
(Subject to the views of other Parties, the UK would be prepared to act as a coordinator for initial work to bring together relevant data with regard to the coastal provinces (see ATCMXXIX/IP 6 for further details on the types of data that may be required) and invites the assistance of other CEP Members and Observers/Experts in contributing to this work.)


April 2006

