


CCAMLR in the Antarctic Treaty System





CCAMLR in the Antarctic Treaty System
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand

At the CCAMLR Symposium jointly hosted by Australia and Chile at the University of Valdivia in April 2005, a session was devoted to the topic of CCAMLR as part of the Antarctic Treaty System. A lively discussion took place, the main points of which were presented to the 24th annual meeting of the Commission in a report by Australia and Chile (CCAMLR-XXIV/38).  The Symposium was convened as part of the build-up to the celebration of the 25th annual meeting of the CCAMLR Commission in October this year. It is in fact almost thirty years since the Consultative Parties sowed the seed which became CCAMLR by initiating the process to conclude “a definitive regime for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources” when they recommended the convening of a Special Consultative Meeting (Recommendation IX-2).  

The Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (“the Convention”), which followed 21 years later, are of course separate international agreements.  Each for example now also has its own Secretariat.  But it should be recalled that the Convention forms an integral part of the Antarctic Treaty System.

This is made explicit right from the outset in the Preamble to the Convention which recognises the prime responsibilities of the Consultative Parties for the protection and preservation of the Antarctic environment, the action they have already taken (including the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna as well as the provisions of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals), and the concern regarding the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources expressed by the Consultative Parties at the IXth Consultative Meeting, as well as the importance of the provisions of Recommendation IX-2 which led to the establishment of the Convention.

The links to the Antarctic Treaty continue in the substantive part of the Convention. By Article III the Contracting Parties (whether or not they are Parties to the Treaty) agree they will not engage in any activities in the Treaty area contrary to the principles and purposes of the Treaty, and accept the obligations contained in the Treaty’s Article I (demilitarisation) and Article V (ban on nuclear explosions/waste dumping).  Furthermore, by Article IV of the Convention the Contracting Parties are bound by Articles IV (territorial sovereignty) and VI (high seas rights) of the Treaty.  

In Article V of the Convention the Contracting Parties acknowledge “the special obligations and responsibilities of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the protection and preservation of the environment of the Antarctic Treaty area” and agree to observe (as and when appropriate) the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and “such other measures as have been recommended by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in fulfilment of their responsibility for the protection of the Antarctic environment from all forms of harmful human interference”.

Article VII enshrines the membership in the CCAMLR Commission of the Consultative Parties which participated in the meeting at which the Convention was adopted.  Article IX (5) obliges the Commission to take full account of any relevant measures or regulations established or recommended by Consultative Meetings pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, for the avoidance of inconsistency.

In respect of institutional linkages, Article XXIII requires the Commission and Scientific Committee to cooperate with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties on matters falling within the competence of the latter.  The Scientific Committee is also obliged by Article XV (3) to “have regard. to the scientific activities conducted within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty”.

The centrality of the Antarctic Treaty and the significant role of the Consultative Parties are clearly evident therefore in CCAMLR’s genetic make-up.  It is these family characteristics, together with the Convention’s emphasis on conservation, that have lead to CCAMLR’s being widely regarded as more than a regional fisheries management organisation that happens to be responsible for the Southern Ocean, but rather as an “RFMO plus”. Nevertheless, after 25 years of CCAMLR’s operation it is perhaps timely to ask whether in practice the child any longer recognises the parent.

There are certainly regular exchanges between CCAMLR and the Antarctic Treaty’s mechanism for furthering its principles and objectives, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  CCAMLR’s Executive Secretary and the Chair of the Scientific Committee attend the ATCM as observers to report on developments in CCAMLR.  Similarly the Chair of the Committee on Environmental Protection observes the meetings of CCAMLR’s Scientific Committee.   And while this meeting maintains an agenda item for consideration of the Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System, CCAMLR similarly considers at its annual meetings its cooperation with other elements of the Antarctic Treaty System, including the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

Occasionally the Consultative Parties have taken action in respect of CCAMLR, in recent times for example by adopting resolutions extending support to CCAMLR’s efforts to combat illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing.  They have also acted to define practical procedures between the CEP and CCAMLR on Marine Protected Areas, given the requirement in the Protocol that CCAMLR’s prior approval be obtained on any proposal for ASPAs or ASMAs which contain marine areas (Decision 9 (2005) refers).  

However, in light of the Consultative Parties’ “special responsibilities” for the preservation and conservation of living resources in the Antarctic under the Treaty, the question arises of whether this level of engagement between the ATCM and the Commission has really been adequate for the health of the Treaty System overall.   In particular, some who would hold a mirror up to the Commission suggest that it has become overly influenced by the harvesting interest compared to the expectations that were widely held for it a quarter of a century ago.

It is true that the overwhelming majority of Members of the Commission, including New Zealand, are these days actively involved in harvesting, which was not the case a quarter of a century or even ten years ago.  Furthermore access to the valuable toothfish fisheries managed under CCAMLR is an important interest for many of them. It is also noteworthy that the delegations of many Members of the Commission, perhaps as many as half of them, are led by officials from fisheries agencies or other maritime bodies.  In addition, some delegations to the Commission do not appear to provide for expertise on the Antarctic Treaty or on environmental issues.  New Zealand for its part considers that some continuity between representation in the ATCM and in the Commission is important given CCAMLR’s place in the Treaty System. 

It is also a fact that the membership of the Commission differs from the composition of the ATCM.  The great majority but not all of the Consultative Parties are Members of the Commission. The membership of CCAMLR also includes a regional economic integration organisation which speaks on fisheries policy matters for nearly one third of the members of CCAMLR. One other Member is not a Party to the Antarctic Treaty, but is of course committed to its principles through the Articles of the Convention described earlier in this paper. 

It is essential in New Zealand’s view that, given the place of CCAMLR in the Antarctic Treaty System, every participant in research or harvesting activities in the Convention Area become a Contracting Party to CCAMLR.  In doing so they commit themselves not only to the important objective of the Convention but also to respecting the purposes and principles of the Treaty and the Treaty’s key obligations.  This takes on particular significance where the Non-Contracting Party concerned is not a Party to the Antarctic Treaty; indeed we would prefer to see all CCAMLR Contracting Parties accede, where possible, to the Treaty (and its Protocol on Environmental Protection). 

It is also New Zealand’s view that the “special obligations and responsibilities of the Consultative Parties for the protection and preservation of the environment of the Antarctic Treaty area”, which are specifically recognised in the CCAMLR Convention, require the Consultative Parties to provide guidance to the Commission on important matters related to the environment and to matters having wider implications for the Treaty System.   

New Zealand sees an important opportunity for the Consultative Parties to discharge their Treaty responsibilities by regularly setting time aside to consider and reflect upon the overall contribution of CCAMLR as part of the Treaty System, by providing advice and guidance to the Commission on the implementation of the Convention, particularly with respect to its contribution to the protection of the environment of the Antarctic Treaty area, and indeed by serving as a forum for discussion on any issue which a Consultative Party may wish to raise in respect of the Commission’s work. 

A draft resolution for the consideration of the Consultative Parties reflecting this proposal is attached.


Resolution XXX

The Representatives,

Recalling the prime responsibilities of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the protection and preservation of the Antarctic environment and, in particular, their responsibilities under Article IX, paragraph 1 (f) of the Antarctic Treaty in respect of the preservation and conservation of living resources in Antarctica;

Conscious that the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources is an integral part of the Antarctic Treaty System;

Noting the commitment of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources that they will not engage in any activities in the Antarctic Treaty area contrary to the principles and purposes of the Treaty and their acceptance of the obligations contained in  Articles I, IV, V and VI of the Treaty;

Further recalling that the objective of the Convention is the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources, which includes rational use;

Welcoming the endorsement by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources at its 24th annual meeting of the Scientific Committee’s advice arising from the 2005 Workshop on Marine Protected Areas;

Noting also Decision 9 (2005);

Recommend that the Parties:

1) evaluate regularly at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings the contribution made by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources to the protection and preservation of the Antarctic environment;

2) encourage increased cooperation at the practical level between the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, including on establishing a harmonised regime for the protection of the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System.

