


Cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR: 
a synthesis and opportunities for the future 





Cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR: 
a synthesis and opportunities for the future
Working Paper for the CEP presented by Argentina

Introduction 
The goal of this paper is to draw the attention of the CEP to the need to implement a suitable mechanism to ensure closer cooperation with the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR).  This paper presents a brief review of all the steps taken by both bodies (and also by the ATCM and CCAMLR), since the establishment of the CEP in 1998, to increase the level of cooperation.  This document also provides additional information on references made in the CEP to areas where cooperation was considered possible.  Finally, different ways of implementing concrete mechanisms are proposed, with a view to improving cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR.   
Cooperation between the CEP and the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR: 1998- 2005.
    1. At its first meeting (Tromsø, 1998), the CEP, noting the special role of the Committee in providing comprehensive advice to the ATCM on environmental issues, recognized that the ATCM could obtain advice from CCAMLR, among other organizations (see paragraph 13, CEP I Final Report).
    2. During CEP II (Lima, 1999), the Chairman of SC-CAMLR offered the Scientific Committee’s support to  the work of the CEP and proposed a reciprocal agreement, whereby a representative of the Committee would attend meetings of SC-CAMLR as an observer (see paragraph 13, CEP II Final Report).
    3. At its third meeting (The Hague, 2000), the CEP recognized that close coordination between the ATCM, the CEP and CCAMLR was needed to ensure harmonisation of measures aimed at conserving Antarctic marine living resources and protecting the Antarctic environment (see paragraph 97, CEP III Final Report).
    4. That SC-CAMLR and the CEP (as well as the ATCM and CCAMLR) should work together has been emphasized at subsequent Committee meetings (see paragraph 107, CEP III Final Report; paragraphs 110 and 111, CEP IV Final Report; paragraphs 45 and 124, CEP V Final Report; paragraph 189, CEP VI Final Report; paragraph 205, CEP VII Final Report; and paragraphs 19-20 and 238 CEP VIII Final Report).  Also, during these meetings, several areas of joint interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR were identified (see below, paragraphs 9-30).
    5. Since CEP II (Lima, 1999), the CEP observer to the Meeting of SC-CAMLR presents, as an Information Paper, a Report to the Committee.  This report is prepared according to a pre-established format that covers almost the same items every year:
    • Ecosystem Monitoring and Management;
    • Fishery Status and Trends;
    • Dependent Species; and
    • Issues taken from SC-CAMLR to CCAMLR, including illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area; New and Exploratory Fisheries; Precautionary Catch Limits and By-Catch; as well as Assessment of Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas which include Marine Areas.
It was not until 2005 that this Report included the heading “Cooperation between CCAMLR and the CEP.”

However, the presentation of these reports has never fueled substantial additional debate within the Committee. 
    6. To date, CCAMLR’s contribution to the meetings of the CEP has consisted of the presentation of two Information Papers (IP 12: CCAMLR’s experience with data management; and IP 13: Monitoring marine debris and its impact on marine living resources in Antarctic waters) to CEP IV (2001), both prepared at the request of CEP III (see paragraphs 19 y 116, CEP III Final Report; paragraphs 107 and 110, CEP IV Final Report).
    7. During CEP IV (Saint Petersburg, 2001), the Committee emphasized its commitment to cooperation with SC-CAMLR on overlapping issues (see paragraph 110, CEP IV Final Report).  At its eighth meeting (Stockholm, 2005), two delegations highlighted the need to generate greater involvement in cooperation with other elements of the ATS (see paragraph 19-20, CEP VIII Final Report).  
    8. During CEP VIII (Stockholm, 2005), the Chairman of the CEP noted that the work of SC-CAMLR was  highly relevant to the work of the CEP and expressed confidence that the level of cooperation between the two bodies would increase in the future (see paragraph 238, CEP VIII Final Report).
Potential areas of cooperation 
    9. In the eight years since the CEP began its work, several areas of joint interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR have been specifically taken into consideration at Committee Meetings.  The most important of these areas have been:
Information on the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP)
    10.  During CEP III (The Hague, 2000), the observer from SC-CAMLR drew the Committee’s attention to the work of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP). The Committee noted that the existence of the CEMP data illustrated the need for close liaison between the CEP and CCAMLR (see paragraph 106-107, CEP III Final Report).  
    11. The representative of SC-CAMLR to CEP V (Warsaw, 2002) noted that CEMP provides useful information on how targeted monitoring activities might be applied to species designated as Specially Protected Species (see paragraph 45, CEP V Final Report).
    12. The Committee, at its seventh meeting (Cape Town, 2004), recognized that the CEMP produces information relevant to the CEP (see paragraph 205, CEP VII Final Report).
    13. During CEP VIII (Stockholm, 2005), CCAMLR noted that it could make available data obtained through its programs to collect marine debris data and other information collected within the CEMP (see paragraph 207, CEP VIII Final Report). 
Marine and coastal debris  
    14. During CEP IV (Saint Petersburg, 2001), the Committee pointed out that research in this area was an example of how long term monitoring can be used as an effective environmental management tool (see paragraph 110, CEP IV Final Report).
    15. At its XXIII Meeting (2004), the Scientific Committee noted that the CEP might be able to provide information relating to methods of marine debris and pollution monitoring that could be used for estimating trends, and agreed to request this from the CEP (see IP 36 CEP VIII, Report of the CEP Observer to SC-CAMLR). 
    16. During CEP VIII (Stockholm, 2005), the Committee agreed that CCAMLR should be supported in sustaining, improving and expanding its monitoring of debris (see paragraph 160, CEP VIII Final Report).  
    17. During CEP VIII (Stockholm, 2005), CCAMLR noted that it could make available data obtained through its programs to collect marine debris data and other information collected within the CEMP (see paragraph 207, CEP VIII Final Report).
IUU fishing and associated seabird mortality
    18. During its sixth Meeting (Madrid, 2003), the CEP noted the continuing problems arising from illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing in and around the Antarctic Treaty Area, and noted particular concern about the high levels of incidental mortality of seabirds associated with IUU fishing (see paragraph 188, CEP VI Final Report).
    19. The Scientific Committee, at its twenty-third Meeting, advised the Commission that even though the estimated seabird by-catch as a result of IUU fishing was the lowest so far made (30% less than the value for 2003), these levels were of substantial concern and probably unsustainable for some populations (see IP 36 CEP VIII, Report of the CEP Observer to SC-CAMLR).
Specially Protected Species  
    20. During its fifth Meeting (Warsaw, 2002), the representative of SC-CAMLR –in two papers presented to the Meeting- welcomed the recognition in both Working Papers that a dialogue with CCAMLR was needed on how the category of specially protected species under the Protocol might be applied to marine species that are under the purview of CCAMLR (see paragraph 45, CEP V Final Report).  
    21. At the same meeting, the Committee pointed out that there were several areas of joint interest to the CEP and CCAMLR, including questions related to species protection (see paragraph 124, CEP V Final Report). The Committee offered CEP advice to the XXV ATCM  (see Appendix 1, CEP V Final Report), recommending that the ATCM take early steps to seek the agreement of CCAMLR, to  establish cooperative working relationships to seek a common approach for addressing proposals for designating Specially Protected Species in Antarctic marine environments.
    22. The Chair of the CEP, reporting on his attendance to the twenty-third Meeting of SC-CAMLR, noted in particular that the CEP again addressed the issue of establishing a category of Specially Protected Species, and continued to develop the required procedures and methods for managing such a category (see IP 36, CEP VIII, Report of the CEP Observer to the XXIII Meeting of SC-CCAMLR).
    23. At CEP VIII (Stockholm, 2005), the Chairman of the CEP agreed to seek CCAMLR’s views on the proposal to delist two species of fur seals designated as Specially Protected Species (see paragraph 127, CEP VIII Final Report).
Fisheries management
    24. During CEP III (The Hague, 2000), the Chairman of SC-CAMLR drew the Committee’s attention to research aimed at assessing krill stocks in the South West Atlantic (CCAMLR area 48) (see paragraph 20, CEP III, Final Report).  
    25. During its XXII Meeting (2003), the CEP observer to the Scientific Committee noted that the projected krill catch for the 2003/04 season was 30% greater than the total expected catch for the 2002/03 season.  Further, the observer noted that if the projected rate of increase were to continue for five or six years, then the fishery may start to expand faster than the capacity of the Scientific Committee to provide management advice. Even though the total catch for the 2003-2004 season was 10% lower than the total catch for 2002/03, the total expected krill catch for 2004/05, according to announcements made by certain members of CCAMLR during the XXIII Meeting (2004), would double the actual catch (see IP 49 CEP VII Report of the CEP Observer to the XXII Meeting of SC- CCAMLR; IP 36 CEP VIII, Report of the CEP Observer to the XXIII Meeting of SC-CAMLR).
    26. At the XXIII SC-CAMLR (2004), the Scientific Committee reiterated the urgent need to develop a means for estimating abundance and providing assessments of stock status for all exploratory fisheries (see CEP VIII, IP 36, Report of the CEP Observer to the XXIII SC-CAMLR).
    27. During its eighth Meeting (Stockholm, 2005), the Chairman of the CEP noted that krill fishery was both interesting and relevant to the CEP as a keystone of the Antarctic ecosystem (see paragraph 237, CEP VIII Final Report).
Bioprospecting
    28. Since 1999, several papers on the issue of bioprospecting have been presented to the CEP, and as of 2003 the issue has been explicitly incorporated into the CEP agenda. However, given that bioprospecting includes marine organisms (as well as terrestrial organisms), the question arises whether this issue could fall under the purview of CCAMLR.  One of the delegations of the CEP underlined the value of the  precautionary ecosystem approach to issues raised by bioprospecting in Antarctic marine areas and recalled that CCAMLR encompasses all living organisms in the Southern Ocean (see paragraph 174, CEP VI, Final Report).  
    29. During CEP III (The Hague, 2000), in response to the concern of a delegation, the observer to CCAMLR indicated that work was underway within CCAMLR to develop methodologies for its consideration of marine protected areas (see paragraphs 94-95, CPA III Final Report).
    30. At its fifth Meeting (Warsaw, 2002), the Committee noted that there were several areas of joint interest to the CEP and CCAMLR, including issues related to management plans for protected areas with a marine component. CCAMLR informed the CEP that it had established its procedure for handling such management plans. This involves first consideration by its Working Groups on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) and on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA), then advice developed by the Scientific Committee, followed by consideration by the Commission (see paragraphs 124 and 125, CEP V Final Report; see paragraphs 143 and 159, CEP VII Final Report; and paragraph 161, CEP VIII Final Report).
    31. During CEP VIII (Stockholm, 2005), the Committee was informed about the CCAMLR Workshop on marine protected areas to be held during Summer 2005 in Washington (see paragraphs 237 and 239, CEP VIII Final Report).
    32. During the XXIV Meeting of CCAMLR, it was agreed that SC-CAMLR should carry out a series of tasks, with the purpose of establishing a harmonized system for the protection of the marine environment in the Antarctic Treaty Area, including the establishment of a Steering Committee with members of SC-CAMLR and the CEP (see paragraph 4.17 CCAMLR-XXIV; see also paragraph 3.37 SC-CAMLR-XXIV).
Why has cooperation not been more effective?
    33. Although the need for close liaison between SC-CAMLR and the CEP was noted at the beginning of the Committee’s development, and although several potential areas of joint work have been identified, this work is still in the initial stages.  Consideration of Management Plans for Protected Areas by CCAMLR is the best example of cooperation.  The presence of mutual observers at both meetings, as the sole channel of communication, has played an important role, but until now, one that is only informative.  The absence of other formal mechanisms of interaction between both bodies does not seem to favour cooperative work.  
    34.  Growth in the amount and complexity of the work load at the meetings of the CEP may have also prevented adequate consideration of new issues, such as cooperation with SC-CAMLR. 
Proposals
    35. After briefly describing the most relevant aspects of the relationship between SC-CAMLR and the CEP during the last eight years, recommendations arising from this paper to increase cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR are:
    a) To consider the possibility that the report of the observers to the CEP be presented as a Working Paper, instead of as an Information Paper, so as to ensure more detailed consideration by the CEP of areas of joint interest, and, in this way, generate a greater level of cooperation. 
    b) To ensure that said reports include a list of contacts of those delegates responsible for the working groups of SC-CAMLR, such as the Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management and the Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment, as well as clear references to those sites where electronic versions of the final reports of the Meetings of SC-CAMLR can be found.  Alternatively, an electronic link to this information can be established on the CEP or the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website.  These options would facilitate and inspire the establishment of informal links between the representatives of the CEP and SC-CAMLR.   
    c) To clearly define, and where possible extend, the role of the CEP observers to the Meetings of SC-CAMLR.  This might include the need to express the views of the CEP at the meetings of SC-CAMLR -that would result from the treatment of Working Papers as Reports (or, for example, views such as those contained in this document)- as well as the inclusion of references to the work of the CEP, through its Intersessional Contact Groups (ICG) and/or Internet Forums, in areas of common interest. 
    d) To consider the establishment of a joint body between the CEP and SC-CAMLR.  The CEP Rules of Procedure, according to Rule 10, allow the Committee to establish, with the approval of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, subsidiary bodies, as appropriate.  Rule 7 also establishes that in carrying out its function the Committee shall, as appropriate, consult with the Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.  In this regard, the establishment of a Steering Committee between SC-CAMLR and the CEP for the consideration of marine protected areas would constitute a significant step forward.
    e) The recent establishment of Internet forums to coordinate discussions within the CEP offers a very powerful tool for facilitating and implementing cooperation and constitutes a viable alternative for dealing with this subject.
    f) In our opinion, if said body were established (regardless of the form it finally takes), its terms of reference should consider, among other questions, the establishment of suitable links between measures, rules, recommendations and verbal reports arising from the CEP and SC-CAMLR, in areas of common interest to both bodies.                                           
    g) As well, with the aim of making information on issues of common interest available to the CEP, it would be desirable if SC-CAMLR could present, at future meetings of the CEP, a synthesis on relevant issues (including baseline information, results, and expected tendencies), like the work of CEMP, fishery status, and marine debris monitoring activities.                         
    h) Finally, it would also be desirable for the CEP to seek counsel from SC-CAMLR in the identification of other areas where cooperation is possible and useful, and of a complementary nature, to increase cooperation on areas of joint interest in the future.         

