



Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges


A summary report of the CEP Workshop,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 9–10 June 2006

Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges


A summary report of the CEP Workshop,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 9–10 June 2006




Working Paper submitted by the Steering Committee
(United Kingdom, Australia, France)


Summary
1.	This paper summarizes the key findings arising from the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) Workshop, held on 9–10 June 2006.  These findings are submitted to CEP IX for further consideration.  The CEP is asked to consider the key Workshop findings as a basis for developing a forward strategy for the CEP.

Background
2.	At the CEP VII meeting in 2004, the Committee briefly discussed the need to give some consideration to the future work of the CEP with respect to environmental challenges in Antarctica, and agreed that this subject should be further discussed at CEP VIII (CEP VII Final Report, paragraph 208).
3.	Two relevant papers were submitted to CEP VIII:
WP 001	Working Paper to initiate a strategic discussion on future environmental challenges in Antarctica (Sweden) and
WP 009	The Committee on Environmental Protection of the Antarctic Treaty: An Overview and Likely Future Scenarios (Argentina).
Two open-ended contact groups were established to consider the future work of CEP:
(1)	on the “must-do” tasks of the CEP (CEP VIII Final Report, Annex V); and
(2)	strategic issues (Annex VI).
The CEP agreed on the importance of building on the thoughts of these groups and established a Steering Committee comprising the Chair, Vice-chairs, Secretariat and the United Kingdom (as host of CEP IX) to stimulate intersessional discussions on the future work of the CEP.
4.	The United Kingdom hosted a Workshop for the Committee for Environmental Protection to consider the environmental challenges likely to face Antarctica over the next 15 years and beyond, and to devise policies, recommendations and strategies to meet them.  The Workshop was held at “The Hub” in Edinburgh on 9–10 June 2006.  This Workshop was informal: those attending spoke as individual experts, rather than as representatives of national Delegations.
5.	The agenda for the Workshop is in IP 113.  Dr Tony Press, CEP Chairman, chaired the Workshop which was attended by 67 experts (the full list of attendees is in IP 113).  Keynote presentations were made on some of the environmental issues Antarctica faces over the next 15 years arising from external (global) factors such as climate change, as well as internal factors such as trends in human activities and environmental impacts and changes within Antarctica.  (Details of the speakers and a synopsis of each presentation are in IP 113).
6.	CEP Members were invited to present posters, which covered a range of environmental issues in detail.  17 posters were presented at the Workshop and a full list of the posters, together with a brief summary of their contents is in IP 113.
7.	Workshop delegates discussed the keynote and poster presentations in small groups and subsequently in plenary.  The workshop participants divided into groups, each of which focused its discussions on the following topics:
•	Vision for the Antarctic in the next 15 years
•	Top 5 environmental issues
•	Headline goals to address those environmental issues
•	What actions can the CEP take?
8.	Each group reported on the key environmental issues.  These can be summarized as follows:
•	Internal (from human activities in the Antarctic)
•	Overall footprint of Antarctic activities
•	Number of people (government & non-government) undertaking activities in Antarctica
•	Proliferation of stations
•	Access to new areas
•	Introduction of non-native species 
•	Pressures from commercial activities:
•	Harvesting of marine living resources
•	Mineral resource activity
•	tourism
•	bioprospecting
•	Water (ice) harvesting
•	 (Concatenation of pressures)
•	External (from outside the Antarctic)
•	Climate changes
•	Pollution
•	Ozone depletion
•	 “Natural” introductions of non-native species
•	Ocean change (i.e. acidification)
9.	A summary of the thoughts on possible goals and priorities identified by these discussion groups is included in IP 113.
10.	Following consideration of the main issues facing the CEP, workshop participants broke into small groups to consider what actions the CEP should take (and when) against these main issues.
The results of these considerations are tabulated below.
11.	On behalf of the participants in the workshop, the workshop Chairman and the Steering Committee present the findings in this paper for consideration and action by the CEP.





CEP Actions to Address
the Major Environmental Issues Facing the Antarctic

What?
When?
Area Protection

Establish a Standing Group on Area Protection and Management to consider management plans
CEP IX
Standing Group to develop terms of reference and a work plan
CEP X
Collaborate with CCAMLR on MPAs
CEP X
Do an audit of the and a gap analysis protected areas system

Do a risk analysis to identify issues requiring immediate attention

Develop an agreed understanding of intrinsic / wilderness values

Establish a database of protected/managed area information

Improve management of protected areas

Quarantine

Consider outcomes of the Biosecurity workshop (NZ, April 2006)
CEP IX
Promote awareness-raising by national programmes
ASAP
Consult with COMNAP and SCAR to produce practical guidelines on quarantine
~2 years
Request SCAR to undertake research to improve understanding of biological regions of Antarctica and the potential impacts of non-native species
~5 years
Reports to CEP on the implications of new technologies using non-native species (e.g. sewage treatment)
CEP X
Quarantine (continued)

Encourage Parties to make better use of current Protocol procedures (e.g. EIA, management plans) to address quarantine issues
ASAP
Revise the list of prohibited products in Annex II 
As appropriate
Species Protection

Review status of Antarctic species
ongoing
Develop and strengthen relationship with ACAP
<1 year
Appoint a CEP representative to ACAP
CEP IX
Watching brief in other relevant forums
on-going
Clean up, waste and energy management

Encourage all national operators to attend the AEON waste management workshop
CEP IX
Consider the outcomes of the AEON waste management workshop
CEP X
Request COMANP to investigate recycling standards and targets
CEP X
Urge Parties to provide the CEP with lists of disused / abandoned bases
CEP X
Request Parties to provide inventory of sites of past field activities and intentions for clean up
CEP X
Request COMNAP to develop Guidelines on disposal of human wastes
CEP X
Promote achievements and best practice
ongoing
Request COMNAP to produce a working paper on best practice energy management
CEP X
Encourage collaboration between Parties and with international organizations on removal and clean up of bases
CEP XI
Collaboration

CEP Chair and Chair SC-CCAMLR to agree on a process for efficient consideration of management plans for protected areas with a marine component
CEP X
Hold a workshop with SCAR/CCAMLR to establish a list of CEP-related research requirements 
CEP X
Establish an ICG to consider future collaboration to build on the  the IPY
CEP X
Collaboration (continued)

Hold a workshop with COMNAP, IAATO, ASOC, SCAR to identify areas of joint interest (e.g. international collaboration as a way to reduce impacts)
CEP XI 
Dedicate time at each meeting for briefing from other international agreements (e.g.  CBD, CMS)
CEP XI/XII
Monitoring and assessment

1.  There is a need to gather and synthesise information on:
CEP IX - 2011
Climate change: SCAR climate assessment
underway
Biodiversity: (marine census)
~2 years
Biodiversity: (terrestrial census)
ongoing
Environmental health and risk (e.g. COMNAP anthropogenic work)

Environmental health and risk (e.g. Relevant other work (i.e. IAATO)

2.  Review and direction
2011
Review of available knowledge and information to assess information gaps in relation to specific needs:
(1) implementation of Article 12; and
(2) progress towards state of environmental assessment

3.  Address gaps in the needs and information with respect to review (above)
After 2011, then ongoing
Promote feedback and iteration

4.  Key strategic considerations

Consider how much the CEP wants to do on its own

Consider the need for a permanent group for monitoring and assessment

Monitoring the implementation of the Protocol and structuring the business of the CEP 

Ask ATCM to urge implementation of Protocol by all Parties
CEP IX
Consider using ICGs only if coupled with workshops or on-site activities

Promote greater use of Discussion Forums (e.g. chat rooms) for informal intersessional discussions
ongoing
Allocate dedicated time during CEP meetings for “horizon-scanning” 

Monitoring the implementation of the Protocol and structuring the business of the CEP (continued)

CEP to identify key elements of environmental concern (if any) arising from existing, new or predicted activities to advise those assessing EIAs

Request Secretariat to prepare annual summary of Article 17 information
CEP IX
Education and outreach (including “in-reach”) 

Compile current examples of networks and projects from Parties and non-ATS bodies
CEP X
Encourage initiatives and make recommendations to various bodies (e.g. IPY Secretariat)
CEP X
Mandatory training of people going to work in Antarctica
2007-2009
Develop training tools and materials
2007-2009
Involve local NGOs in education and outreach activities
2007-2009
Interactive activities
2007-2009
Develop web-based systems for education and outreach
2007-2009
Establish Ambassador programme
2011
Review
2011


