


Establishment of a New Indian Research Base in the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica




Introduction
Antarctica is a vital element of the Earth’s climate system. Regional processes on the icy continent and its surrounding oceans have important global consequences, from atmospheric composition to ocean circulation. The region is also vulnerable to change in our global environment, potentially giving rise to strong feedbacks, which could accelerate climate change. Of late, Antarctic science has also been increasingly contributing to our understanding of the origin and evolution of the continents, changes in the world climate pattern, global oceanic circulation, the plasma processes occurring in the earth’s upper atmosphere, and global phenomena such as ozone hole, sea level rise etc.
India joined the global polar science community, recognizing the importance of Antarctica as a pedestal for front-ranking scientific research in 1981, when the first Indian Antarctic Expedition was launched. Since then, India has made constant strides both in Polar Sciences and related logistics, through a judicious and harmonious blend of multi-institutional expertise. This has paved the way for the country to sustain its scientific endeavor in the icy continent on a year-round basis since 1983, when the first permanent Indian Antarctic Base ”Dakshin Gangotri” was commissioned on the ice shelf, off the Princess Astrid coast in Central Dronning Maud Land. This station built in the record time of a single polar summer, continued to host the members of Indian expeditions to Antarctica till 1989, when it had to be decommissioned due to excessive snow accumulation.
The scene of activity thereafter shifted to Schirmacher Oasis, where an ice free, rocky area was selected to build the second Research Station “Maitri (70o45’52”S: 11o44’03”E).  The indigenously designed building erected upon this site it in 1988-89, has stood the test of time since then. The infrastructure available at this station has enabled the scientists to conduct front-ranking research in various disciplines such as Atmospheric Sciences & Meteorology, Earth Sciences & Glaciology, Human Biology & Medicines, Biology & Environmental Sciences, and Engineering & Communication. Furthermore, the station being the gateway to one of the largest mountain chains in central Dronning Maud land located south of Schirmacher, has helped Indian Geologists in surveying and preparing geological map of a large part of area in Wohlthat, Orvin, and Muhlig Hoffmann Ranges.  Several of the research programs initiated by India in the Oasis area and its environs have also contributed directly to global experiments mounted under the aegis of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), and have had as active partners such as Germany, Italy, France, Peru, Russia, United States of America etc. India has also provided logistic support to scientists from Russia, Germany, Poland, Malaysia etc. keeping the Treaty mandate of international cooperation.
Even while using Antarctica as a platform for conducting scientific research, India has always recognized the importance of conserving the pristine nature of the continent, which modulates the intricate global processes. To uphold these commitments, India ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in April 1998.
A new Indian Research Base in Antarctica- Basis of the proposal and its significance
Ever since 1981, the Indian endeavors on the icy continent have continued uninterrupted and annual scientific expeditions to Antarctica have remained one of the primary focus-areas of Indian national science programme.  Till date, twenty five expeditions have been successfully launched.  In addition, an expedition to the Weddell Sea and one for assessment of krill in the Antarctic waters has been undertaken.  These expeditions have provided over 1500 scientists and logistics personnel from more than 60 national laboratories, universities, defense services and research institutes opportunity to conduct front-ranking experiments/studies in some of the frontier areas of polar sciences.  These studies have contributed significantly to a better understanding of Antarctic continent in general and of the Central Dronning Maud Land in particular.  
The availability of a pool of scientists with a sustained interest in the polar realm, and the ability to conduct front-ranking scientific research on a year-round basis prompted India to provide an opportunity to the Indian scientific community to look beyond the Dronning Maud Land. Following aspects has been given due weightage while deciding on the need for another research base in Antarctica:
    • The Indian contributions till date to Antarctic science vis-à-vis the international scenario.
    • The need to extend the ongoing and planned scientific experiments at Maitri with those that could be mounted at the new site, ensuring thereby that the studies are not merely site-specific endeavors.
    • The relevance of the new Antarctic locale due to its past connectivity with the Indian landmass during Gondwana time, in the context of the planned growth of Indian science programme.
    • The need for sustaining the spirit of co-operation in Antarctic science and increase Indian contribution in terms of science and logistic support for advance scientific endeavours.
Deliberations at different levels and debate between different experts on the best options for a new Indian research base in Antarctica finally narrowed down to Amery Ice shelf – Prydz Bay area, since it offers a unique opportunity to work on the India-Gondwana fit. The rocks in Prydz Bay area of Antarctica and the Eastern Ghat Mobile Belt of India have proven similarities.
Against the above backdrop, a Task Force constituted by the Government of India and comprising experts from geology and glaciology, oceanography, upper atmosphere and geomagnetism, biology and logistics; undertook a reconnitary visit to the Amery Ice shelf -Prydz Bay region of East Antarctica during February 2004 and examined the area between 660 E and 780 E Longitude. After extensive traverses in the Vestfold Hills, Rauer Group of islands, Larsemann Hills and Bolingen islands, the Task Force recommended a rocky promontory between Quilty Bay and Thala Fjord in the central part of the Larsemann Hills, bound by latitudes 69024’ and 69025’ and longitudes 76010’and 76014’ E, as the most suitable site for the new Indian base. This was reported by India in XXVIII ATCM (2005) at Stockholm in IP 80.
Proposed scientific studies at the new site
The new proposed research base is expected to cater to a critical scientific research in some of the frontier areas of earth science, environmental sciences, remote sensing, oceanography and coastal ecosystems of Antarctica. 
Geoscientific studies
    1) The Prydz Bay can be considered the key in the India-Antarctica link during Gondwanaland, as the area of Prydz Bay of Antarctica and the Eastern Ghat Mobile belt of India once formed a contiguous landmass. Geologically, therefore the area offers possibilities of detailed correlation between the rocks exposed all along the eastern coast of India (high grade granulite, charnockites, khondalites) with rocks of Napier and Rayner complexes of Prince Charles mountains as well as the rocks of Prydz Bay area.  Only India is in a position to carry out such detailed correlation and directly verify the postulated correlation between Kerala  Khondalite belt and rocks of Lutzow-Holm Bay area as also the correlation between the Eastern Ghat Mobile Belt Rocks with those of Prydz Bay region.
    2) Integrated geophysical –geological studies aimed at understanding India-East Antarctic rifted margins and its role in the evolution of present Indian sub-continent. Such studies have not been attempted so far using high quality integrated geophysical data.
    3) The study of Lambert Glacier, the fastest moving glacier in Antarctica, opens an exciting new vista in glaciological studies.
    4) The history of late Quaternary glaciation in the Vestfold and Larsemann Hills areas remains a topic of intense academic debate.
    5) The new research base offers an ideal location for yet another geomagnetic observatory in Antarctica, linking it with the Maitri research station as well as India.
    6) Studies on the measurement of current drift of the Indian sub continent with respect to this region of Antarctica will complement similar studies being undertaken by the Indian scientists at Maitri.
Meteorological and Atmospheric studies
    1) Setting up of a weather station
    2) Aerosol Radiative Flux estimation; Aerosol size distribution, solar terrestrial effects, transportation of aerosols.
    3) Establishment of geomagnetic observatory at Larseman Hill Site with deployment of instruments like DFM, DIM, PPM. 

Biological and Environmental studies
    1) Biodiversity of marine, terrestrial and aquatic biota of the area.
    2) Determination of indicator fauna and their population trends and impact of biotic and abiotic factors on the coastal Antarctic ecosystem.
    3) Wild life biology and conservation ecology
    4) Environmental monitoring
Oceanography and Remote Sensing
    1) Bathymetric and oceanographic surveys.
    2) Establishment of a satellite earth station to facilitate remote sensing studies of the area, real time data transfer and communication between India, Larsemann Hills and Maitri.
The close proximity of the proposed Indian base to the Australian (recently reported to be jointly manned with Romania), Chinese and Russian stations would go a long way in fostering significant collaboration and co-operation in polar science.
Description of the proposed site 
Location
The Prydz Bay represents an embayment along the Eastern Antarctic margin, lying between the East Longitudes 660 and 790. The Amery Ice Shelf on the southwestern side and Ingrid Christensen Coast on the southeastern end define its limits. The isolated islands, promontories, peninsulas and nunataks occurring along the continental ice describe the rocky terrain exposed in the area, which, from East to west, fall under Vestfold Hills, Rauer Group, Svenner Island, Larsemann Hills and Bolingen Islands respectively (Fig. 1). 
The Larsemann Hills (690"23' S, 760"53 'E) named after Mr. Larsemann Christensen, is an ice-free coastal oasis fringing the Prydz Bay, located approximately midway between the eastern extremity of the Amery Ice Shelf and the southern boundary of the Vestfold Hills (Fig. 3).  There are two main peninsulas on the two extremities of the Larsemann Hills, namely the Broknes Peninsula and the Stornes Peninsula. In between these two peninsulas, there are number of islands of varying dimensions and some unnamed promontories. The northern and western sides of Larsemann are dotted by a series of small islands. The satellite imagery of the area indicates open sea on the eastern edge of the Broknes Peninsula (Fig.2).  
Westwards, the Clemence Fjord separates Broknes Peninsula from Stinear Peninsula and Fisher Island.  The area north and westwards is marked by a number of islands, namely Harley, Easther, Breadloaf, Butler, Betts, McLeod, Jeason, Solomon, and Sandercock Island. The highest elevations on Larsemann Hills are around 180 m above sea level (ANARE 2000). The hills are dissected by steep valleys lying between the ice sheet and the coast. The shape of the land surface is controlled by the lithology and shape of geological structures, particularly joints and lineaments, as well as erosion by ice, water and salt. More than 150 freshwater lakes are found in the hills ranging from small ephemeral ponds to large water bodies such as the 3.8 m deep Progress Lake. Some of these water bodies are briefly ice-free or partially ice-free in the summer months. For the remainder of the year (8-10 months) they are covered with ~2 m of ice. The westerly currents break the fast ice during early summer facilitating the entry of the vessels quite close to these stations
Larsemann Hills have received considerable geological attention by several workers including Stuwe et al, 1989, Dirks et al, 1993, Thost et al, 1994, Zhao, 1993-94, Sheraton and Collerson, 1983, Harley and Hensen, 1990, etc. Four Antarctic stations viz. the Progress I & Progress II (Russia), Law Base of Australia (now jointly managed by Australia and Romania) and Zhong Shan (China) are located in the area.
Site of the proposed new base in the Larsemann Hills 
The new Indian Antarctic base is proposed to be located on an as-yet un-named promontory situated between Quilty Bay on the east and Thala Fjord on the west. This particular site on the Larsemann Hills has been found to be most suitable for a research base. The pear shaped promontory with an available flat area, which is being considered as the site for the construction of the research base, has its broader end towards sea, trending NE-SW. The southern margin separates Polar ice margin and the hills thereupon, by a narrow bay. The northern and western slopes have a high gradient with the edge being exposed in the form of a steep cliff over the sea. There is however availability of an area of low gradient on the north-eastern part, where landing can be made by boats /barges for off -loading cargo. (Fig.3)
Accessibility of the site from the open ocean
The approach to the promontory is through the gap between the Solomon and Sandercock Islands. This area of the sea was found to be clear of sea ice during surveys conducted in the summer season of 2004, 05 and 06 with isolated icebergs on the outer periphery. Pack ice is extensive inshore throughout summer, and the fjords and embankments are rarely ice-free. Snow cover is generally deeper and more persistent on Stornes Peninsula than Broknes Peninsula. An isolated iceberg is grounded between the McLeod and the Sandercock islands but comparison of satellite imageries of past decade have shown that the said iceberg is reducing in size. The area is marked by persistent, strong katabatic winds that blow from the north-east on most summer days. which  in conjunction with the ocean currents keep the sea relatively free of ice bergs (Fig 4 & 5).  
During February 2006, preliminary multi-beam swath bathymetric surveys were undertaken along a corridor starting north of the grounded iceberg to the western face of the Larsemann promontory to define an approach channel for vessels. The NW-SE part of the corridor from the grounded iceberg to the promontory measured about 6 km and had a width of about 2.5 km.  Bathymetric data totaling 122 line km was collected along 22 survey lines within the corridor.  The minimum depth recorded in the channel was 10 m and the maximum 460 m. There is a deep channel in the corridor area with an observed minimum depth of 140 m and  a maximum depth of 250 m   Detailed analysis of the bathymetric results are currently being undertaken, which would facilitate  delineating  a  proper and safe approach to the proposed site of the research base for vessels (Fig. 6 & 7).  
Availability of freshwater 
In the vicinity of the proposed site, there is a fresh water lake situated at higher elevation, measuring about 300 m x 200 m. with water column height of 12m. The conductivity test confirms to the potable quality of water. Apart from the said lake, there are four main water bodies at lower elevations that store melt water and hence are also of   good quality. The eastern most lake among these gets overflow from the other water bodies and the water ultimately seeps to sea. The water bodies L1, L2, L3, & L5 besides being shallow revealed low hydraulic detention period and high flushing rate.  The variation of Temperature, density, salinity and conductivity along depth in the Prydz Bay lakes has been recorded.
Lake water sample from the McLeod Island were collected from the Lake-1 and Lake-2 (long lake) in 2006. A multi-parameter probe was used for in-situ measurement of certain parameters and the analysis result of both fresh water lake shows that the water is potable.
Existing Infrastructure 
A temporary field camp was established in by the Indian scientists in the summer of 2005 by placing an Igloo hut with basic provisions for emergency needs near the proposed site.  During the summer of 2006 this hut was found in good condition by the team of Indian scientists which landed on the shore using a boat. Indian scientists carried field observations and collected further data on various aspects of the site and its surroundings necessary for establishing a permanent research base. No further additions have been made at the temporary camp site during this year.  
Proposed plan of future activities
India proposes to finalise in coming months the basic design and other infrastructural and logistic needs of the new research base. This will be done keeping in view the optimum requirement of scientific and logistic personnel to carryout the proposed scientific activities in Larsemann Hills, Pyrdz Bay and nearby areas.  Based on the proposed layout of the research base and on the basis of available information on ecological, biological, physiographical, geological and other attributes of the area and the data which has been collected by the Indian scientists through surveys during the summer seasons of 2004, 2005 and 2006, a draft CEE will be prepared and submitted to the CEP as per the provisions of the Environmental Protocol of the Treaty. Collection of data on the proposed key areas of research and scientific programmes will be continued, both in the surrounding seas and around the site.  Considering the requirement of additional logistic support and greater effort required from the polar science community during the International Polar Year in 2007, India would like to cooperate with nearby research stations in conducting joint research and sharing the infrastructure and logistics in the Larsemann Hills area.
India has also taken note of the Working Paper (WP 27 Rev 1) on the proposed ASMA in the Larsemann Hills area, jointly submitted by Australia, Russia and China during the XXVIII ATCM, 2005 at Stockholm.  Considering the specific scientific and logistic requirements and need for future research, critical for greater understanding of the Antarctic in general and various global environmental, ecological and geological processes in particular, which are proposed to be studied in the new research base; India would be looking forward to appropriate modifications in the proposed ASMA. India will continue to maintain the ecological integrity of fragile Antarctic environment. However there is a need to make a greater effort to sustain the scientific quest, which is necessary to understand the global ecological processes, climate change and related issues. 






																																																																																																				






































																																											


	

