


Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) Handbook





Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) Handbook
Background
At the eighth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP VIII) in 2005 an open-ended contact group met to discuss the Committee's “must-do tasks”. The report of the contact group's discussions included the suggestion that ‘a CEP Handbook be prepared to include all existing CEP procedures and agreed guidelines’ (see Annex 5 to the CEP VIII Final Report). Following discussion of the report by the full Committee, Australia offered to prepare a CEP Handbook. This paper introduces the concept of an online CEP Handbook and presents an outline of a draft Handbook for the Committee’s consideration.
Online CEP Handbook Concept
Australia considers that a CEP Handbook would be most useful and practical if made available as an online resource, but in a format that would also allow it to be easily downloaded or printed.
In keeping with the suggestion of the open-ended contact group, the Handbook should contain all existing CEP procedures and agreed guidelines. To allow the Handbook to serve as a central reference for CEP representatives, it could also contain copies of other documents frequently required for CEP-related business (e.g. copies of the key Antarctic Treaty System instruments, and lists of CEP Members, National Contact Points, protected areas, and CEP-related measures) and a list of links to useful ‘external’ sources.
Australia has established an online version of a draft CEP Handbook on the CEP website (www.cep.aq) as a ‘proof of concept’. The Introduction and Table of Contents are reproduced at Attachment A. The Handbook is structured as an active list of hyperlinked PDF documents, including: (1) a single file comprising the complete Handbook with all incorporated documents bookmarked for ease of navigation; and (2) a series of separate files, one for each of the individual documents. A brief list of Useful Links is also given; the content these additional ‘external’ sources is not incorporated into the complete Handbook mentioned above.
Some elements of an online Handbook would need to be updated on an annual basis (e.g. CEP Contact Points list) and some elements would need to be added or removed as a result of decisions made by the CEP or ATCM (e.g. new or revised guidelines); updating the online Handbook to reflect these changes would be a straightforward task. Making the Handbook available as a series of individually accessible PDF files would allow users to insert new or revised documents into a printed hard copy of the Handbook without re-printing the entire Handbook, the majority of which would remain unchanged from year to year.  
Some Future Options for a CEP Handbook
Australia is mindful that the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (the Secretariat) has been tasked with preparing a new version of the Antarctic Treaty Handbook, and an ATCM/CEP delegates’ Manual. The Committee may wish to consider whether this work being undertaken by the Secretariat has a bearing on the ongoing need for, and content of, a CEP Handbook.
The Handbook comprises a compilation of documents that would already be maintained in the Secretariat’s electronic document database, so maintaining and updating an online Handbook would be unlikely to create a significant additional workload for the Secretariat. As the content and functions of the CEP website will be transferred to the ATS website (www.ats.aq) following CEP IX, the Committee may wish to ask the Secretariat to establish and maintain the online CEP Handbook at a suitable location on its website. Australia would be happy to work with the Secretariat to establish the Handbook on the ATS website.
To assist users with maintaining a printed hard copy of the CEP Handbook, the Committee may also wish to ask the Secretariat to establish a means of showing version information or another way of indicating when components of the Handbook have been updated.
Australia welcomes Members' feedback regarding the content, format and future of the draft CEP Handbook.
