





Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area




Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area

CEP Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary

    1. Following discussion at CEP VIII, the United Kingdom offered to develop practical guidelines for ballast water exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area (cf. Final Report of CEP VIII, paragraph 138).  The aim of the guidelines would be to support early implementation of the practical measures identified in the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Waters and Sediments, 2004 (IMO Ballast Water Management Convention).

    2. The United Kingdom proposes that the CEP:
    • endorses the draft guidelines (at Annex A to this paper); 
    • recommends to the ATCM that the guidelines be adopted by means of a Resolution, to bring them into force immediately; and 
    • recommends that the ATCM forward the guidelines to the 55th session of the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) in October to propose that they be considered for adoption by IMO Resolution.

Background

    3. Marine organisms may be transported by ships in their ballast water from one biological region to another.  On release of the ballast water at a different location the potential exists for transported species to colonise and multiply within the new site.  Invasive marine species contained within ballast water could be transported into Antarctic waters, or moved between biologically distinct regions within the Antarctic Treaty Area, with negative effects for existing Antarctic marine ecosystems.  Particular concerns relate to the transportation of sub-Antarctic species across the Polar Front, or the movement of Arctic species to the Antarctic from vessels transiting between the two areas.

    4. COMNAP presented ATCMXXVIII/IP121 on The use of Ballast Water in Antarctica at CEP VIII.  This paper reported on the findings of a ballast water survey of just over half of the combined COMNAP-IAATO fleet, which indicated that the vast majority of vessels do not exchange ballast water in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Whilst CEP VIII considered that this situation was encouraging, it noted that if the practical measures set out in the IMO Ballast Water Management Convention could be implemented they would further reduce the risk of introduction of non-native species into Antarctica through ballast water.

    5. In developing practical guidelines for ballast water exchange, the United Kingdom has considered the following key principles of the IMO Ballast Water Management Convention:
    • ballast water exchange is to be used as an interim measure, until such a time as ballast water treatment technologies have been developed, as set out in the Convention;
    • Parties with common interests bordering enclosed and semi-enclosed seas shall endeavour to seek co-operation with neighbouring Parties through regional agreements  to develop harmonised procedures (Article 13(3) of IMO Convention); and,
    • a Party or Parties can put in place additional measures to those in Section B of the Convention, such as regional management strategies based on ballast water exchange, which will require ships to meet a specified standard or requirement (Regulation C-1).	

    6. The UK has also consulted widely on the development of the draft guidelines.  COMNAP kindly supported the circulation of the draft guidelines to all its members and all comments received were taken on board.  

    7. In addition, the draft guidelines were discussed at the 54th session of the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) (in London from 20-24 March) and received significant support.  The suggestions made during those discussions have also been taken on board in the final draft guidelines.  Should the ATCM adopt the guidelines, the MEPC has indicated that it would welcome their resubmission to the 55th session in October, for their extension to all shipping activities through IMO Resolution.


April 2006
Annex A

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR BALLAST WATER EXCHANGE IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

    1. The application of these Guidelines should apply to those vessels covered by Article 3 of the IMO’s International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and Sediments (the Ballast Water Management Convention), taking into account the exceptions in Regulation A-3 of the Convention.  These Guidelines do not replace the requirements of the Ballast Water Management Convention, but provide an interim Ballast Water Regional Management Plan for Antarctica under Article 13 (3).

    2. If the safety of the ship is in any way jeopardised by a ballast exchange, it should not take place. Additionally these guidelines do not apply to the uptake or discharge of ballast water and sediments for ensuring the safety of the ship in emergency situations or saving life at sea in Antarctic waters.

    3. A Ballast Water Management Plan should be prepared for each vessel with ballast tanks entering Antarctic waters, specifically taking into account the problems of ballast water exchange in cold environments and in Antarctic conditions.  

    4. Each vessel entering Antarctic waters should keep a record of ballast water operations.

    5. For vessels needing to discharge ballast water within the Antarctic Treaty Area, ballast water should first be exchanged before arrival in Antarctic waters (preferably north of either the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone or 60 oS, whichever is the furthest north) and at least 200 nautical miles from the nearest land in water 200 metres deep (If this is not possible for operational reasons then such exchange should be undertaken in waters 50 nautical miles from the nearest land in waters of 200 metres depth).

    6. Only those tanks that will be discharged in Antarctic waters would need to undergo ballast water exchange following the procedure in Paragraph 5. Ballast Water Exchange of all tanks is encouraged for all vessels that have the potential/capacity to load cargo in Antarctica, as changes in routes and planned activities are frequent during Antarctic voyages due to changing meteorological and sea conditions.

    7. If a vessel has taken on ballast water in Antarctic waters and is intending to discharge ballast water in Arctic, sub-Arctic, or sub-Antarctic waters, it is recommended that ballast water should be exchanged north of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone, and at least 200 nautical miles from the nearest land in water at least 200 metres deep.  (If this is not possible for operational reasons then such exchange should be undertaken in waters 50 nautical miles from the nearest land in waters of 200 metres depth).

    8. Release of sediments during the cleaning of ballast tanks should not take place in Antarctic waters.  

    9. For vessels that have spent significant time in the Arctic, ballast water sediment should preferably be discharged and tanks cleaned before entering Antarctic waters (south of 60oS). If this cannot be done then sediment accumulation in ballast tanks should be monitored and sediment should be disposed of in accordance with the ship’s Ballast Water Management Plan. If sediments are disposed of at sea, then they should be disposed of in waters greater than 200 nautical miles from the shoreline in waters 200 metres deep. 

    10. Treaty Parties are invited to exchange information (via COMNAP) on invasive marine species or anything that will change the perceived risk associated with ballast waters.

