





A Korean Public Awareness Program, ‘Pole-to-Pole Korea’(2008-2009)





A Korean Public Awareness Program, ‘Pole-to-Pole Korea’ (2008-2009)


1. ‘Pole to Pole Korea’ Polar Research Experience Team  
Korea Polar Research Institute(KOPRI) has operated the “Pole to Pole Korea” programs to raise public awareness of polar scientific research, disseminate the science-oriented culture, and promote the pioneering spirit. Since its launch in 2005, the program has recruited adolescents for the Arctic Experience Team, and science teachers, college students and artists for the Antarctic Team. In 2008, six middle and high school students, and four science teachers experienced the Arctic and Antarctic environment and undertook research activities through the program. 
(Contact point: Ms. Jiyoung Lee, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr )

2. Special Photo Exhibition of the Polar Landscape and Research Activities 
To attract public attention and increase interest in the polar regions, KOPRI held a special Photo Exhibition of the Polar Landscape and Research Activities at the National Science Museum in Gwacheon on 6-31 January, 2009. The photos exhibited were taken by a famous Korean photographer, who was given the opportunity to go to Arctic and Antarctic regions through KOPRI’s ‘Pole-to-Pole Korea’ program. 
(Contact point: Ms. Jiyoung Lee, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr )

3. Celebrating 20 years since the Establishment of King Sejong Station  
The 20th anniversary of King Sejong Station was in February, 2008. In celebration of this, Korea Polar Research Institute tried to increase public awareness of Korean polar activities of the last two decades. KOPRI published “20 years with the King Sejong Station” a book of essays and stories about the Antarctic written by visitors to the King Sejong Station.
Also, last year KOPRI celebrated the 20th anniversary of its founding by inviting honourable guests to the station, and produced a commemorative special set of stamps designed by the Korea Post Administration that were presented to the public at a celebration. Press coverage of the celebration increased public understanding and interest in Korea’s polar research activities and helped to inform the public of the meaning and importance of the International Polar Year(IPY).
(Contact point: Ms. Jiyoung Lee, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr)
4. Korean Science Festival 2008 exhibition of Korea’s polar activities 
Every year the Republic of Korea holds various exhibitions on the theme of ‘Science’ with the support of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology or the metropolitan governments. KOPRI participated in the Korean Science Festival 2008, one of the most famous scientific exhibitions hosted by the government, which was held in Gwangju in September 2008. The exhibition included Korea’s research in the polar region, together with the roles of Korea’s first icebreaker the ‘ARAON.’ Above others, the model of the ‘ARAON,’ stuffed specimens of Antarctic penguins, and pieces of Antarctic glacier attracted many visitors.
(Contact point: Ms. Jiyoung Lee, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr )

