





Joint VISTA-Oceanites Antarctic Project




Joint VISTA-Oceanites Antarctic Project

Information Paper Submitted by New Zealand (in Conjunction with Oceanites)

Abstract
The VISTA and Oceanites site monitoring schemes have many similar aims and objectives. Representatives from the two programmes have been working together in order to share ideas and work towards standard approaches to site monitoring. This paper aims to update the Committee on the progress of the VISTA scheme.


1. Introduction
New Zealand manages a visitor site assessment scheme (VISTA) which aims to determine if direct or cumulative effects are occurring at visitor sites in the Ross Sea region and to provide information on those sites in order to support the management and mitigation of any environmental impacts.

VISTA data has been collected for the last four seasons. New Zealand National Representatives who serve as observers on Antarctic tour ships are conducting the bulk of the data collection, as they visit sites that are not often visited by national programmes. The anticipated outcomes of the VISTA scheme are:

    1. Collection of basic site information and baseline environmental condition data which will support the EIA process prior to activities being conducted;

    2. Implementation of sound methods for monitoring to verify the actual impacts of visits; 

    3. Publication of internationally adopted site guidelines (based on site information collected), to assist management of activities at sites by highlighting key features and sensitivities;

    4. Dissemination of visitor site information collected through the web and publications;

    5. A coordinated approach with monitoring in other Antarctic regions, particularly the Oceanites Site Guide to the Antarctic Peninsula.

In the Antarctic Peninsula, Oceanites has been active with site monitoring since its founding in 1994. Oceanites are the only non-governmental conservation charity in the region, working in areas not covered by the main research stations, to monitor wildlife and tourism throughout the Peninsula (www.oceanites.org). The monitoring and assessment approach taken by Oceanites’ Antarctic Site Inventory project is described in ATCM XXXII/INF1; and, as noted in ATCM XXXII/INF14, in 15 seasons from November 1994 through February 2009, Oceanites’ Antarctic Site Inventory project has made 951 site visits and collected data at 128 Antarctic Peninsula locations.

The Oceanites and VISTA schemes operate in different parts of Antarctica but have many similar aims and objectives. An opportunity to work together and compare and contrast the work of the two monitoring schemes presented itself when Jana Newman from Antarctica New Zealand was appointed as an observer on a Quark voyage, and when Quark generously provided an extra berth for Ian Bullock from Oceanites. 

The voyage travelled from Ushuaia (Argentina) to Lyttelton (New Zealand), providing an opportunity to see how Oceanites researchers work on the Peninsula and how the VISTA programme works in the Ross Sea region in the same voyage. With neither party having seen each other’s monitoring work directly, (apart from a working visit by Harry Keys in 2005 invited as part of standard Oceanites monitoring activity in the Peninsula) this was an excellent way to develop, discuss and share ideas on site monitoring. Monitoring results from the voyage are still being processed.

New Zealand is committed to keeping the CEP informed of the progress against the goals of the VISTA scheme and welcomes discussion, suggestions and feedback on the scheme from interested Parties.


2. Aims and Objectives
The specific aims for the monitoring work on this voyage and for ongoing collaboration are:

    1. Compare and contrast Oceanites and VISTA;

    2. See each other’s work in action, share thoughts and ideas, explore options for the development of the schemes;

    3. Collect as much site information as possible during the voyage including doing some simple mapping, collecting data on biodiversity and site sensitivities;

    4. Discuss wildlife viewing distances, landing numbers etc comparing sites with different levels of visitation;  

    5. Collect data along the ‘transect’ of the expedition to explore possibilities for monitoring things other than  landing sites;

    6. Develop ideas for standard methods for collecting data opportunistically.


3. Comparison of Oceanites and VISTA
VISTA is a relatively young monitoring scheme, with methods focussed on recording site characteristics, measuring terrestrial disturbance and detecting any changes at visitor sites. Oceanites monitoring is more established, and has a focus on monitoring wildlife, with monitoring tourist impacts as a secondary and more recent aim. However, the main aims for long term monitoring of change are common to both schemes, and many of the aspects of the monitoring methods overlap. In addition, standardising monitoring methods would not be difficult, because a very similar framework has been used (and VISTA has always aimed to take a parallel approach to Oceanites).

There are some differences in the approach to monitoring. VISTA monitoring has been completed by National Representatives, for whom the monitoring is one of several tasks to complete during a landing. It has been difficult to record data systematically; many of the Ross Sea sites are very remote and far apart meaning that monitoring staff could not easily be left on site for any length of time as there may not be a second voyage to collect them again, and monitoring is not replicated very frequently. In contrast, Oceanites researchers, many of whom are experienced field scientists, are focussed only on the monitoring work and teams have been able to station themselves at landing sites to conduct more detailed monitoring, research and mapping work. There are relatively frequent ship visits, both within the operating season and every year, to many of the landings in the Oceanites programme to facilitate the Oceanites approach. 

The two schemes share a need to analyse relatively complex data, gathered at unpredictable intervals by a range of people, and a need to manage and analyse data efficiently. They also often share short landing times in which to complete a range of tasks. Oceanites have been developing statistical methods to cope with this kind of ad hoc data collection.


4. Data Collection
A useful data set was collected during the voyage including a range of wildlife counts for Peninsula and Ross Sea Sites, sketch maps of landing sites, notes on management of landings, minimising the impact at landing sites and replication of VISTA photo monitoring. We recorded species observed and logged conditions. 



5. Possibilities for ongoing work
The main areas of possible future collaborative work between VISTA and Oceanites are:

    1. Ensuring that the same monitoring methods are used and developing new monitoring methods. This could include:

        a.  Collating the existing methods used by VISTA and Oceanites, and others relevant to terrestrial site monitoring (e.g. CCAMLR ecosystem monitoring methods) that could be used by observers;

        b. Exploring options for monitoring methods for recording observations while at sea; for example bird and marine mammal counts, daily recoding of conditions;

        c. Developing a decision-making tool to support designation of sensitive areas or sites;

        d. Exploring options for gathering information on any wildlife responses to visitors. This would build up overtime and help inform discussions on wildlife viewing distances;

        e. Developing standard methods or guidelines for producing site maps (in the absence of more formal maps). Maps are important components for monitoring, identifying site sensitivities etc.

    2. Oceanites and VISTA could establish a regular information-sharing process to keep each other updated on work. Consideration could be given to holding data in shared system.


6. Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Oceanites, Antarctica New Zealand, Quark Expeditions and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade for supporting and facilitating this work.



