





Australian-led research during the International Polar Year




Australian-led Research during the International Polar Year 
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
During the International Polar Year five Australian-led international research projects made significant advances in scientific understanding in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. These projects provided valuable opportunities for collaboration between scientists from different nations and different scientific disciplines, enabling research on a larger and more comprehensive scale than ever before. The projects leave a legacy of strong partnerships for further international research, new data and databases, and increased public engagement in the Antarctic region.
Census of Antarctic Marine Life
The Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) and its northern counterpart, Arctic Ocean Diversity, have pioneered new understandings of the evolution and diversity of life. Led by the Australian Antarctic Division, CAML coordinated 18 major research voyages to Antarctica and the Southern Ocean during the IPY. Australian scientists participated in three CAML voyages focusing on waters adjacent to East Antarctica – known as the Collaborative East Antarctic Marine Census (CEAMARC). These voyages, aboard Japan’s Umitaka Maru, France’s L’Astrolabe and Australia’s Aurora Australis, studied sea-bed communities and the deep pelagic zone.
Altogether, CAML revealed that Antarctica is a single bioregion united by the Circumpolar Current – the largest current in the world. Previously thought to be low in species diversity, the Antarctic is now known to have an unexpected richness of life. In addition, molecular techniques show Antarctica to be the birthplace of many species, driven by glacial cycles over millions of years. 
The recent collapse of several Antarctic Peninsula ice shelves has exposed seafloor communities to light for the first time. An expedition to the disintegrating Larsen A and B ice shelves showed newly exposed areas of the continental shelf attracting life from deeper waters on the slope, including sponges that rapidly colonise the sea floor disturbed by ice scour.
During the voyages, correspondents and photographers aboard research vessels sent words and pictures around the world. In February 2009 CAML received an award for ‘overall exellence’ from its parent program, the Census of Marine Life, for its approach to and success in science, education and outreach activities, and cooperation and collaboration.
A major legacy of CAML is the ‘SCAR-MarBIN’ (Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Marine Biodiversity Network) dataportal, which contains data collected on some 14 000 species. This database of comprehensive information on Antarctic marine biodiversity will provide a baseline against which future change in marine communities around Antarctica can be assessed.
CAML is made possible by support from a broad range of private sources and government agencies in nations including Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, Germany, India, Indonesia, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and South Africa. The Census of Marine Life program will end in 2010. The international network of researchers in marine biodiversity will continue under the auspices of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research.
For more information see www.caml.aq.
Climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
The Climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (CASO) program, led by the Australian Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Marine and Atmospheric Research, is working towards obtaining a circumpolar snapshot of the physical environment of the Southern Ocean. This snapshot will enhance understanding of the role of the Southern Ocean in past, present and future climate, and improve climate predictions from models that incorporate a better understanding of southern polar processes.
CASO consists of 25 individual projects involving scientists from 18 nations. It links with other IPY projects, including studies of ocean circulation and ocean-ice interaction near the Antarctic margin, biogeochemistry, meteorology, ecology and paleoclimate. 
During the IPY CASO, in collaboration with other IPY programs, measured a wide range of physical, chemical and biological properties of the Southern Ocean. The measurements covered the circumpolar extent of the Southern Ocean, from the surface to the sea floor and from the Antarctic continental shelf to the Subtropical Front. Scientists used a wide variety of tools, including ship transects, profiling floats, satellites, moorings and oceanographic sensors attached to marine mammals. The integrated, multi-disciplinary observations made with these tools, provide a ‘proof of concept’ for the long-term Southern Ocean Observing System presently under development by the international community.
The Australian CASO team deployed 30 ocean profiling (‘Argo’) floats throughout the Australian sector of the Southern Ocean, to measure temperature and salinity in the upper 2000 m of the ocean. These floats contribute to a network of over 3000 existing floats deployed throughout the world’s oceans. Observations from these, and other instruments, will be integrated with a range of modelling studies.
Australian scientists also conducted an oceanographic transect across the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, to understand the current’s interaction with the Southern Ocean overturning circulation, which regulates the heat and carbon stored by the ocean. Observations showed that water sinking from the surface to the deep ocean near Antarctica is becoming fresher and less dense, demonstrating that changes in high latitude climate are being communicated rapidly to the deep ocean.
A number of students participated on the CASO voyages and many will use the results in their research projects. The data collected during the CASO voyages has been archived in the international hydrographic data archive – CLIVAR & Carbon Hydrographic Data Office (http://whpo.ucsd.edu). CASO scientists have also been active in schools and other public outreach activities.
For more information see http://www.clivar.org/organization/southern/CASO/index.htm 
Sea Ice Physics and Ecosystem Experiment
The Sea Ice Physics and Ecosystems eXperiment (SIPEX), involving 45 scientists from 12 countries, has improved understanding of the relationship between sea ice physical processes and the biological environment within and under the ice. The program, led by the Australian Antarctic Division and the Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre, was conducted on a 55-day multi-disciplinary sea ice voyage, at a time of maximum sea ice extent in East Antarctica. 
SIPEX was conducted as part of a larger IPY project titled ‘Antarctic Sea Ice in the IPY’ which drew together research programs across many countries. The US-led Sea Ice Mass Balance in the Antarctic (SIMBA) program, for example, aimed to characterise the sea ice environment of West Antarctica. Together, SIPEX and SIMBA formed a major, simultaneous study of much of the Antarctic sea ice zone.
During SIPEX, field measurements of snow properties as well as sled-based radar measurements provided valuable insights into ‘radar returns' (returning signals) from the snow surface, ice/snow interface and intermediate layers within the snow pack. This allowed scientists to identify the snow layers that most affect the reflection of a radar signal and to estimate snow thickness. Coupled with airborne radar and laser altimetry measurements, this information will play a pivotal role in the interpretation of satellite altimetry data and the development of global ice and snow thickness products. 
A number of new technologies were used, adapted and deployed as part of the program, including the Surface and Under Ice Trawl, used to sample krill immediately under the ice; airborne laser and radar altimetry for measuring sea ice ‘freeboard’ (height of ice above the water) and snow cover over tens to hundreds of kilometres; and instrumentation on a Remotely Operated Vehicle for exploring the presence of algae and krill immediately under the ice. 
Data collected during SIPEX, including aerial photographs over sea ice, will be archived with images from other field campaigns at the Australian Antarctic Data Centre (AADC). The laser and radar altimetry, once fully processed, will provide a reference to regional sea ice and snow thickness in the study region. 
Twelve PhD students and two teachers from the Teachers Experiencing Antarctica program participated in SIPEX, providing a direct link between scientific research in Antarctica and classrooms in Australia and around the world. A website, which was updated daily from the ship, enabled students and the general public to follow the progress of the voyage and to learn about Antarctic research first hand. 
A special volume of Deep Sea Research II on ‘Antarctic Sea Ice in IPY’ will be published and more than 30 preliminary paper titles have been submitted for consideration. Many of the programs conducted during SIPEX will continue over the next few years, and will contribute to the development of new field programs in the future. 
For more information see http://www.sipex.aq/
Solar Linkages to Atmospheric Processes
The Solar Linkages to Atmospheric Processes (SLAP) project investigated the links between changes in solar output and weather and climate. 
Thunderstorms and lightning strikes drive electricity around the world and form part of a global ‘atmospheric electric circuit’ that flows between the ground and the lower reaches of the ionosphere – about 80km up. The circuit is completed when the current trickles back to Earth, in regions remote from thunderstorm activity, such as Antarctica. The flow of current around the world is modulated by cosmic rays, which control atmospheric conductivity; while cosmic rays are in turn modulated by the solar wind (charged particles from the sun). 
Meteorological and solar variability influences on the atmospheric circuit are well established. The unanswered question is whether the electric circuit actively links solar variability and weather, or if it responds passively to both meteorological and solar variations. Understanding this interaction is important because changes in the global electric circuit, caused by solar variability, could alter the conditions under which thunderstorms develop. 
Through the SLAP project, scientists from the Australian Antarctic Division and the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute in Russia, measured the atmospheric circuit high on the Antarctic plateau at Vostok, near the centre of East Antarctica. Instruments were also deployed at three sites in West Antarctica by the British Antarctic Survey and at the French-Italian station, Concordia (at Dome C), by international collaboration.
The project scientists recently published evidence supporting a day-to-day meteorological variation linked to solar activity, and showing that the process operates via the atmospheric electric circuit – i.e. there is an active link between the electric circuit, solar variability and weather. This supports a new link between solar variability and climate in addition to solar irradiance and UV ozone modulation described in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report.
The Vostok and Concordia data sets will ultimately reside in the Australian Antarctic Data Centre and the Global Circuit Project of the University of Houston. Data from the western Antarctica deployments will be available via the British Antarctic Survey Data Access and Browsing System (DABS). 
As a number of instruments were deployed late in the formal IPY program, scientists will continue collecting data over at least the next two years to address their research goals. 
For more information see http://globalcircuit.phys.uh.edu/SLAP/index.htm
Aliens in Antarctica
Aliens in Antarctica is the first major investigation into the effect of human activities in Antarctica on the invasion potential of alien (non-native) species. Over the 2007-08 summer an international team of scientists from nine nations, jointly coordinated by the Australian Antarctic Division, investigated the likelihood of the introduction of non-native species across a wide range of national Antarctic programs and tourist operators. 
Teams examined the type and number of ‘propagules’ (seeds, spores and eggs) that could be unintentionally imported into Antarctica on personal clothing and equipment, fresh food, cargo, and more than 40 ships and aircraft. Crews and passengers were also surveyed to ascertain the extent of travel that people had done before heading south, to identify the geographic range from which invasive species could be drawn. 
The Australian team examined over 2000 items of fresh fruit and vegetables destined for Australian Antarctic stations. Eighty-nine per cent of items were clean, but the remaining items were either infected with fungi (9%) or had evidence of the presence of insects (2%). Blue moulds were commonly associated with fruit and vegetables that had been in cold storage for many months prior to the beginning of the Antarctic field season. Propagules were also found in cargo, on aircraft and in expeditioners’ personal gear and clothing. 
This field work was complemented with laboratory-based simulations, including sowing seeds on different mediums, such as sand, peat and gravel, and at different temperatures, to see what could germinate and grow in dry, cold Antarctic conditions. Other experiments involved volunteers play-acting as tourists, using clothing and equipment that had been ‘spiked’ with seeds, to see how likely such seeds could be shed by tourists visiting Antarctica. 
Data and information gathered during the project are now being analysed and will be reported to the Committee for Environmental Protection, to a SCAR Biology symposium and through the scientific literature. The work has also been promoted through national and international radio and television. Ultimately, it is hoped the information will inform conservation and protection practices in the Antarctic region and other sensitive areas around the world. 
For more information see http://www.aad.gov.au/default.asp?casid=29158 
Legacies
Many of these projects gathered information which has been, or will be stored in broadly accessible databases. These data are a key IPY legacy and will be invaluable for future research and, in some cases, will provide benchmark information against which environmental change can be observed.
A number of observational systems and associated infrastructure were also established, and equipment installed, which will enable continued and long-term research. Some research, such as that conducted during the Census of Antarctic Marine Life and the Aliens in Antarctica project, will directly assist future conservation of the Antarctic environment.
As well as building relationships between new and established scientists, science students and research institutions, Australian IPY scientists also engaged with the general public. A range of public outreach and education activities were conducted, including IPY days, school visits, and the creation of weblogs and educational and scientific websites.
Altogether, the success of the Australian projects in delivering on the four major goals of the IPY – advances in polar knowledge; a legacy of infrastructure and observational systems; inspiring a new generation of scientists; and public outreach – will ensure the continued success and broad understanding of Antarctic research made possible by the IPY.

