





Annual Report pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty




Annual Report pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty


The report has been elaborated according to article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The activities of International Antarctic Expedition (Australia, India, Estonia and Romania), organized by Romania, have been carried out at Law-Racovita Base, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, during January 10, 2009 – February 08, 2009 with the support of India and Australia. 
  
1. NOTIFICATION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 17 OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
1.1. Notification of the measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Protocol

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was ratified by Romania in February 2003, and this International Expedition and activities in Larsemann Hills fully observed the Protocol through the procedures of organization and carrying out.

1.2. Contingency plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol

Romanian Antarctic Foundation has established several regulations and contingency plans for our expeditions in Antarctica. Besides these ones, we also permanently observed the specific regulations in the Guide to Law-Racovita Base taken over from Australian Antarctic Division.

2. REPORT PERSUANT TO ANNEX I, ARTICLE 6 (1) OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL
2.1. Procedures to consider the environmental impacts of proposed activities in Antarctica/ Annex I, Article 6 (1a)

As the Romanian Law-Racovita Base is located in a protected area, previously to the expedition start, a procedure of Environmental Impact Assessment has been elaborated. This was, besides the Protocol provisions, the basis of developing our activities in compliance with the regulations of implementing the protocol.

2.2. List of initial environmental evaluations developed in accordance with article 2 and decisions taken / Annex I, Article 6 (1b)

In second step of activities in Law-Racovita Base a brief  Initial Environmental Assessment was elaborated.

2.3. Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, from procedures put in place in accordance with  Annex I, Article 2 (2) and 5, of the Protocol,  Annex I, Article 6 (1c)

The low number of team members and the adequate initial procedure of activity performance, as well as the people specific education led to an insignificant impact on the local environment. 

3. REPORT PERSUANT TO ANNEX II, ARTICLE 6 OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL
3.1. Number and nature of permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol during 10 January-08 February 2008 / Annex II, Article 6/2. 

None

3.2. Records concerning sampling in the 2009 season 

The team was formed of: Indian chimist Bhupesh Sharma (Shriram Industrial Research Institute, New Delhi), Estonian geologist Enn Kaup (Institute of Geology at Tallinn Technical University) and two Australian scientists.
Sampling operation: sediment, lake water, sand samples from Lake Cameron, Lake Nella, Sarah Tarn, Lakes Heart and Potato (inside Progress Station), Lakes Progress and the largest lake on the Bhatri Island near the Indian Station. Some of the samples were obtained by drilling. 
Scientific activities of the expedition were convened at Kiev 2008, between Australia and Romania at a request from Estonia and consisted in limnology studies and nutrient flow.  
The sampling operation generated an insignificant impact on the environment.
 
4. REPORT PERSUANT TO ANNEX III, ARTICLE 9 OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL

4.1. Waste Management Plans prepared in accordance with Annex III, Article 8 and 9/1 of the Protocol
We try to be particularly careful to avoid pollution of any sort in Antarctica, and especially any disturbance of fresh water lakes or soil.  We observe the provisions of the Protocol and the Environmental Protection Specifications provided in the Management Plan of Larsemann Hills
.
4.2. Report on implementation of waste management plan /Annex III, Article 9/1 of the Protocol

All the wastes are separated and transported according to the regulations.
- Grey water from domestic uses and human urine have been disposed of in special containers and sent    to the Zhong Shan Station, about 300 L. 
- The liquid wastes generated by nutrient analyses (about 20L) were returned to India. 
- Human solid waste were deposited in double black plastic bags and transported to the Indian ship.
 We sort rubbish into three categories: 
- burnables (food scraps, paper) – incinerated;
- recyclables (glass and plastics containers, aluminium and steel cans) – washed and returned to the Indian Expedition Ship;
- Non - recyclables also returned to Indian Ship.

4.3. Inventory of past activities in accordance with Annex III, Article 8/3 and 9/1 of the Protocol 
Inventory of past activities has been as follows:
Title: Romanian National Antarctic Expedition
 Location: Law-Racovita Base, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, 69023'16"S and 76022'47"E
 Duration: February 20-March 15, 2007
 Number of team members: 1
 Type of activities: biological and chemistry researches 
 Sampling: ice, lake water, sand and vegetation (a few grams/sample) 
 Organization Responsible for the preparation of the IEE: Romanian Antarctic Foundation






