





Antarctic Historic Resources:  Ross Sea Heritage Restoration Project - Historic artefacts from ASPA’s 155, 157, 158 and 159





Antarctic Historic Resources:  Ross Sea Heritage Restoration Project - Historic artefacts from ASPA’s 155, 157, 158 and 159
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand
Purpose
This paper provides information on plans to temporarily remove artefacts from the historic sites on Ross Island and at Cape Adare, conserve them, display them internationally at public institutions and return them, as part of the Ross Sea Heritage Restoration Project New Zealand is undertaking in the Antarctic. The artefacts to be removed come primarily from Captain Scott’s hut at Cape Evans. The sites being conserved include those built by the expeditions led by Captain Scott and Ernest Shackleton as well as the Huts built by Carsten Borchgrevink’s British Antarctic (Southern Cross) Expedition. New Zealand is aware of the high level of interest of other Parties in these historic sites. Comments and ongoing dialogue is invited from any Party with an interest in the restoration, protection and preservation of Antarctica’s human heritage.
Background
The Ross Sea Heritage Restoration Project has been conceived, managed and funded by the Antarctic Heritage Trust (AHT), a New Zealand not-for-profit organisation. AHT has taken practical responsibility for the conservation of the historic sites in the Ross Sea region on behalf of the international community. Extensive logistical support has been provided by Antarctica New Zealand. Funding support to date has come from the Governments of New Zealand, Britain, Norway and Ireland, along with various international agencies, individual philanthropists and donors. AHT is committed to provide education and public outreach opportunities to highlight the legacy at these historic sites in the Ross Sea region. More information can be found at www.nzaht.org.
Update
An information paper on the Ross Sea Heritage Restoration Project was submitted by New Zealand to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) XI /Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) XXXI in June 2008.
The programme of conservation at Captain Scott’s last expedition base at Cape Evans will span the centenary of Scott’s expedition.  As part of this programme, AHT plans to temporarily remove several artefacts from Antarctica, primarily from Scott’s hut at Cape Evans.  They will be conserved in New Zealand and then displayed internationally to coincide with the centenary before being returned to Antarctica. It is likely artefacts will be removed from the continent for a period of three years.  This activity will be undertaken in accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and the New Zealand Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994, which implements the Protocol into New Zealand law. Permit(s) to undertake this conservation will need to be sought from the New Zealand Government.
Comments and further information
For further information contact the New Zealand Contact Point: 
James Walker
Antarctic Policy Unit
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
James.Walker@mfat.govt.nz

