





The Czech research activities on the James Ross Island  and Antarctic Peninsula in 2008/09





The Czech research activities on the James Ross Island  and Antarctic Peninsula in 2008/09

CLIMATOLOGY

One climatologist from the Masaryk University, Brno (Dr. Kamil Láska ) participated in the Czech Antarctic expedition to the James Ross Island. Field climatological research was realized in area of the Czech J.G.Mendel station in January and February 2009. The research was supported by the grants provided by the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic: 205/07/1377 – The effect on atmospheric factors on the regime of UV radiation in the region of Antarctic Peninsula and 205/09/1876 – Recent deglaciation of the northern part of the James Ross Island, Antarctica. 

Main objective is long-term monitoring of various abiotic factors as well as investigations of the spatiotemporal variability of the climatic conditions of the Ulu Peninsula and James Ross Island in general. Another objective is to explain the processes leading to regional atmospheric warming and to determine relief influences on air masses transformation and boundary layer processes. In a frame of the above-mentioned projects were carried out checks and complex maintenance of seven automatic weather stations situated in area of scientific interest. In particular, there were repaired or replaced the damaged meteorological instruments, parts of the sensors, ventilation units, their holders and auxiliary constructions. The replacement of meteorological instruments was carried out annually for the purpose of their calibrations according to the WMO regulations in certificated laboratories, e.g. Solar and Ozone Observatory of the Czech Hydrometeorological Institute in Hradec Králove, and Kipp-Zonen BV respectively. Special attention was devoted to services of the solar radiation sensors and their devices (pyranometers, PAR radiometers, UV radiometer and UVB-Biometer), which are situated at the J. G. Mendel Station. The quality control was preliminary executed using nonlinear model approach and comparison with the standard radiometers operated simultaneously within January 2009. Final processing of data sets and their verification will be carried out within 2009 in the Czech Republic.

Furthermore, glacio-climatic investigation was performed at Davis Dome and Whisky Glacier in the territory of Brandy Bay. At the both glaciers, ablation rates and glacier retreats were studied using GPS, bamboo poles and their interannual changes. Additionally, two meteorological stations were newly installed on the ice cap of Davis Dome (530 m a.s.l.) and upper part of Whisky Glacier (356 m a.s.l.). The fully automatic regime and long-term operation is planned in both measuring systems.

BOTANY

Five plant physiologists participated in the Czech expedition to the James Ross Island (Prof. Miloš Barták, Dr. Peter Váczi, both from the Masaryk University, Brno and Prof. Jiří Komárek, Asst. Prof. Josef Elster and Dr. Linda Nedbalová, all from Institute of Botany AS CR, Třeboň, Czech Republic. The research was supported by the grants provided by the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic: Kontakt ME 945, Kontakt ME 945 and GA ASCR IAA600050704.  Field and laboratory-based work was performed within the period of December 31st 2008 to March 3rd 2009. Within the expedition, plant physiology research was carried out in the following fields:

In-situ long-term measurements of photosynthetic activity of moss species. Two different measuring systems based on chlorophyll fluorescence and saturation pulse method were installed at a research plot in order to estimate diurnal courses of photosynthesis in moss species dominating coastal vegetation oasis. Effective quantum yield of photosynthetic processes in photosystem II (II) was measured in 15 min step for 7 weeks in Jan-Feb 2009. Simultaneously, data on incident photosynthetic active radiation, air temperature and relative air humidity were recorded. To analyze the importance of particular physical factor for moss photosynthesis, electron transport rate of photosynthetic processes was calculated from II data and related to irradiation, temperature and water supply. Since water status of a thallus is the most limiting factor for photosynthesis in Antarctic poikilohydric vegetation, hydration-response curves of  were measured in the laboratory at the J.G.Mendel station using a water potential meter and fluorometric CCD camera. The above research was performed by M. Barták and P. Váczi.

Terrestrial vegetation responses to manipulated warming using an OTC approach.  The project is based on long-term warming of terrestrial vegetation by plexiglass open top chambers (OTCs). The project started in 2007. During the 2009 expedition, two OTCs were newly installed close to the margin of Davis Dome glacier. In this way, total number of OTC installations increased to 12, located in three contrasting localities of the James Ross Island: (A) coastal vegetation oasis, (B) plateau of a table mountain (350 m a.s.l.), and (C) freshly deglaciated area close to glarier margin. During the 2009 expedition, a multichanel datalogger and several temperature sensors were installed to monitor temperature characteristics of air, ground surface and soil in the newly installed OTCs (site C). At the same time, annual data on microclimatic characteristics of OTCs and control plots from the sites A and B were downloaded and analyzed in order to evaluate chamber effect, i.e. OTC-induced temperature shift in a course of a year. Photographs of vegetation in the OTC were taken using a grid method in order to evaluate growth response to elevated temperature. The above research was performed by M. Barták and P. Váczi.

Biodiversity of moss, lichen and fungal species. The work consisted of several collections of lichen and moss samples in different parts of deglaciated area of the James Ross Island including specific ecosystems like e.g. wet rock wall surfaces. Some of species were found at the James Ross Island for the first time. The samples were transferred to the Czech Republic, where they will be determined using different approaches ranging from optical microscopy to molecular biology methods. Newly obtained data will serve for the biodiversity study of the James Ross Island. The above research was performed by M. Barták.

Usnea species and their ecology on up welling mesas at the James Ross Island, Antarctica.  This season the measurements of density and length of lichen thallus, digital photography with evaluation of ground cover in four open top chambers, four snow barriers and control treatments were performed in Biby Point mesa. It is long term ecological project, which studies the response of lichen community to manipulated (warming – cooling) conditions. Simultaneously, on Lachman Crag and Bery Hill mesas the experiment measuring lichen dispersal in respect on lichen gradient diversity and cover in various distances from glacier front has been studied.  In 2007-08 austral summer about 70 Petri Dishes were fixed on ground rocks. The bottoms of Petri Dishes have been covered with glue paper. During period of one year, when the Petri Dishes have been installed in the field on surface of glue paper lichen spores have been caught. In summer 2008-09 Petri Dishes were collected and transported to the laboratory in the Czech Republic. The quantification and growing test of caught lichen spores will be performed. This experiment is going to introduce the speed of lichen dispersal.

The limnological study of lake ecosystem, Ulu peninsula, James Ross Island, Antarctica.  16 different lakes (shallow lakes, glacial deep lakes permanently frozen and/or seasonally frozen) have been studied. Bathymetry, temperature, O2, pH, conductivity, reactive-Si, total phosphorus, total dissolved phosphorus, soluble reactive phosphorus, chloride, nitrate, nitrite and ammonium nitrogen, sulphur and iron together with hydrobiological parameters (bacterioplankton, phytoplankton, chlorophyll a, zooplankton abundance and diversity) were measured. Simultaneously also the sample for periphyton composition were collected. This part of project is describing diversity of freshwater lakes in studied area.    

Biodiversity of terrestrial and aquatic cyanobacteria and green algae The work continued the studies from previous years. Populations of cyanobacteria and algae from all types of freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems were collected, studied under microscope and samples were preserved. The critical species were isolated in cultures (about 60 monospecific strains of cyanobacteria and about 30 strains of green algae). The work was focused on less known biotopes and on critical and important genera (Phormidium, Nostoc), particularly from lakes, moraine pools, seepages and glacial creeks. The living material will be used for laboratory studies of ecological and morphological diversity and molecular evaluation. The special samples for molecular sequencing were prepared from the genus Nostoc, which is dominant in all biotopes and participates commonly in symbiotic life with lichens. The unique strains of coccoid and heterocytous cyanobacteria were particularly isolated and their diversity and ecological function revised. Several new types of filamentous and branched green algae were found in geologically old and stable lakes. The review of cyanobacterial diversity of the James Ross Island is prepared for publication in several articles.

Ornithology   Two specialists from the University of Palacky, Olomouc studied a  colony of 20 pairs of Antarctic Terns (Sterna vittata) near the Czech J.G.Mendel Base on the  James Ross Island. A detailed video monitoring of nesting etology was recorded. From several adults and juveniles blood samples were taken for DNA and parasitologic analyses.


EARTH  SCIENCES

Team of 7 geologists from the Czech Geological Survey, 1 from the Faculty of Science, Charles University,  Prague and 1 from the National Museum, Prague worked in the northern part of  the James Ross Island and in the adjacent part of the Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula. The study was carried out as a part of the research project (VaV MZP SPII 1a9/23/07) financed by the Czech Ministry of the Environment “Contribution of the Czech Republic to study of the ozone layer and UV radiation in Antarctica, palaeoclimate and palaeogeographic reconstruction of the selected area in Antarctica and related geological research and mapping (2007-2011)” . 

A part of the team finished geological mapping (1:25.000) of the Mesozoic sediments and Cenozoic volcanics in the northern part of the James Ross Island. This included also field collaboration with geologists from the Instituto Antartico Argentino. Palaeontological research was focused on fossil plants and molusca . For geomorphological research a monitoring network was establish to observe a rate of regolith creep and movement of glaciers.  

The other group working on the Antarctic Peninsula was based in a field camp on the Victory Glacier near Pitt Point. A detailed structural study of the Mt. Reece granitoid intrusion and the surrounding metamorphics of the Trinity Peninsula Group was carried out based on macrostructural  measurements and sampling for microstructural and geochemical analyses. 


Acknowledgement

It is our pleasure to acknowledge that the Czech research in the Antarctic during the last season would not be possible without the logistic effort, commitment,  and hospitality of  the Fuerza Aérea Argentina personnel at the Base Marambio. We highly appreciate the assistance and collaboration of the Dirección Nacional del Antártico - Instituto Antártico Argentino, as well as of the Instituto Antártico Chileno that was essential for the transport of the Czech ornithologists.




