





Two new Antarctic Related National Institutes recently established in Brazil




Two new Antarctic Related National Institutes recently established in Brazil
Information Paper submitted  by Brazil
Agenda item CEP 9(b) ATCM 13


Introduction

Searching for excellence in the activities of science and technology in Brazil, the National Plan of Science and Technology contemplates the establishment of 45 new National Institutes, which will occupy a strategic position in the National System of Science and Technology. The National Institutes, which have recently been established, have as characteristics: thematic focus in different areas of knowledge, articulation in networks, widely spread distribution of researchers around the country, long-term development and more complex financial support and organization. 
It is expected that the National Institutes will motivate and bring together the best research groups in the country in areas of the scientific frontiers and in strategic areas for sustainable development of the country; stimulate high level research, advances in national competence, and the formation of new scientists; support the installation and strengthening of scientific laboratories; promote qualification of the country in priority areas aiming its regional and national development and better national distribution of scientific research; and promote education and outreach activities.
Amongst the recently established National Institutes, as a legacy of the International Polar Year, two are focused in the Antarctic region: the National Institute on Antarctic Environmental Research and the National Institute for Cryospheric Science. Both, engaged through the strategic areas of the Action Plan 2007-2010: in the Program of Science, Technology and Innovation for Antarctica. This action aims at the implementation of networks of atmospheric, oceanic and cryospheric monitoring, in the Antarctic region.
ANTARCTIC INSTITUTE ON ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
The Antarctic Institute of Environmental Research will focus mainly on the integrated understanding, in a long-term, of the environmental changes observed in Antarctica, in respect to the role of Antarctica in the Global Changes, as with regard to the fragilities and susceptibilities of the Antarctic Environment to the impact of Global Changes and of human activities in that environment.
In fact, the new Institute will be responsible for the monitoring programme proposed as the Brazilian contribution to the joint monitoring programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1) presented in ATCM30 IP 111 and ATCM31 IP 118. 
The Antarctic Institute of Environmental Research proposes to generate a network of transdisciplinary investigations, taking into account the human activities and environmental variability characteristics of the maritime Antarctic region, especially around the Antarctic Peninsula.
This network will characterize and evaluate through long time series data the interactions between environmental processes and living organisms, monitoring the effect of natural and anthropogenic impacts in the region. It will promote the research and scientific exchange from different areas of knowledge and specialities, and participant institutions (national and international), in order to facilitate the dialogue and integrated action. One of the aims is to increase the production of Educational and Outreach materials and activities for the widespread communication of the results, and bring to the Brazilian cultural, social and economical daily life the relevance of the Antarctica to the planet, and especially to South America and Brazil.  
The activities of the Antarctic Institute on Environmental Research will contribute directly towards the formulation of public politics, especially within the scope of the Ministry of Environment. All knowledge generated by the Institute will subsidise the recommendations for the elaboration of political decisions on the biological diversity and protection of the Antarctic environment as a whole. The Antarctic Institute of Environmental Research involves 15 research institutions spread over 8 federative units in Brazil.
The Environmental Institute work is structured in such manner as to contemplate the following components:
1. Antarctic Atmosphere and its Environmental influence in South America
2. Global Environmental Impact in the Antarctic Environment
3. Impact of Anthropogenic Activities in the Antarctic Environment 
4. Evaluation and Management
1. Antarctica and the Climate of South America
The monitoring of the Antarctic atmosphere and ocean and their influence in South America is being built on consolidated basis as continuous studies have been undertaken by Brazilian researchers in the Antarctic region for decades. The idea is to carry on with such studies, which require long-term series, for a better understanding of global changes, and to use the data in numerical models of climate and weather forecasting making them more trustable. 
Antarctica plays an essential role in the thermal equilibrium of the planet. In relation to South America this is especially relevant. The climate of the Southern hemisphere is essentially controlled by air masses originated from the frozen continent. 
It is well known that the energy which comes from the Sun is not constant and cause variation on the earth climate, on the global meteorology, and on the environment. Recent studies have shown that the solar radiation can alter the physicochemical properties of the atmosphere and can influence the wind regime and the amount of UV radiation which reaches the earth surface, as well as the cloud coverage and precipitation. 
The understanding of the interaction between the chemistry of the atmosphere and climate change is a new and instigating research area. The connection between atmosphere and solar radiation, especially UV, which triggers the chemical reactions and these, on their turn, depend on the temperature, atmospheric circulation and climate, are now being studied in an integrated and systematic manner.
New questions are arising with the observed changes on the atmospheric temperature profile, especially with the increase on the troposphere (near surface, as a result of the greenhouse gases) and the decrease on the low stratosphere (between 15 and 20 Km, because of the destruction of ozone layer) and on the mesosphere (between 90 and 100 Km, cause attributed to the increase of greenhouse gases). The main questions are: What are the chemical changes which are occurring on the different layers of the atmosphere with increase of UV radiation and changes on temperature? What are the consequences for the dynamic, circulation and equilibrium between the atmospheric layers?  

This theme will comprehend the following monitoring issues:

    • Tunnel of cold fronts and climate behavior 
    • Chemistry of the atmosphere and the climate
        ◦ Sun-Earth Interaction
        ◦ Long term monitoring of the mesosphere temperature
        ◦ Ozone Hole
    • Greenhouse gases and the Antarctic

2. Impact of Global Change in the Antarctic Environment
As an integral part of the global environment system, the Antarctic region not only export climate signs, affecting the global climate, but also imports such signs, suffering its consequences.  The Antarctic environment and its biodiversity are fragile and vulnerable to global changes. 
Meaningful disturbances have been already observed in the Antarctic region such as: retreat of glaciers; changes on the plant coverage and distribution; change on bird distribution and abundance;  introduction of non-native species; disturbance on phytoplankton by UV radiation, as a consequence of ozone hole; retreat on the ice shelf and ice algae, affecting the abundance of krill, influencing, in this way, the food availability, leading to drastic decline on the population of other organisms, such as penguins (decrease of 62% on the population of Pygoscelis papua). 
The definition of the causing agent is not always linear and can be very complex. The impact caused by global changes might also be associated with pressures by human activities. As an example, changes on bird distribution might be directly linked to environment disturbance by human occupation or indirectly linked to global issues. There are also natural disturbances, like the impact caused by ice. With the increasing knowledge and the long-term monitoring, a dynamic baseline, representing the scope of the environmental natural variability, can be defined, allowing a better understanding of the overall process of change.
This theme will comprehend the following monitoring issues:

    • Retreat of Glacier
    • Retreat of plant coverage and change in the biodiversity of plant communities
    • Fluctuation and distribution of bird population
    • Non-native species and endemic illness

Impact of Human Activities in the Antarctic Environment 

The human presence, the establishment of scientific stations, refuges, camping sites, the presence of vessels, aircrafts, and any other logistical support essential for the development of research, are sources of environmental impact.
Antarctica is still the most preserved region on Earth and so it should be maintained, harmonizing the human presence and the fulfilment of human needs with the mitigation of the impacts in an environment with high degree of fragility.
Therefore, it is necessary to monitor the resulting products from the pressures caused by human activities in Antarctica, as well as to control the use of impacting factors, and to know the consequences for the environment.
The environmental monitoring allows a good evaluation of the impact of human activity generated by scientists, tourists and support personnel from the stations.  This information provides decision support for the implementation of actions to minimize and mitigate potential environmental impacts and to correct the negative consequences to the environment. 
This theme will comprehend the following monitoring issues:

Atmospheric Environment
Impact from atmospheric emissions 
Terrestrial Environment
Introduction of contaminants in the environment. Microbial community
Footprint
Production of Solid waste
Waste water
Quality of fresh water
Optimization of the energetic matrix
Fuel handling
Aircraft/vehicle operations
Station population
Field activities
Cumulative impact
Introduced organisms
Noise impact
Impact on the landscape
Preservation of the historic heritage


Marine Environment
Quality of marine water (water column)
Quality of the biota (water column)
Quality of the marine sediment and the benthic biota

* It is also contemplated in the monitoring programme technological development, related to clean energy and the establishment of a management facility.  

4. Evaluation and Management 
The use of an effective and efficient management system to understand the current global changes, having as focal point the Antarctic Continent, is one of the greatest challenges for the Brazilian Antarctic Program. The data collection, in a systematic way, in the most diverse scientific areas, with the aim to understand the structure and the functioning of that continent, has been a positive characteristic of the Program. However, these should be organized by a model which is capable to integrate the pertinent information and, in this way, contribute for the integration of researchers on a wide discussion on measures to protect the region.
The search for management models is a relevant factor to understand the relationship between cause and consequences of the environmental problems, as well as of its dynamics. Therefore, a model that can develop a strategy of integration and environmental analysis can be of relevance for the proposed monitoring program. In the process of environmental management, it is important not only to define indicators of environmental change, but also to attest their effectiveness throughout the time. 
The present proposal aims to organize the system of existing indicators and integrate them into the pressure/state/response– PSR Model. In relation to the management process, it shall involve five different phases: diagnosis, planning, adoption, implementation and evaluation.
It is also the goal of this component to make available the data generated by the monitoring program on a Geographic Information System and to use the data to establish a System of Environmental Management.
This component will comprehend:

    • Evaluation and Management
    • System of Environmental Management
    • Geographic Information System
    • Educational activities


NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR CRYOSPHERIC SCIENCE
This project proposes the implementation of the first national research programme for the cryosphere (Earth's snow and ice masses). The National Institute for Cryospheric Science, herein named Instituto Nacional da Ciência da Criosfera (INCC), will incorporate seven associated laboratories that are devoted to studies of the different components of the planetary ice masses and its variability (Antarctic sea ice, Antarctic ice sheet and glaciers, Andean glaciers, permafrost) and their response to climate change. Each subproject will devote a part of their resources to numerical modelling of the inter-relationships of the cryosphere-ocean-atmosphere system, in the present and in the recent past (up to the Last Glacial Maximum) and for testing the sensitivity of Brazilian climates, for example, to the variability in the extent of the frozen Southern Ocean (seasonal variation between 1.9 and 19 million square kilometres). The program also includes the addition of a laboratory dedicated to analysis and interpretation of ice cores and the establishment of a national centre for monitoring the cryosphere. This centre will act as an advisor to other national institutions concerned with environment and climate changes issues, mainly on the impact of cryosphere melting relative to the mean sea level change. The program will also develop routines for the use of CBERS satellite imagery system for South American glaciological investigations. Finally, this action will allow the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR) to expand its scientific activities to the interior of the Antarctic continent.
The INCC will be coordinated by the Polar and Climate Centre (CPC) operating from the Geosciences Institute, of Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS). The CPC will function from facilities especially built for this action, already partially funded by a MCT/CTINFRA Grant. The six laboratories involved are: Southern Ocean and Sea Ice Research Group, operating from the Oceanography Institute of the Fundação Universidade Federal do Rio Grande (FURG), in Rio Grande, RS; Ocean-Atmosphere-Cryosphere Interaction Studies Centre, operating from the Southern Regional Centre of Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE), in Santa Maria, RS; the Oceanography, Climate and Cryosphere Laboratory, operating from the Oceanography Institute of Universidade de São Paulo (USP), in São Paulo, SP; Polar and Sub-tropical Biogeochemistry Centre, operating from the Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ), in Rio de Janeiro, RJ; Glacier Geophysics Laboratory of  Observatório Nacional (ON), in Rio de Janeiro, RJ; Centro TERRANTAR: Permafrost-Cryosols-Terrestrial Ecosystems and Antarctic Climate Change, operating from Universidade Federal de Viçosa (UFV), the Federal University of Viçosa (UFV), Viçosa, MG. The INCC will involve 147 researchers; staff and students, of whom 81 are doctors from 20 national and 19 international research institutions.
The post-graduate training programme will tackle the issue of the interrelationships between the Polar Regions and the Brazilian environment, exploring the processes of the coupled ocean-atmosphere-cryosphere system. As for the science of glaciology, the goal is to double the number of Brazilian doctors in 5 years. The Science Education Program in the INCC will include the development of a free e-learning modules, short courses on Polar Regions and catered qualification courses on Polar Regions for elementary and middle school teachers and an internet portal to back up administrative, research, teaching and outreach efforts.
Objectives
The term cryosphere describes collectively all the elements of the earth system containing water in the solid state and includes sea ice, fluvial and lake ice, and snow cover, solid precipitation, permafrost, seasonally frozen soil, glaciers, ice capes and principally, due to their dimensions, the two ice sheets on the planet (Antarctica and Greenland).  At present, permanent ice covers 10% of the surface of the Earth, 30% in the recent past (18, 000 years before present). 
The presence of water in the solid state, in the atmosphere, on land or over the surface of the ocean affects the global energy balance, humidity, gas and solid particle fluxes, cloud formation, precipitation, hydrological conditions. Ice is also, one of the main controls for ocean circulation and sea level patterns. Additionally, the stratified layers of glaciers and the ice sheets contain one of the best paleoclimate records for the last 800 thousand years, supplying reference values for the interpretation of modern climatic variation and evaluation of anthropic impact on the environment. In relation to Brazil’s boarder states, the Andean glaciers are important sources of water and the generation of hydroelectric power, making life and agriculture possible in relatively arid areas. 
Regardless of the important role that the cryosphere has on the environmental system, and more particularly, of Brazil’s closeness to the Earth's largest ice mass (the Antarctic ice sheet, covering 13.6 million km2, and holding 90% of the of the world’s ice volume, 25 million km3), thus predominantly influencing the atmosphere and ocean circulation of and around South America, national scientific investigations on this theme are still limited. Even the national Antarctic program, Programa Antártico Brasileiro (PROANTAR), completing 25 years of coastal and ocean related scientific activities to the North of the Antarctic Polar Circle, still does not perform studies on the ice sheet.      
When considering the role of the cryosphere in the environmental system and the need for prospective studies on the impact of the variability and climate change of the ice sheet and the consequences for Brazil, this proposal to structure a cryosphere science national institute, locally called Instituto Nacional de Ciência da Criosfera (INCC), has as its main objective to integrate the national scientific community that investigates the role of glaciers, the ice sheet, sea ice and permafrost in Antarctica and the Andes. As by-product of this endeavour, amplifying PROANTAR´s range of activities and acquiring valuable scientific field mission experience from the extreme environmental conditions of the cryosphere.



