





Romania participation in IPY 2007-2008




Romania participation in IPY 2007-2008

Romanian participation in IPY 2007-2008 mainly consisted in an Expression of Intent EOI ID 1267 regarding a project proposed by Romania, and the IPY project ID No 28 and in educational and dissemination activities related to the IPY Program. 

1. This EOI entitled ”Pedobiological processes evolution in polar areas” (PPEPA) deals with a theme not yet proposed in IPY, for a better assessment of cryosoil forming and evolution processes, based on original, improved methods, enabling future elaboration of climate-related pedobiological database and models. These scientific activities were initiated on IPY launch. If related research separately carried out by project participants was restricted to a limited number of locations, in this project the participants contribute to new research locations and activities. The project identifies geographic, methodological and knowledge gaps, and communicate to the wider scientific community and general public the significance of the cryosoil studies through outreach and education activities. 
This project is a bipolar one, involving combined studies of climate-related geochemistry, pedobiology, microbiology and ecology. The main objective of this project is the comparison of soil forming stages, achieved at present in Spitsbergen and Greenland zones and Antarctic coast and interior areas, that can be easier done by analyzing some original biological indicators (modular and synthetic), similar to those used for soils in the alpine zones in temperate areas. 
Project partners: Romania (Romanian Polar Research Institute, Agricultural and Veterinary Sciences University, Bucharest, “Lower Danube” University Galati, Faculty of Chemistry, Bucharest University), India (National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research),  Estonia (Institute of Geology at Tallinn Technical University), Bulgaria (Institute of Microbiology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia), Russian Federation (V.L. Komarov Botanical Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg).

2. Romania is also involved in IPY Project ID no 28 “Climate of the Arctic and its role for Europe/Arctic System Reanalysis” by means of the National Meteorological Administration, partners in this project being Germany, France, Sweden, Finland, Russia, USA, Belgium, UK, Denmark, Poland, Spain, Iceland, Romania (National Meteorological Administration), Greece and China.
The significant advances/developments will consist in  New knowledge about the Arctic environment obtained through new observations, model studies and data analysis. The ASR will produce a high-resolution coupled model of the Arctic region, the first such model to be developed. It will also produce a climate-quality multi-parameter pan-Arctic data base of unprecedented scope. In the longer term, the ASR will lead to an operational activity that will improve weekly to interannual forecasts. 

3. Educational and dissemination activities
Besides a cycle of conferences during IPY regarding the importance of the IPY Program at Romanian Academies (Romanian Academy, Academy of Science Specialists) and Universities (Bucharest, Galati, Iasi), the Romanian Polar Research Institute organized in 2007 and 2008, two International Symposia of Polar Research in Bucharest under the auspices of the Romanian Academy, in which scientists form 10 countries participated along with many research institutes in Romania.  

In December 2008 the Romanian Polar Research Institute presented in 2 national broadcast transmissions the IPY program objectives and role and the Polar Day Concept, respectively (02 and 04.12. 2008)  

