





Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2009




Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2009
by
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc., Co-Principal Investigator, Antarctic Site Inventory
Dr. Heather Lynch and Dr. William Fagan, University Of Maryland, Co-Principal Investigators,             Antarctic Site Inventory
Summary
This paper provides an update on results of the Antarctic Site Inventory project through February 2009. The Antarctic Site Inventory has collected biological data and site-descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula since 1994.1
The project's methodology, results, and updates from previous field seasons have been described and discussed in XIX ATCM/INF 47, XX ATCM/INF 100, XX ATCM/INF 102, XXI ATCM/INF 114, XXII ATCM/INF 27, XXIII/INF 32, XXV ATCM/INF 25, XXVI ATCM/INF 53, XXVII ATCM/INF 10, XXVII ATCM/WP 11, XXVIII ATCM/INF 22, and XXIX ATCM/INF 27, XXX ATCM/INF 11, XXXI ATCM/INF 6, XXXII ATCM/INF1.
1. Introduction
The Antarctic Site Inventory began fieldwork in November 1994, examining whether opportunistic visits can be used (1) to effectively and economically detect possible visitor-caused changes in the physical features, flora, and fauna of sites in the Antarctic Peninsula being visited repeatedly by ship-based tourists; (2) to collect baseline information necessary to detect possible changes in the physical and biological variables being monitored; and (3) to determine how best to minimize or avoid possible environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Peninsula area.
The Antarctic Site Inventory has demonstrated an ability to reach Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites frequently and cost-effectively, relying opportunistically on expedition tour vessels and, occasionally, the United Kingdom ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance for logistics support. Well-timed visits by trained researchers have proved an effective means of characterizing sites and for collecting relevant biological data.2
Data collected by the Inventory are intended to assist the implementation of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which, among other things, requires a priori environmental impact assessments for all human activities, including tourism, and for monitoring to be done, as and when necessary, to assess and verify predicted environmental impacts. There is a focus on the “initial environmental reference state” of particular locations, which in the case of tourism, would refer to places where shipboard passengers are visiting. The environmental concern is identifying changes to the baseline reference state and, if possible, determining whether any detected changes are naturally occurring or are anthropogenic, perhaps caused by tourism or other human activities. Potential impacts may be short-term or long-term, immediate or cumulative.3
2. Results
In 15 seasons from November 1994 through February 2009, the Inventory has made 951 site visits and collected data at 128 Antarctic Peninsula locations. During the recently concluded 2008-09 field season, with two expedition vessels assisting the project (Lindblad Expeditions’ National Geographic Endeavour and the National Geographic Explorer), the Inventory made 155 visits and collected data at 56 sites, including 8 sites not previously visited by Inventory researchers.
In the 2008-09 season, as well as over the 15-year history of the Antarctic Site Inventory, there have been repetitive visits to all of the visitor sites that are most heavily visited by expedition tourists, to all sites which exhibit the most species diversity and are most prone to potential environmental disturbance from human visitors,4 and to the species-diverse, environmentally sensitive tourism sites now subject to site visitation guidelines adopted at recent ATCMs.5
3. Species Trends
As noted, the Antarctic Site Inventory is conducted by researchers placed on tour ships and site censuses are taken during zodiac landings or, occasionally, during zodiac tours. The advantages of this approach include wide spatial coverage of the western Antarctic Peninsula, and a negligible “footprint” on the landscape. The Inventory’s censuses add tremendous spatial and temporal coverage to existing census records and can be used in population.6
While the timing of censuses is opportunistic and censuses are not always timed with the peak of egg laying or chick crèching as required by the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 2004), off-peak bias corrections are currently being developed (Lynch et al. in prep.) to ensure that all collected data may be appropriately analyzed.7
In our most recent publication,8 we report on census data collected by the Antarctic Site Inventory through February 2007, updating earlier efforts reported in Naveen et al. (2000). This paper also reports new breeding populations of gentoo penguins at the Yalour Islands (65°14'S, 64°10'W), Galindez Island (65°15'S, 64°15'W ), and Cape Tuxen (65°16'S, 64°08'W), the last representing the southernmost-known breeding colony of this species. 
In addition, we continue to document rapid change in the relative populations of gentoo and Adélie penguins where they breed sympatrically in the southwestern region of the Antarctic Peninsula. Gentoo penguin populations are not only increasing rapidly at sites like Petermann Island (65˚10’S, 64˚10’W), historically their southern breeding limit, but are expanding their range southward to colonize either unoccupied breeding areas (like Moot Point, 65°12’S, 64° 06'W) or areas previously occupied only by Adélie penguins. We also document all three pygoscelid penguins breeding at Port Charcot, Booth Island (65°04'S, 64°00'W), the fifth known Antarctic Peninsula site where these species nest contiguously on the Antarctic Peninsula.
In the Inventory’s two most recent field seasons, we have continued to explore and census new penguin breeding sites on the Peninsula in order to increase the spatial extent and resolution of our efforts to monitor population changes. Although previous monitored by ship-based censuses, we have recently completed what we believe to be the first on-the-ground nest and chick censuses of Glandaz Point and Loubat Point in at least 25 years. These sites, situated along the steep cliffs on the eastern side of the Lemaire Channel,  represent important outposts of gentoo penguin breeding in an area where gentoo populations are on the rapid increase. We also note several newly established and rapidly growing new colonies of gentoo penguins at and near Vernadsky Station (65º15'S and 64º16'W). As the front edge of southward expansion for gentoo penguins, the areas around Vernadsky Station (the Yalour Islands, the Argentine Islands, etc.) will be an area of particular interest for Inventory efforts in the years to come. We have also continued to add sites in the south-western portion of the Peninsula, including Inventory-first counts at Vortex Island (63˚44’S, 57˚38’W), Andresen Island (66˚53’S, 66˚40’W), Jenny Island (67˚44’S, 68˚24’W), and Red Rock Ridge (68˚18’S, 67˚08’W). This southward expansion of our survey efforts allows us to better understand how Adelie population dynamics change over the broad latitudinal gradient at which they are known to breed on the Peninsula.
4. Analyses
As noted in XXX ATCM/INF 11 ands XXXI ATCM/INF 6 and elaborated in XXXII ATCM/INF1, Oceanites has begun an effort in collaboration with the Fagan Lab at the University of Maryland to utilize hierarchical Bayesian modeling and other, cutting-edge statistical and geographical information system (GIS) techniques to analyze the 15-year-old Antarctic Site Inventory database in concert with other extant, long-term Peninsula datasets. This will enable a better understanding how Peninsula biological and physical processes, as well as direct/cumulative impacts from human activities, may connect.  
In this regard, we seek to characterize decadal scale changes in penguin and seabird populations throughout the Peninsula, and to discern how Antarctic species are changing in abundance, relative abundance, and spatial distribution, and more importantly, identifying the factors specifically driving these long-term changes. These are key steps toward an improved understanding of the Antarctic ecosystem, which is essential for the effective stewardship of Antarctica’s unique resources, an endeavour that will necessitate distinguishing effects attributed directly to immediate human activity (e.g., tourist visitation) from long term climatic changes. Despite the scientific and technical challenges inherent in using data compiled from multiple sources, recent advances in statistical modeling, such as hierarchical data analysis, afford important new avenues for hypothesis testing using aggregated datasets. 
5. Logistics
As noted above, the Inventory places research teams aboard expedition vessels operating in the Peninsula during the austral spring and summer. Expedition ships are selected carefully, particularly those with the longest Peninsula itineraries, whose Initial Environmental Evaluations have been reviewed by national authorities, and whose operations and expedition personnel enable Inventory researchers to reach as many sites and make as many site census visits as possible during each field season. By a cooperative arrangement with Lindblad Expeditions, Inc., Inventory researchers have collected census data from the 2000-01 season to date on all Antarctic departures of that company’s expedition vessels.
6. Geographic Coverage, Methodology
The Inventory divides the Antarctic Peninsula into six subareas: South Orkney Islands, including Laurie, Coronation, and Signy Islands; Elephant Island and nearby islands; Northeast Antarctic Peninsula/ northwestern Weddell Sea (from Cape Dubouzet, 63˚16’S, 64˚00’W to James Ross Island); South Shetland Islands (including Deception, Low, and Smith Islands); Northwest Antarctic Peninsula (from Cape Dubouzet, 63˚16’S, 64˚00’W, the northern end of the Lemaire Channel); and Southwest Antarctic Peninsula (from the north end of the Lemaire Channel to the northern part of Marguerite Bay, 68˚18’S, 67˚11’W).
The Inventory’s methodology as initially constituted is fully described in the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency.9 As elaborated in ATCM XXXII/INF1, because the project intends to analyze decadal scale changes in penguin and seabird populations throughout the Peninsula, data are collected on all Inventory site visits and off-peak bias corrections are being developed (Lynch et al. in prep.) to ensure that the appropriate analysis of all collected data.
The Inventory collects three categories of data and information: Basic Site Information, which includes descriptions of key physical and topographical characteristics; latitude and longitude; distribution of flora, seal haul-out and wallow locations, and discrete groups of breeding penguins and flying birds; Variable Site Information and Data, which includes weather and other environmental conditions (sea ice extent, cloud cover, snow cover, temperature, wind direction and speed), biological variables (number of nests and chicks, number of chicks per nest, ages of chicks), and the nature and extent of any observed visitor impacts (footprints or paths, styrofoam, and other litter); and  Maps and Photodocumentation, which portray the major features of each site, particularly the locations of colonies and assemblages of resident fauna and flora. 
The Inventory is creating fully digitized and annotated GPS maps for all of the locations in the Inventory. These maps include both biologically relevant information such as the location and boundaries of breeding bird colonies, as well as information on zodiac landing sites, commonly used visitor trails, locations of historical sites and markers such as cairns and stakes. Where appropriate, map locations are associated with regular and repeated photodocumentation of sensitive features such as moss beds.
With respect to penguins and flying birds, the focus is collecting data on the key biological variables of breeding population size (nest counts) and breeding productivity (number of chicks per active nest), which are the appropriate biological parameters for detecting direct and cumulative impacts on these populations. 
7. Dissemination of Data and Information, Publications
Biological data and site descriptions collected by the Antarctic Site Inventory have been published and routinely are made available in peer-reviewed papers, government reports, and popular publications. 
The most recent government report is the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency,10 which compiles site descriptions and data relating to the 82 sites visited/censused by the Antarctic Site Inventory through February 2003. Details include: the number of visitor sites experiencing zodiac landings; where such landings are concentrated; the sites exhibiting the most species diversity; and the sites which are most sensitive to potential environmental disruptions. A third edition of the Compendium is planned for 2009-10.
Data and information about the Antarctic Site Inventory are also available on the recently launched Oceanites website — www.oceanites.org — and news/content site — http://oceanitesfeed.wordpress.com/ .
8. References
Abbott, S. and Benninghoff, W.S., 1990. Orientation of Environmental Change Studies to the Conservation of Antarctic Ecosystems, in Antarctic Ecosystems. Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel), Berlin, Germany.
Benninghoff, W.S. and W.N. Bonner, 1985. Man’s Impact on the Antarctic Environment: A procedure for evaluating impacts and logistic activities. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England.
Croxall, J. P. and E.D. Kirkwood, 1979. The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, England.
Emslie, S., 1997. Natural and human-induced impacts to seabird productivity and conservation in Antarctica: a review and perspectives. In Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management, The World Conservation Union (IUCN), Washington.
Forrest, S. and Naveen, R., Prevalence of Leucism in Pygoscelid Penguins of the Antarctic Peninsula, Waterbirds 23 (2): 283-285 (2000).
Hofman, R.J. and Jatko, J., (eds.), 2002. Assessment of the Possible Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Commercial Ship-Based Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Area: Proceedings of a Workshop Held in La Jolla California, 7-9 June 2000, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, and W.F. Fagan. 2009. Censuses of Penguins, Blue-Eyed Shags, and Southern Giant Petrel Populations in the Antarctic Peninsula, 2001-2007. In press at Marine Ornithology.
Naveen, R., 1996. Human Activity and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory, In R. Ross, E. Hofman, and L. Quetin (eds.) Foundations for Ecosystem Research in the Western Antarctic Peninsula Region. American Geophysical Union. Washington. pp. 389-400.
Naveen, R., 1997a. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Naveen, R., 1997b. The Oceanites Site Guide to the Antarctic Peninsula, Oceanites, Inc., Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA.
Naveen, R., 1999. Visitor landings in the Antarctic Peninsula, 1989-99. Unpublished report submitted to the US Environmental Protection Agency, November 15, 1999.
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334 (2000).
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132 (2001).
Naveen, R., 2003. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites (2d edition): A Report to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, US Environmental Protection Agency.
Naveen, R., 2004. Indicators of Cumulative Impacts on Bird and Plant Populations: Approaches Taken by the Antarctic Site Inventory. Paper presented at the NSF/COMNAP/SCAR Workshop, Practical Biological Indicators of Human Impact in Antarctica, March 2005, Bryan/College Station, Texas.
Sander, M., Balbao, T. C., Costa, E. S., Dos Santos, C. R. & Petry, M. V. 2007. Decline of the breeding population of Pygoscelis antarctica and Pygoscelis adeliae on Penguin Island, South Shetland, Antarctica. Polar Biology 30: 651-654.
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Subcommittee on Bird Biology (Ed. by E. Woehler and J. Croxall), 1996. The Status and Trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic Seabirds.
Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2004 (revised). CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies. Hobart, Australia.
Woehler, E. J., 1993. The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England. 


