





Continuous data collection and long-term monitoring as an integral part of the Antarctic scientific programs




Continuous data collection and long-term monitoring as an integral part of the Antarctic scientific programs

Introduction

One of the main objectives expressed in the Antarctic Treaty is scientific research in the Antarctic and free information exchange. In recent years, the interest for scientific cooperation between Countries has been intensified both, in order to improve their quality and avoid unnecessary duplications, and to reduce the environmental impact of human activities in the Antarctic to a minimum. In this sense, one of the possible ways is to utilize shared installations and to take advantage of pre-existent scientific stations.

Much of the research work that has been recognised as of high priority or of major relevance by the international scientific community (including the SCAR and the CCAMLR) as well as the ATCM itself, such as the Climate Change, the invasion by non autochthonous species, impact of fishing, etc. demand a sound and long-term data base that many times it is only feasible to obtain from measurements taken in permanent stations (or temporary stations that are set up, generally,  along a long uninterrupted period of time to maintain such observations).
The collection, recording, keeping and transmission (especially real time transmission) of those data normally demand great efforts, both material and human. These data provided to the international networks are extremely valuable and much appreciated by the international scientific community, moreover when the time frame is longer.

Nevertheless, the relevance of data collection continuity (and their quality) and of long-term monitoring may times is little understood by the institutions responsible for funding scientific activities for which the cost of installation and maintenance of equipment and facilities have to be absorbed by the national Antarctic programs. At the same time, the activities related to scientific data collection and long-term monitoring are not always considered relevant scientific activities (and sometimes are not recognized as scientific activities) when inspections are carried out within the statements of the Article 7 of the Antarctic Treaty.
 
Below, and only as an example, two activities carried out by the Argentine Republic related to the permanent and supervised data collection are presented. These data are used both for direct applications (operational and safety/security) and for scientific studies. These examples were chosen to show the diversity of subjects for which continuous and long-term monitoring and/or data collection are necessary and the opportunities they provide to attain a close cooperation among countries. One of them consists of a project with international cooperation (ASAIN), while the second one consists of a national inter-institutional cooperation. Both utilize the installations provided by the permanent scientific stations that Argentina has in the Antarctica.

The permanent operation of such continuous monitoring stations involve the maintenance of scientific stations with a technical staff specifically trained and assigned to each of these projects as well as an annual equipment check and calibration by a group of Argentine and foreign researchers who, by Argentine logistic means, move to each of these stations in summer. At the same time, the real time transmission of the information obtained at each station requires a satellite connection to the Internet that is afforded by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and cult of the Argentine Republic.

Example 1: ASAIN network (Antarctic Seismographic Argentine-Italian Network) for seismologic observation in Antarctica

In 1991 the Dirección Nacional del Antártico  (DNA) through the Instituto Antártico Argentino (IAA) signed a collaboration project with the Istituto Nazionale di Oceanografia e di Geofísica Sperimentale (OGS) of Trieste, Italy, to carry out joint seismologic studies in the Antarctica.

The area of most relevance for this project covers the area known as the Scotia Arc that comprises the Antarctic zones of Drake Passage, Scotia Sea - including the islands -, the Sandwich Islands Arc, the Antarctic Peninsula and the archipelago of South Shetland Islands, as well as the archipelago of Tierra del Fuego. This zone has a well-known seismic activity and as an example it is worth mentioning that a strong seism (7.5 in the Richter scale) took place on August 3, 2004 at only 76 km from the Orcadas Base in the Laurie isle, South Orcadas Islands, and generated an wave that brought about the crack of a 2 meter thick pack-ice scattering many parts of it on the beach close to that Base. Nevertheless, and further than this relevant application, the seismologic network along with the gravimetric and geodesic stations (GPS) provide essential data to know about the internal structure of the Antarctic continent what has a major relevance for the adjustment of current models on the projection of change in the sea level that might bring about an eventual melting of the Antarctic ice sheet, among other uses.

In this region of the Argentine Antarctica there are 6 scientific stations that have been permanently operating since many decades ago: Marambio, Jubany, Esperanza, Belgrano II, San Martín and the oldest one in the Antarctic continent, the Orcadas Base, on a permanent base since 1904. As part of the above mentioned agreement, joint seismological stations have been set up in Esperanza Base (1992), Orcadas Base (1997), Jubany Base (2002), San Martín Base (2007) and most recently Belgrano II Base (2009), which at present integrate the network called ASAIN (Antarctic Seismographic Argentine-Italian Network). The denomination and location of these seismological stations is the following: Esperanza Base (ESPE): 63º 23' 52.72 S; 56º 59'46.63 W, recording started in February 1992; Orcadas Base (ORCD): 60º 44' 20.17 S; 44º 44' 17.18 W, recording started in March 1997; Jubany (JUBA): 60º 44' 20.17 S; 44º 44' 17.18 W, recording started in February 2002; San Martín Base (SMAI): 68º 07' 48.72 S; 67º 06' 21.24 W, recording started in February de 2007 and Belgrano II Base (BELA): 77º 52' 29 S; 34º 37' 37 W, recording started in January 2009. Currently, except for BELA (that is in the process of being incorporated), the other four stations provide real time data to the “Virtual European Broadband Seismograph Network” (VEBSN): http://www.orfeus-eu.org/Data-info/vebsn.html


Example 2: Network of Antarctic meteorological observatories

Observation and recording of meteorological parameters have been and still are a basic task in all the Antarctic bases.  Collected data are of major relevance in order to know the Antarctic meteorological phenomena and predict changes in the meteorological condition that can restrict or hinder operations as well as being part of the necessary data base for the study of climate change. Just one of the problems to make progress in the study of this phenomenon in the Antarctic region is the scarce quantity of meteorological stations, their non homogenous distribution (mainly in coastal areas) and fundamentally, the short period of data registration (mostly less than 50 years).

In line with an agreement signed with the National Weather Service, the six Antarctic bases in the Argentine Republic have meteorological stations operated by a qualified staff (meteorologists and/or meteorology observers) of such institution who routinely perform observations every three hours over the following parameters: atmospheric pressure, air temperature, surface wind (direction and intensity), clouds (quantity, type and height), visibility, ground condition, ground temperature, snow height, rainfall (type and quantity), heliophany and observation of special phenomena  (noctilucent clouds, auroras, optical phenomenon, etc). 
These observations have an immediate use to make short-term meteorological forecasts that are used in operational aspects and provided as free services to any operator who might require them. Moreover, these stations integrate a network distributed around the Antarctic Peninsula that has collected continuous data for a period that dates back to the 30 years ago for the last station set up (Marambio) up to 105 years in the oldest (Orcadas). In the extraordinary case of the Orcadas Base these data have been used in recent publications about climate change in the Antarctica (Turner, et al., 2005. Int. Journ. Climat. 25; Mayewski et al, Rev. of Geophysiscs, in press), and also the continuous records of atmospheric CO2 that are carried out in Jubay Base, since 1994 and that show a progressive increase in the concentration of this gas in the atmosphere of approximately 20 ppm, can be mentioned.

Final considerations

Data collection in a continuous and supervised manner is a task of major relevance for the scientific programs that are focused to learn about the dynamic state of the Antarctic natural system, to understand how it works and to make predictions about its future evolution.
Although these tasks are not considered strictly scientific, they cannot be assimilated to logistic support tasks, such as those that are aimed at maintaining the bases’ operational capacity. Due to the growing complexity of the devices used and the demand in data quality, the staff involved is increasingly more specialized, and also a direct participation of the scientific staff is required for some long-term monitoring tasks that are performed on organisms such as birds or marine mammals.
For this reason it is considered that if the ATCM expressed recognition of them as an integral part of the national scientific programs, it would be a big stimulus for the maintenance of these activities. 

