





Standardised methodology for counting Southern giant petrels




Standardised methodology for counting Southern giant petrels
Information Paper submitted by the Secretariat to 
the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP)

This paper presents ACAP's response to a request by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) for guidance on the development of a standardised methodology for undertaking population counts of Southern giant petrel (SGP) colonies.  ACAP considers that the use of such a standardised methodology has potential to greatly add to the value of SGP population data by improving its comparability and strongly supports its promulgation amongst all relevant researchers.  ACAP suggests some changes to the standardised methodology presented to CEP XI and notes other ways in which Antarctic Treaty Parties, including those not a Party to ACAP, could facilitate ACAP's ability to provide expert advice on SGPs and other species listed under ACAP.

Following discussions at CEP XI in 2008, the CEP sought advice from ACAP on the development of a standardised methodology for population monitoring of Southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus) at Antarctic breeding sites (refer paragraph 284 of the CEP XI final Report).  

The CEP's request was welcomed by ACAP and considered at the 2008 meetings of the ACAP Advisory Committee and its Status and Trends Working Group (STWG), which reviewed the document developed by SCAR at its May 2008 workshop and later presented at CEP XI (ATCM XXXI/WP 10 Rev1).  The outcome of the ACAP review is at Attachment 1 (and forms Annex 7 of the Working Group's Report to the Advisory Committee (AC4 Doc 11 Rev 5)). ACAP considers that the use of such a standardised methodology has potential to greatly add to the value of SGP population data by improving its comparability and strongly supports its use by all relevant researchers.

In addition to the standardised methodology, ACAP also wishes to provide the CEP with a copy of the recently completed ACAP Species Assessment for the Southern giant petrel (Attachment 2) which collates and summarizes information on taxonomy, conservation listings and plans, breeding sites, population numbers and trends, as well as demographic data, threats, foraging ecology and distribution, and any data gaps for the species that still need to be addressed.  This species assessment and any updates – and others developed by ACAP for other species listed under ACAP – may be downloaded from the ACAP website (www.acap.aq, via the "Resources/Education"/ "ACAP Species Assessments" menus).

In providing the above information to the CEP, ACAP wishes to note that the ACAP population dataset on SGPs is incomplete and that some of the population data for SGPs breeding in Antarctica, and used by SCAR during its May 2008 workshop to review the status of SGPs, has not been made available to ACAP.  The ACAP Secretariat recently approached SCAR to ask if it could assist with the acquisition of that population data, for use in future updates of the ACAP SGP Species Assessment. It is likely, in some cases at least, that the original data owners have not provided SCAR with the necessary permission to release their data to ACAP and that there is additional data that was not provided to the SCAR Workshop.  Noting the complementary objectives of ACAP and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, particularly Annex II on the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, ACAP would welcome any assistance that Antarctic Treaty Parties could provide to ensure that relevant data are submitted to ACAP.

ACAP thanks CEP for its request for advice and appreciates the opportunity to assist with this matter.  ACAP would be pleased to provide further assistance or advice about any of the species listed under ACAP.

