





Indian IPY Activities




Indian IPY Activities
Introduction
As the IPY nears its completion successfully, India has contributed strongly to its scientific & outreach program that will continue into 2008-09 & beyond. National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research (NCAOR, under the Ministry of Earth Sciences) is the national coordinating agency that has well defined scientific & outreach activities that seek to educate school children, general public & scientific community about the challenges & need of the polar research. The Indian chapter of the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008 was launched at NCAOR on 1st March 2007 by Prof. U. R. Rao, former Chairman, Indian Space Research Organization with subsequent lectures by Sri Rasik Ravindra, Director, NCAOR & Dr. S. R. Shetye, Director, National Institute of Oceanography, Goa. A “calendar of events” was released that listed outreach activities to be undertaken in collaboration with WWF-India (World Wide Fund for Nature) for school children. WWF a non-profit organization, was chosen as a partner and was financially supported as it has offices all over India with manpower trained in organizing outreach activities that would aid in spreading the information regarding IPY throughout the vast expanses of India. In New Delhi, a lecture by Dr. S.L. Jain, Emeritus Scientist, National Physical Laboratory was delivered at Jawaharlal Nehru National University (JNU) that was coordinated by WWF-India to mark the beginning of the IPY-Indian chapter. 
Scientific Programme
Two scientific projects have been endorsed by the ICSU/WMO Joint Committee, which are Project id. 70 and Project id. 129: 
    • Project id. 70: Monitoring of the upper ocean circulation, transport and water masses between Africa and Antarctica (short title: Upper-ocean characteristics between Africa and Antarctica) by Dr. A. Luis, National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research, Goa.
It envisages profiling of density structure in the upper ocean by launching expendable CTD probes from a cruising ship between South Africa and Antarctica (18-76°E). The data collection campaign for the project, under the umbrella of Climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (CASO), a strategy for climate research for the IPY, started in January 2007 and was continued during austral summer of 2008-09. The hydrographic data so collected have been analyzed for quantifying the changes in the vertical density structure by comparing with historical data. Using T-S diagrams water mass characterizations have been carried out for every 5 degree latitude interval. In an attempt to understand the circulation, geostrophic currents and Ekman components estimated from ship's wind observations have been merged to obtain the total zonal transport along the near-meridional sections. 
    • Project id. 129: Land Based Anthropogenic Impact of Coarse Particles on Antarctic Shelf (short title: Aerosol Impact on Antarctica) by Mr. A. Tiwari, National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research, Goa.
This study aims to collect the samples on the ship course starting from Goa (India) to the India bay at Antarctica (70°45.94'S and 11°44.13'E) and further en route to the site of India’s third station at Larsemann Hills (69°24'S and 76°10'E). For aerosol observations necessary instrument like High Volume Sample, Aerosol Spectrometer, Aethalometer, Quartz Crystal Cascade Impactor, Sun Photometer were installed onboard expedition ship MV Emerald Sea. Automatic Weather Station was also installed onboard to understand the wind effect on transport of aerosol. Experiment was carried over Arabian Sea to Southern Ocean and India Bay in Antarctica. Further observations were extended at Maitri station. 
Besides above-mentioned endorsed research proposals the following project will also contribute to the IPY theme:
    • Study of the short-term Holocene climate variability’s in Antarctica and the Southern latitudes utilizing sediment cores from the Indian Ocean sector of the Southern ocean, the cores from the periglacial lakes and the shallow ice-cores from Antarctica  by scientists of National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research and other participating organizations such as Birbal Sahni Institute of Paleobotany, Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Geological Survey of India, Annamalai University, Center for Cellular Microbiology etc. 
This study seeks to illuminate rapid decadal to millennial scale climate changes at high latitudes by employing high-resolution studies on the ice cores and lake sediment cores from Antarctica and marine sediment cores from the Southern Ocean.
Several papers & special volumes in various scientific journals have been published to dispense the information regarding IPY themes. Two special issues of Indian Journal of Marine Science focusing on “Antarctic & Southern Ocean – Physical Processes” & “Geoscientific & Biological Studies in Antarctica & Southern Ocean” were published in March 2008 & December 2008 respectively. Special volume of the journal “Hill Geographer” on IPY was published by the “Geographical Society of the Northeast Hill Region”, India for popularizing polar science and other aims of IPY to general public in Northeastern states.
Outreach Programme
 NCAOR had sponsored the visit of two students to Antarctica during the 25th Indian Antarctic Expedition (IAE) under the “Students Participation Programme”. A series of lectures were delivered by one of them at more than twenty schools & colleges in the rural & suburban areas of Maharashtra regarding the wonders of Antarctica. Students from several schools and colleges and scientists/visitors from various Indian institutes/foreign countries have visited NCAOR & its labs, especially ice core laboratory, to get firsthand experience of polar research. NCAOR, in collaboration with WWF-India, has carried out competitions such as poster & model making, stamp designing, petition writing etc. for school children during 2007-2009. The first competition, poster making & slogan writing, was held at New Delhi on April 10, 2007 and prizes were distributed by the H'ble Minister of Science & Technology and Earth Sciences on the Earth Day in 2007. The winners of these competitions were invited for launching of the XXVII Indian Antarctic Expedition at Goa and were felicitated by the Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences on 5th December 2007. The award winning posters were published in the form of a calendar for the year 2008-09 that was freely distributed. 
Under the aegis of IPY 2007-2008, a 14 year old Indian student – Sh. Omar Beg, from Father Agnel School, New Delhi was selected by Student On Ice, for their annual Arctic expedition that was held from August 2nd to 17th, 2007. NCAOR has supplied audio-visual & printed material on polar science to Nehru Science Centre for their exhibitions on the theme “The Story of Poles”, which was inaugurated on 2nd November 2007 by Director, NCAOR. The exhibition consisted of graphical panels, 3D interactive exhibits, animations, charts, 3D models, computer kiosks etc. NCAOR also participated & financially supported the “4th Science-Expo” organized by Nehru Science Centre at Mumbai from 11-15 January 2008 and “Science Fiesta – 2008” organized by Goa Science Centre at Panji, Goa from 26-28 February 2008. Lectures were delivered by NCAOR scientists at both the exhibitions that highlighted the effort of Indian scientists in unraveling the mysteries of the past using ice cores and other anthropogenic problems faced by Antarctic environment. 
Moreover, under the "Popular Book Series" initiative of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, a book entitled "Story of Antarctica" is published by NCAOR for free distribution among school children. Similar books on "Story of the Oceans" and "Glaciers - The Rivers of Ice" have already been published & distributed to students in different states of India. NCAOR also celebrated the International Polar day on 4th December 2008 that involved lectures, short movies, competitions & activities focusing on research above the Polar Regions for school children and launch of a “virtual weather balloon” by them. It was also celebrated at WWF-India headquarters at New Delhi as well with several competitions & lecture by scientist from Ministry of Earth Sciences.
To further give impetus to our outreach efforts & to engage more students, an innovative Soccer Tournament called "Sub-Zero Soccer" was organized on 15th-22nd November 2008 at New Delhi, for College students. The main objective is to generate awareness among the youth by engaging them in sports and culture as this is very close to their heart and appeals to them. The tournament began with a film on Antarctica and a brief on IPY. The team-names were based on biological diversity of the Polar Regions. Information on receding polar ice in Polar Regions, India's presence in Antarctica etc. was displayed on the field through banners & posters all around. 
Recently, several articles have appeared in popular science magazines for children & general public. One of the widely read magazines, Science Reporter, has carried out special features focusing on International Polar Year in February 2009. It consist of interviews from the H’ble  Minister of Science & Technology and Earth Sciences and Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences, where they present a comprehensive overview of IPY and Indian involvement in this international program. They also outlined the endeavors made by NCAOR to coordinate the activities of all the institutes & making new beginnings such as launching the 1st Indian expedition to Arctic in 2007 & establishment of a permanent station, named Himadri, in a short span that was inaugurated by H’ble Minister of Science & Technology and Earth Sciences on 1st July 2008.  
The completion of IPY was commemorated by holding several other lectures, competitions, street-plays etc. and participating in science exhibitions. In the last week of the February 2009, four scientists from NCAOR had participated in the Science-Fiesta 2009 – a state level science exhibition where Indian polar activities & information regarding IPY was showcased to audiences comprising school children & public alike. A lecture on Polar Biology was also delivered by one of the scientists.  
The legacy of IPY should be preserved & the momentum built during the IPY will be sustained so as the focus from polar science doesn’t shift. The outreach activities started during this period should be continued to keep the Polar Science in public mind. For outreach, one of the best ways is through internet/dedicated websites that can be very informative & interactive. Such a link is being maintained at the NCAOR official website (www.ncaor.gov.in). But in a developing country like India, the internet penetration is very low and moreover even if internet is available, only that student/person who himself is interested in knowing about polar science will visit the particular site. But as we wish to reach out to as many people as possible, we need to devise a strategy involving professional non-profit organizations who have experience & trained man-power to carry out year-round programmes/competition in schools/colleges throughout the vast expanse of our country.  Furthermore, NCAOR has a well-defined student participation programme that is widely advertised in schools/colleges that not only spread awareness about polar science but also prepare future polar researchers i.e. fulfil the aim of capacity-building.  Other researchers may be attracted towards polar science through guest lectures by eminent polar scientists & through collaborations with international polar institutes. 


