





COMNAP's 20 years: a new constitution and a new way of working to continue supporting science and the Antarctic Treaty system




COMNAP's 20 years: 
a New Constitution and a New Way of Working to Continue Supporting Science and the Antarctic Treaty System
Information Paper submitted by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
to ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, USA, April 2009) under agenda item 4 “Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System / Reports by Parties, Observers and Experts” 
Abstract
Created in 1988, COMNAP has adopted for its 20th anniversary a new constitution and a new way of working. 
The new constitution clarifies and reasserts COMNAP's purpose, to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic, and reasserts its close connection with the Antarctic Treaty. 
The new way of working should put COMNAP in a better position to address new, upcoming challenges. In particular, COMNAP has recognised a greater need for collaborative support to science, and is addressing it.
COMNAP has progressively assumed a number of practical tasks and functions previously handled by the Treaty Parties directly or by other organisations, and sometimes still formally assigned to those through ATCM measures still in force. In particular, COMNAP maintains a range of information of practical use to many in the Antarctic Treaty System, and which include and go beyond the range of information that Parties are required to exchange. 
COMNAP Origins
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) was formally created on 15 September 1988 to bring together the Managers of National Antarctic Programs, that is the national officials responsible for planning and conducting their nations' presence in the Antarctic on behalf of their respective governments, all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.  
Until then, Managers of National Antarctic Programs (MNAPs) only met within the structure of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR – a non-governmental organisation), and also on the margins of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs). 
The National Antarctic Programs (NAPs) have their foundation in the early expeditions sent to explore, map and study Antarctica in the 19th and early 20th centuries and, more importantly, in the national scientific expeditions of the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957-58.
The early expedition already fostered and relied on international collaboration, as illustrated by the first two winter expeditions: on board the Belgica (1897-1899) under Belgian Adrien de Gerlache and at Cape Adare (1898-1900) under Norwegian Carsten Borchgrevink.  These first two wintering parties involved 29 men from 9 different nations, all of which remain active in the Antarctic. Three National Antarctic Program stations in operation today are named after 3 of these 29 men: Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen (station Amundsen-Scott), Polish geologist, oceanographer and meteorologist Henryk Arctowski (station Arctowski) and Romanian biologist, zoologist and biospeleologist Emil Racoviţă  (station Law-Racovita).
The International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957-58 saw international collaboration reach new heights with 12 nations coordinating a range of large research programmes across many scientific disciplines, supported by 57 stations (including 6 in the sub-Antarctic), new technologies and significant use of air transport and logistics.
COMNAP has its roots in this long-standing tradition of multilingual, international collaboration in the planning and conduct of Antarctic scientific expeditions.
COMNAP's 20 years 
COMNAP just celebrated its 20th anniversary. 
It has now grown into an international organisation bringing together the National Antarctic Programs from 29 Antarctic Treaty Parties from Africa (1), the Americas (8), Asia (4), Australasia (2) and Europe (14). New Antarctic Programs from Belarus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Romania and Venezuela have established contact with COMNAP and could join in the near future, bringing the total to 34 members. 
COMNAP has become an active, recognised member of the Antarctic Treaty System. It has the status of Observer at both Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) and meetings of the Antarctic Treaty's Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) where it provides practical, technical advice drawn from  the National Antarctic Programs' pool of expertise.
It has produced and maintains a range of practical information and products, including the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) and the Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM). It has developed practices that improve the effectiveness of Antarctic activities in an environmentally responsible manner, and has produced a range of best practice advice and guidelines. 
It has promoted and facilitated international partnerships at various levels and in different ways, in particular through providing a forum in which national managers could meet and develop bilateral and multilateral collaborations as needed. 
It has maintained a close relationship with the Scientific Committee on Antarctica (SCAR), in particular through close liaison and regular meetings between both organisations' executive committees. 
A New Constitution
For its 20th anniversary, COMNAP adopted at COMNAP XX (St Petersburg, Russia, 29 June to 04 July 2008) a new, simple and clear constitution.  
It clarifies and reasserts COMNAP's purpose as:
To develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in Antarctica, by
    • Serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner;
    • Facilitating and promoting international partnerships;
    • Providing opportunities and systems for information exchange; and
    • Providing the Antarctic Treaty System with objective and practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' pool of expertise. 
It also confirms COMNAP's close connection with the Antarctic Treaty by reasserting the long-standing principles that:
    • COMNAP membership is only open to those with national responsibility for managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area on behalf of their respective governments, which must have signed the Antarctic Treaty and ratified its Protocol on Environmental Protection; and
    • COMNAP like the ATCM generally follows the  principle of consensus, as the way to reach an opinion or position developed by a group as a whole. 
The new COMNAP constitution (Annex A) provides renewed guidance and will assist in developing a number of strategic objectives. 
A New Way of Working 
In conjunction with the new Constitution, COMNAP adopted in St Petersburg a new way of working so that it will be better placed to address new, upcoming challenges. 
COMNAP will now be a more strategic, project-oriented organisation, defining a small number of strategic projects and each time finding the best people to deliver a result within a defined, limited timeframe.
We no longer operate through a range of formal Working Groups, Committees and Networks with their large membership of national representatives. The valuable communication channels with, and between, experts in each field are maintained through simple topic-based mailing lists and new information sharing systems.   
COMNAP Annual General Meetings will become shorter and more focused, with the plenary given targeted presentations on strategic projects and topics, followed by discussions and consideration of relevant proposals put forward by the project teams.
Development and implementation of this new way of working is in progress. 
Supporting Science
What National Antarctic Program managers have in common is their national responsibility to manage the support of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area on behalf of their government and in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.  This is what brings them together in COMNAP and, hence, what they want to help each other with.   
These managers organise and, for most of them, fund the support to research projects that have been evaluated and selected at national level. Selection is based on the quality and relevance of the science, but also on the extent and availability of the resources required for the project, and on national strategic priorities. Most of these managers have a key role in the decision process about the science that can and will actually be supported. 
Two key aspects of COMNAP's purpose are of particular relevance to this:
    • Improving the effectiveness of [National Antarctic Program's] activities: being more efficient within a country means more science with the same budget;
    • Facilitating and promoting international partnerships: more international collaboration means less duplication and more science with the same global budget.
Increased ambitions – in particular in relation to climate change research, different and more sophisticated science and more demanding environmental measures contribute to added pressure on National Antarctic Programs, and to an even greater need for international collaboration. This may not have been noticed so much yet with the considerable extra funding that National Programs had managed to secure for the International Polar Year (IPY). But IPY is now coming to an end, and now comes the challenge of how to deal with its legacy.
Undoubtedly, all good quality science projects deserve to be supported but neither the money nor the infrastructure will always be available to support them. 
The national managers' decision process will become more and more critical. And it will need to take into account more and more what resources are needed for a project, and what resources can be pooled and shared with others if the project can be modified or associated with projects in other countries.
COMNAP has recognised a greater need for collaborative support, and is addressing it. The new way of working is an important component of this. Related strategic work is under way. It includes a review and assessment of options and possible mechanisms for bilateral and multilateral partnerships between National Antarctic Programs, and a similar review and assessment with SCAR of possible new mechanisms for collaboration between the two organisations.    
Supporting the Antarctic Treaty System
Just three years before the creation of COMNAP, the XIIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XIII, Brussels, Belgium, 08-18 Oct 1985) in Recommendation XIII-2 Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Overview had recommended that an item “Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports” be included on the Agenda of each subsequent Consultative Meeting under which reports [would] be received from the components of the system. The recommendation provided a list of these components of the system and introduced the category of observers for two organisations: the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).  
Following its creation in 1988, COMNAP started contributing positively to the Antarctic Treaty System and in 1991 was given the status of Observer alongside CCAMLR and SCAR.
At the Preparatory Meeting held in Bonn in April 1991 to prepare ATCM XVI, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties invited the Chairman of COMNAP to present a report on the activities of COMNAP under agenda item 5 (a) of the provisional agenda of ATCM XVI, to be held in Bonn, Germany, 07-18 Oct 1991 (refer ATCM XVI final report, paragraph 4).  This agenda item 5 (a) was explicitly to deal with reports to be provided under Recommendation XIII-2.  
ATCM XVI recognised the important role of COMNAP in examining and solving practical problems relating to the implementation of scientific activities and their associated logistics and agreed that COMNAP should be invited in future to participate on the same basis as SCAR under Recommendation XIII-2 (refer ATCM XVI final report, paragraphs 23-24). This added COMNAP as one of the components of the [Antarctic Treaty] system called under Recommendation XIII-2 to provide reports to the ATCM. This is reflected in the ATCM Rules of Procedure (refer ATCM Revised Rules of Procedure (2008), paragraphs 2 and 31-35).  
COMNAP has since 1991 remained committed to serve its role in the Antarctic Treaty System and in the protection of the Antarctic environment by providing objective and practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' pool of expertise.
COMNAP has also progressively assumed a number of practical tasks and functions that previously were, or would have been, undertaken by Treaty Parties directly or by other organisations. A case in point is its role as repository for some of the information which the Treaty Parties are required to exchange under Article VII of the Treaty and related provisions. Information in such fields such as air safety and telecommunications, which is still formally included in current ATCM measures, is no longer exchanged between the Parties directly, but is actually collected and maintained – with updated specifications – through the COMNAP mechanisms. 
COMNAP developed and maintains the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM – as per 1989's ATCM Recommendation XV-20 Air Safety in Antarctica) and the Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM), both of which include and go beyond the range of information that Parties are required to exchange under a number of Treaty provisions, in particular under Resolution 6 (2001).   
COMNAP maintains a range of practical information about National Antarctic Program stations, camps, refuges and ships which again include and go beyond the information that Parties are required to exchange under the Treaty. Close cooperation over the last few years between the Antarctic Treaty and COMNAP secretariats has resulted in a coordinated development of both sides' information systems with a view to avoiding duplication. It will be possible for Parties, with just a few clicks, to export relevant information maintained on the COMNAP systems to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat systems for the purpose of meeting their exchange of information obligations under the Antarctic Treaty.  
Following discussions at ATCM XXV (Warsaw 2002), COMNAP agreed to compile [...] information on Antarctic bases [in the format of the inspection checklists] (refer ATCM XXV final report, paragraphs 123-124). COMNAP is contributing actively to the current review by the ATCM of this checklist, including with a view to finalising the format in which it will compile this information. This is so that it can be consistent with information that is already collected, or that needs to be exchanged under the Treaty. 
Conclusion
Created in 1988, COMNAP has adopted for its 20th anniversary a new constitution and a new way of working. 
The new constitution clarifies and reasserts COMNAP's purpose, to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic, and reasserts its close connection with the Antarctic Treaty. It provides renewed guidance and will assist in developing a number of strategic objectives. 
The new way of working should put COMNAP in a better position to address new, upcoming challenges. In particular, COMNAP has recognised a greater need for collaborative support to science, and is addressing it.
COMNAP formally became a component of the Antarctic Treaty System in 1991 and has ever since remained committed to serve its role in the Treaty System by providing objective and practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' pool of expertise.
COMNAP has also progressively assumed a number of practical tasks and functions that previously were, or would have been, undertaken by the Treaty Parties directly or by other organisations. Some of these tasks and functions remain formally assigned to those through various ATCM measures that are still current. 
In particular, COMNAP maintains a range of information of practical use to many in the Antarctic Treaty System, and which include and go beyond a range of information that Parties are required to exchange under the Treaty. Every effort is made to ensure this information can easily be used by the Parties to fulfil their information exchange requirements.  
Annex A: COMNAP Constitution (as adopted 04 July 2008)

Preamble
Supporting Science
What member National Antarctic Programs have in common is their national responsibility to manage the support of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
Consistent with this, COMNAP's primary mission is to  develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. 
Supporting the Antarctic Treaty System
COMNAP is committed to serve its role in the Antarctic Treaty System and in the protection of the Antarctic environment by providing objective and practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' pool of expertise.

COMNAP Origins
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) was formally created on 15 September 1988 to bring together the Managers of National Antarctic Programs, the officials responsible for carrying out national activity in the Antarctic on behalf of their governments - all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. 
Until then, Managers of National Antarctic Programs only met informally on the margins of other meetings that they attended:  meetings of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR – a non-governmental organisation), and Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs). 
Some of their staff members were members of the SCAR Working Group on Logistics, which was then transformed into the Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) -  a group that had a special status as it was under the authority of both COMNAP and SCAR. 
COMNAP maintains a special, complementary relationship with SCAR. The Executives of both organisations meet annually and both organisations attempt to coordinate their bi-annual meetings so as to facilitate cross-participation in both meetings.
COMNAP immediately started contributing positively to the Antarctic Treaty System and was very quickly formally recognised as a valuable member of the Treaty System. It was invited to provide a report to the ATCM as early as 1991 (XVI ATCM, Bonn, Germany, 07-18 Oct 1991). XVI ATCM recognised the important role of COMNAP in examining and solving practical problems relating to the implementation of scientific activities and their associated logistics (refer XVI ATCM final report, paragraph 23).  Since then, COMNAP has had the status of observer at ATCMs. 

Constitution
1   General
1.1   Each signatory to the Antarctic Treaty normally establishes a “National Antarctic Program”. The National Antarctic Program is defined as the entity with national responsibility for managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area on behalf of its government and in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.
1.2   Those National Antarctic Programs can choose to become a member of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs, hereafter referred to as COMNAP.
1.3   Ultimate decision power on COMNAP matters rests with the assembly of the “Managers of National Antarctic Programs” (MNAPs) which meets  in an Annual General Meeting (AGM) at a location agreed at a previous AGM. Each member National Antarctic Program has one vote at the AGM. 
1.4   Decision making at COMNAP generally follows the principle of consensus, in its meaning of an opinion or position reached by a group as a whole. It is not intended as a de-facto right of veto given to every member. 
1.5   MNAPs elect one COMNAP Chair and one or more COMNAP Vice-Chairs as specified in the Rules of Procedure.
1.6   A COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) is constituted by the Chair and Vice-Chair(s), and any other persons as specified in the COMNAP Rules of Procedure. EXCOM members shall all be representatives from different member National Antarctic Programs, reflecting COMNAP's diversity and range of expertise. 
1.7   The COMNAP Chair, with the support and advice of EXCOM, chairs the AGM and takes responsibility for COMNAP matters between AGMs .
1.8   COMNAP functions under the general principles of a not-for profit organisation and, for all intents and purposes, subjects itself to normal international principles and standards for organisations like COMNAP. 
1.9   COMNAP is domiciled at its Secretariat. 
2   Purpose
2.1   The purpose of COMNAP is to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in Antarctica, by
    • Serving as a forum to develop practices that improve  effectiveness of  activities in an environmentally responsible manner;
    • Facilitating and promoting  international partnerships;
    • Providing opportunities and systems for information exchange; and
    • Providing the Antarctic Treaty System with objective and practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from  the National Antarctic Programs' pool of expertise. 
3   Membership 
3.1   Membership of COMNAP is open to National Antarctic Programs, as defined in paragraph 1.1, not to individuals.
3.2   Membership of COMNAP is open to National Antarctic Programs from nations whose governments are signatories to the Antarctic Treaty and have ratified its Protocol on Environmental Protection. There can be only one member National Antarctic Program per nation. 
3.3   Members must comply with this constitution and the Rules of Procedure.
3.4   While structures can differ widely from country to country, what characterises and unifies member National Antarctic Programs is their national responsibility to manage the support of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
3.5   Each member National Antarctic Program is represented on COMNAP by a lead national agency.
3.6   Whenever this lead agency has a broader mission, only those parts of the organisation that have this national responsibility  are considered part of the “National Antarctic Program” member of COMNAP. 
3.7   Whenever this national responsibility is divided between several national organisations, the lead agency will, as appropriate, organise for relevant parts of the other national organisations to participate in the work of COMNAP  under its authority and responsibility. 
4   Secretariat
4.1   A COMNAP Secretariat serves and supports the functional needs of COMNAP and is accountable to the COMNAP Chair
4.2  The COMNAP Secretariat  is subject to the laws and regulations of the country it is domiciled in.
5   COMNAP Finances
5.1   The income of COMNAP is obtained from the following:
    • an equal annual contribution (“membership fee”) from each of its member National Antarctic Programs, as determined by the MNAPs at an AGM;
    • any additional, voluntary contributions from member National Antarctic Programs; 
    • any  grants from external bodies, as and if agreed by the MNAPs at an AGM.
5.2   COMNAP funds are intended to support the internal work of COMNAP to support its activities and purpose. The level of the annual contribution should be kept under regular review to ensure it best meets the needs of COMNAP and provides best value to members. 
5.3   The COMNAP budget  is approved by the MNAPs at each AGM.
6   Representation of COMNAP
6.1   The COMNAP Chair is the official representative of COMNAP.  If unavailable one of the Vice-Chairs or another representative agreed by EXCOM will represent COMNAP. 
7   Preamble and Rules of Procedure
7.1   A Preamble and Rules of Procedure complement this constitution but are not part of it. Both are subject to the rules, principles and intent of this constitution, and can be separately amended by the MNAPS at an AGM as and when required. Any new version takes effect at the time it is approved and supersedes any previous version.
8   Modification of this COMNAP Constitution
8.1   This COMNAP Constitution may be modified by agreement of the MNAPs at an AGM. 



