





Microbiological monitoring of the expedition infrastructure facilities in the Antarctic




Microbiological monitoring of the expedition infrastructure facilities in the Antarctic
As a result of current biological studies, it was determined that green plants comprise the main mass of living organisms on land  equaling 2.4 × 1012 tons or 99.2% of all biomass. The continental animals and microorganisms comprise 0.02×1012 tons or 0.8%. In the ocean, this proportion dramatically changes: the biomass of plants is equal to 0.0002×1012 tons or 6.3%, and animals and microorganisms – to 0.003×1012 tons or 93.7%. The Antarctic is at a first glance an exception from this rule. Flora and fauna directly at the Antarctic continent are at the limit of existence. There is no vegetation cover in Antarctica in the usual understanding. Flora is represented by different species of moss, lichen and algae and fauna – by very small arthropods, worms and protozoa. An exceptional depletion of biocenoses of Antarctica is in sharp contrast with the immense richness of biocenoses of the Southern Ocean waters surrounding the continent. In any other Earth’s regions there is no such a sharp contrast at transfer of the life forms from terrestrial to oceanic.
The microbiological diversity of Antarctica and waters of the Southern Ocean has been very sparsely studied even at the beginning of the 21st century. Unicellular organisms represented by bacteria, microscopic fungi, algae, protozoa and archaea belong to this life form. Absence of permanent population and terrestrial mammals, any forms of industry and agriculture in Antarctica have created at the beginning of the second part of the 20th century a view of this continent as the most sterile Earth’s area. At many Antarctic stations, cases of virus diseases of personnel were registered directly during the period of rotation of the wintering expedition teams or arrival of seasonal researchers and other temporary visitors from the other continents. It was believed for a long time that people, some foods and expedition equipment delivered to the Antarctic from the other continents serve as carriers of pathogenic forms of microorganisms, which produce an active influence on people who have lost their immunity as a result of staying in Antarctica for many months. Severe natural-climatic conditions had a destructive impact on all alien microorganisms introduced to Antarctica, killing them and not assisting in their breeding.
AT ATCM XXIX in Edinburgh in 2006, the Russian Delegation presented the IP 72 “Monitoring of pathogenic microbiota in the Antarctic”, which described the preliminary results of microbiological studies carried out at different Antarctic stations on King George Island. It was indicated that inside the working-living premises of some stations, colonies of pathogenic forms of fungi, hazardous for man health were found. Probably, constant routes of arrival of personnel of these stations from urbanized complexes located at the other Earth’s continents to this Antarctic region were a source of supplementing these microbial communities, whereas the habitat conditions of these microorganisms inside the station quarters contributed to their development and even reproduction. Some other variant of the development of this process is also not excluded, when strict conditions of survival in the Antarctic result in mutation of some species of pathogenic microbes, cultivating additional properties in them for survival under these conditions. These studies opened a new stage of microbiological work in the Antarctic expeditions aimed to monitor the investigations of micro-biotic communities and applied medicine for protection of health of personnel at the stations. 
This new direction of studies was continued in the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) in the summer seasons of 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09. They were carried out at all Russian coastal Antarctic stations (Bellingshausen, Novolazarevskaya, Progress and Mirny, at the nearby stations of the Antarctic expeditions of other countries, onboard the expedition vessel “Akademik Fedorov” and at the seasonal bases Russkaya and Leningradskaya that were reactivated after a long interruption). The latter bases were closed by the Soviet Antarctic Expedition in 1990 and 1991, respectively, and were visited again by RAE participants in January-February 2008. These both stations are located in the Pacific Ocean sector of the Antarctic that are difficult for access due to ice navigation conditions. Whereas Leningradskaya station was visited several times in the period 1991 to 2008 by some national and non-governmental expeditions of other countries, there were no visitors to Russkaya station for the entire indicated period. The micro-biological sampling at all Antarctic working-living facilities and in the surrounding landscape compartments was performed for further analyses both by methods of classical microbiology (growing of microbiological cultures in different culture media), and for application of methods of molecular biology. 
The results of laboratory analyses showed that in different zones of working-living premises of the seasonal field bases Russkaya and Leningradskaya, several bacterial species were isolated with some of them belonging to a category of pathogenic bacteria. The question how these bacteria preserve viability under the conditions of closed stations remains open. At least, for one of the species of isolated bacteria it has been known for quite a long time that it is not capable to grow at the change of temperatures. This indicates that this species of bacteria cannot be a natural part of Antarctic micro-biota. It is probably a peculiar contaminant, which was introduced by investigator during sampling, or preserved its viability during the entire time the station was abandoned. This question can be answered only by additional studies.
An analysis of the results with application of both microbiological methods of studies allowed us to construct a phylogenetic tree of microbiota, which shows that among the bacteria studied, two branches: beta- and alpha-Protobacteriae are most fully represented. In both cases, the representatives of these groups were detected in all samples studied, except for those collected onboard the ship “Akademik Fedorov”. An obvious wide spreading of bacteria of these groups in the Antarctic specimens can signify that they are part of the endemic micro-flora. It is also possible that their wide spreading can be a result of air transports. The revealed pathogenic forms of bacteria on King George Island and at Russkaya station cannot be identified by the same origin. While on King George Island they are an evident result of the anthropogenic environmental impact and are introduced from the areas outside the Antarctic, we cannot make such a conclusion at present at Russkaya station, being restricted to information that this species of bacteria has adapted to the environmental conditions.
Understanding that the ATCM is not a scientific forum for discussing different results of research studies, we present this information only with the purpose of drawing attention of the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to the new most important problem of investigations and activities that are beyond the framework of purely scientific research and organization issues of bio-prospecting and can significantly influence the conditions of safety of life activity of personnel of the Antarctic expeditions.



