





The management of Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea) area: an ASPA or an ASMA?




The management of Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea) area: an ASPA or an ASMA?


CEP Information paper submitted by Italy


Introduction

Terra Nova Bay and its surroundings are areas with high scientific values that have to be protected. Activities in the area have to be managed.

The area here taken into account could have an amplitude variable between 2000 and 5000 square meter. Figure 1

The overall area taken into consideration includes parts which have been already the object of environment conservation actions and areas which have not, but deserve a like attention. The first are: Terra Nova Bay Protected Area (ASPA 161),  Edmonson Point (ASPA 165), Mt Melbourne (ASPA 118).  The others include  Inexpressible Island  (South of Terra Nova Bay), Cape Washington and  Silver Fish Bay (North of Mario Zucchelli Station) and Key Island (North of Edmonson Point, inside of Wood Bay). It includes also a wide marine area which extends for about 30 km into the Ross Sea. 

All the area has high naturalistic significance and educational values. However scientific activities, logistic activities and tourism in the area are increasing. Therefore it is imperative for the next future to implement a balanced management of the different activities. That could be accomplished by the establishment of a suitable number of  Protected Areas (ASPAs) and one or more Specially Managed Areas (ASMA).

For any scientific research being planned or undertaken within the area is important to evaluate the long term environmental changes in the region and how these are in relation with global changes, in particular in regard to the effect of climate changes. 

This research is relevant to the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole.

There is a potential risk for the scientific research when the activities occur in the area not appropriately managed, Marine harvest is not normally carried out in the area while on the other side the marine component of the area represent only the 2-4  % of the CCAMLR Subarea 88.1. In any case it is important that the harvesting activities undertaken into the area be carried out in such a way  that they would not impact on the scientific value and pristine conditions of the area.
Recently, i.e. during the XXVII CCAMLR, it has been proposed to split 88.1J subarea (that includes entirely the Ross Sea) into two parts: East and West; to prohibit fishing in West proposing the area of Terra Nova Bay as an SSRU (small scale research unit). The SSRU proposal for Terra Nova Bay is consequent to a wider proposal for a Ross Sea Marine Protected Area (MPA or SPA) that should include entirely the portions 88.1J and 88.1 H. This would be important with the scope to have a true protection of the marine resources referred to by MPA’s no. 105, 106, 121, 124, 161 and 165.


Scientific value

The whole Terra Nova Bay and Wood Bay area (immediately at North of Terra Nova Bay) are particularly valuable for science due to the extraordinary presence of marine and terrestrial flora and fauna, with a database on their living resources running since 20 years. Extensive marine ecological research has been carried out at Terra Nova Bay since the middle of the eighties contributing substantially to our understanding of communities which had not been previously well-described. High diversity at both species level and community level gives this area a high ecological and scientific value.

The presence of a population of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Adelie Cove (also known as Penguin Bay) allows the assessment of the effects of this colony on the adjacent marine environment (Povero et al., 2001).

At Edmonson Point, the geographical position, the terrain and habitat of the site and the natural protection given by the summer fast ice extension and the distance from Mario Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay make Edmonson Point particularly suitable for the research on these birds.

Studies have been carried out on a variety of topics including long term monitoring of seal, penguins and bird populations also in the Wood Bay and Edmonson Point area (Corsolini S. and Tremont R. 1997, Olmastroni et al 1998, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004) 

The area includes only one permanent summer Station, the Italian Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS) and the German Station Gondwana, inhabited now and then. However within this area several researches have been carried out in different fields by a wide range of Antarctic Treaty Parties, also in collaboration with Italian scientists. In addition it should be mentioned that at Edmonson Point is located a permanent field camp that can host from four to eight scientists. Edmonson Point is also a well known  CEMP (CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme) site.

An example of scientific research performed in the proposed ASPA/ASMA area is the project on Long Term Ecological Research that includes Terra Nova Bay since 2006 into the national network LTER-Italy.
The project is integrated in the international project Latitudinal Gradient Project (LGP) coordinated by New Zealand. It includes Terra Nova Bay costal ecosystem into the historical Long Term Monitoring.

The coast of Victoria Land (Ross Sea), including the Ice Shelf section south of McMurdo Sound, extends across nearly 18 degrees of latitude, from Cape Adare at 68° S to La Gorce Mountains at 86° S. It represents the largest range of latitudes  along the Antarctic coastline that can be studied consistently with the logistics of national programs. The Ross Sea Region contains a number of environmental (ecological) spectra relating to cold, aridity, solar radiation, UV, light/dark conditions and highly variable sea ice dynamics including a major polynya. The land and coast within the Ross Dependency across this wide latitudinal range includes a variety of marine, terrestrial and freshwater habitats., Some of these system are unique to the Antarctic. (Cattaneo-Vietti,; Workshop LGP, Report, Siena, Italy, July 2000)

Another scientific Project known as “Terra Nova Bay ASPA Marine Observatory (MOA-TNB)” joins inside of the project LTER-Italy and proposes the constitution of an marine coastal observatory for the collection and successive marine environmental information processing for a corrected management of the ASPA 161.

Flora and fauna values

Wood Bay and Terra Nova Bay areas are among the most biologically and ecologically diverse in Antarctica  with many species of bryophytes, lichens, birds, marine mammals and invertebrates.
These organisms are present on both marine and terrestrial ecosystems and the whole ASPA/ASMA area produces a clear influence on regional ecological processes.
Breeding colonies of birds and seals are present on ice-free areas along the coast of Edmonson Point, Adelie Cove and Inexpressible Island, while emperor penguins are present onto the ice at Cape Washington.
Weddell  seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) are commonly found in the Area

South polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) breed within the Area with one of the most numerous colony of the Victoria Land. 

Flocks of snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) have been observed flying over the Area, and Wilson’s storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) have been sighted regularly. The second of these latter two species is known to breed within the Area. 

At least six moss species, one liverwort, and about 30 lichen species have been recorded within the single area of Edmonson Point. Recent analyses have identified at least 120 alga and cyanobacteria species present in the same area.

No area in the Ross Sea region, apart from Cape Hallett, has a comparable abundance of plants as Edmonson Point (Greenfield et. al.,  1985) although in 1996 an extensive area colonised almost exclusively by Bryum subrotundifolium (= B. argenteum) was discovered on Beaufort Island (ASPA No. 105), approximately 280 km to the south of Edmonson Point.

Around Edmonson Point the moss-dominated communities comprise up to seven bryophyte species, several algae and cyanobacteria and, at the driest end of the moisture gradient, several lichens are found encrusting moribund moss (Lewis Smith, 1999; Bargagli et al., 1999).
The lichen communities are relatively diverse, with 24 species identified and at least six crustose species so far unidentified, although few are abundant (Lewis Smith 1999; personal communication 2004)

Invertebrates

Numerous invertebrates, such as the polychaete Harmothoe brevipalpa, the mollusc Laevilittorina antarctica, the crustacean amphipod Paramoera walkeri and the isopod Nototanais dimorphus can be very abundant. The soft bottoms in the depth range from 20 to 40 meters are mostly coarse sands and gravels, where the community is characterised by the mollusc bivalve Laternula elliptica and the polychaete Aglaophamus ornatus (Nephtiidae). Between 30–70 m, the substrate becomes finer and is completely colonised by the bivalve Adamussium colbecki. Below 70 m and down to 120–130 m the benthic communities are dominated by the sessile zoobenthos mainly characterised by sponges and anthozoans, which can reach very high biomass values.  The conspicuous sponge spicule mats found at these depths underline the outstanding role of sponges in this area, besides the one played by diatoms, in determining the sediment texture and silica content.  A peculiar community, dominated by polychaetes and by the bivalve Limatula hodgsoni, can be associated with these mats. Much deeper, at about 150-200 m depth, brachiopods and various species of bivalves characterise the environment on small gravels as well as on the soft bottom. The large heterogeneity of these substrates contributes to the creation of communities with considerable species richness, diversity and biomass.
In this region, large predators such as the gastropod Neobuccinum eatoni and the nemertean Parborlasia corrugatus are frequent.  The echinoid Sterechinus neumayeri and the starfish Odontaster validus are still very frequent at all depths on both hard and mobile substrates (Chiantore et al., 2002; Cerrano et al., 2000b).

Finally, the faunal assemblage of the Area includes notothenioid fishes, represented especially by species of the Trematomus group, including T. bernacchi, T. pennelli, T. hansoni and T. loennbergii. 
These exert an important role in benthic food webs as consumers of many invertebrate species, mainly crustaceans and polychaetes (Vacchi et al., 1991; 1992; 1994a; 1994b; 1995; 1997; 2000b; La Mesa et al., 1996; 1997; 2000; Guglielmo et al., 1998).

For all the evidence which has been underlined above, it is quite understandable how idea to propose an attention area came out from just observing the exceptional environmental wealth of the area.

The aim of any management action should be to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of Terra Nova  region by coordinating the variety of activities and interests in the Area. The Area would require a special management to ensure that important values are protected and sustained in the long-term, specially the extensive scientific data sets collected over the last decades. Increasing human activity and potentially conflicting interests make it more necessary to manage and coordinate activities now.

Two different scenarios can be hypothesized.

1.	A set of several ASPAs  could be proposed

Differents ASPAs could be created or proposed in different times in the whole considered area. Considering the just existing marine ASPAs and ASPAs with marine component, in the  mentioned areas ( Terra Nova Bay, 161 and 165 ASPAs and Terra Victoria Area 105, 106, 121, 124 ASPAs). Others P.A. to propose could be taken into account as Kay Island, Cape Washington, Silver Fish Bay, Inexpressible Island.(fig 2). 

a)	Kay Island (coordinates 74° 05’ S, 165°20’ E) is situated to the North of Edmnson Point inside the Bay that is named Wood Bay (Fig.3). It is a particular site from geographical point of view. It  is encircled by ice that very rarely is melted. There is very high albedo effect there and during the summer it is possible to find temperatures near 10 degrees.
It has not a different biodiversity than other sites in the area, but there is high biomass, there is high growing of mosses and the rocks are covered by lichens, common lichens but very abundant and the growing is sometimes spectacular.
Another particularity is that Kay Island is an important skuas and snow petrel reproduction site and again more important is that the site is a perhaps the unique reproduction site for the Wilson petrels ( a petrel with a black wings and white breast)  rare in the Terra Victoria.

b)	Cape Washington (coordinates  74° 39’ S, 165°25’ E ) is situated not farther than 30 Km to the North of the Italian Base (Fig.4 and 5). It is a particular site for the presence of the biggest emperor penguin colony of the area and the coast immediately at north is a important breeding site for Weddell seals. Along the cost of Cape Washington there is a passage line for the Killer Whale that through  Terra Nova Bay go until Mc Murdo Sound.
An aerial survey on cetacean species, conducted in the coastal area surrounding the Italian Station Mario Zucchelli in summer  2004, showed the presence of Killer Whale (Orcinus orca (L.), types B and C and Minke Whale (Balaenoptera bonaerensis Burmeister). (Lauriano et al., 2007a; 2007b; Lauriano pers.com.) 

c)	Silverfish Bay (coordinates of triangle in fig 6. West of Shield Nunatak  74°34.1’S  164° 30’ E, Oscar Point  74° 35.4’ S  164° 55. 2’ E,  Tip of Ice Tongue 74°41.1516’S  164° 33. 012’E). It is a coastal handle of sub-triangular form of approximately 78 km2 of extension; the surface almost is totally covered by multi-annual marine ice until 3 meters of thickness; the depths of sea turn out very deep but a bathymetry of the locality does not exist.
The denomination of the area is relative to the abundant presence of eggs and larvaes of “Silverfish” (Pleuragramma antarcticum), a fish species which is a key in the Antarctic trophic network.
The platelet ice occurring at Terra  Nova Bay in early spring has been shown to house an important nursery for the Antarctic silverfish, Pleuragramma  antarcticum, a key organism in the ecology of Antarctic food webs (La Mesa et al., 2004; Vacchi et al., 2004). The platelet ice environment has strong prooxidant characteristics at the beginning of austral spring, and the marked responsiveness of antioxidant defences represents a fundamental strategy for  P. antarcticum. The elevated prooxidant challenge, to which these organisms are naturally adapted, also influences the susceptibility of P. antarcticum toward prooxidant chemicals of anthropogenic origin (Regoli et al., 2005b). 
The exceptional scientific importance of this area for the management of the Ecosystem of the Sea of Ross required therefore the creation of a suitable protected area.
Silverfish is a species key for the alimentary network of Antarctica. It is the food for penguins, seals, cetaceans, and many other marine organisms; the protection of their  reproductive cycle is crucial for the entire Antarctic marine ecosystem.

d)	Inexpressible Island (coordinates 74°54’ S, 163°39’ E) is situated about 30 Km on South from Italian scientific Base of MZS (Fig. 7 and 8).
Inexpressible island penguin colonies consists of 25000 nests and it appears directly on an area of opened sea, the polynya of the Terra Nova Bay, maintained free from the marine ice (pack) for all the year from strong katabatic winds. 
The birds that nest to Inexpressible Island therefore can feed themselves inside of the polynya or to swim far away towards the continental platform for collect amounts more abundant of Krill. With the scope to compare the feeding and the ecology of the penguins in the two colonies Inexpressible Island and Edmonson Point, just ASPA n°165, the feeding areas and the biology reproduction were been studied during the phases of incubation guard, crèche and fledging. 
The results show not substantial variations in the feeding produced by the greater ice presence and by open sea and the penguins of Inexpressible Island seem nourished better through better quality of fish. Therefore the differences seem have a corrispondence with the typology of the ice. These areas could have unlike topographical characteristic of the sea bottom and different covering of the ice that support up-welling phenomena  and of concentration of the preys.


2)	An ASMA could be proposed 

The ASMA should include all the areas mentioned above as single ASPAs.

For these areas (namely Kay Island, Cape Washington, Silverfish Bay, Inexpressible Island) special measures would be demanded in order to assure their protection. In side of the Management Plan for the ASMA should be defined “Restricted and Managed Zones that include Facilities Zones containing primary areas of human activity , tourism zones if appropriated, containing areas where tourism activity can occur, and Special Features that are established to provide additional protection for environmental features of special value.

Through the guidelines for Special Features, it should be possible to limit many activities, suggesting specific and weighted activities for each point.
All the marine parts of the area (ASMA) would be placed under special control excluding the sole activity of research and maintaining an open corridor for the logistic activities of the Italian base (Mario Zucchelli Station) and the German Station (Gondwana). Besides it would be possible also to limit or to forbid the commercial fishing by, either proposing a Small Scales Research Unit (SSRU) or by supporting the hypothesis for a SSRU, as recommended to the Scientific Commission CCMLAR  November 2008,  by the Fish Stock Assessment working group (FSA) for Western Ross Sea most internal area including Mc Murdo Sound and Terra Nova Bay. The SSRU would take into account the special vulnerability of the area particularly considering that it is a migration area of the Tootfish. This fish, in order to reach the reproduction zones situated to the north,  passes through Terra Nova Bay.

Advantage for the establishment of an ASMA

The whole area (2500-5000 Km2) could be subjected, at one blow, to special protection.

Aims and objectives

The aim of this ASMA and its management plan should be to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of the Terra Nova Bay region by managing the variety of activities and interests in the area. The area requires special management to ensure that its important values are protected and sustained in the long-term, specially the extensive scientific data sets collected over the last 25 years. Increasing human activity and potentially conflicting interests have made it necessary to manage and coordinate activities more effectively within the area.
In particular the general objectives can be resumed as follow:

    • avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance to the area. 
    • allow scientific research on the ecosystem, in particular on the marine species assemblages, while ensuring it is protected from over-sampling or other possible scientific impacts
    • maintain long-term monitoring sites to evaluate natural changes in marine and terrestrial  communities
    • monitor the effects of the research station and its associated activities on the marine ecosystem;
    • preserve a part of the natural ecosystem as a potential reference area for the purpose of future comparative studies
    • allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the Management Plan.
    • Facilitate scientific research while maintaining management of the environment
    • Ensure that any marine harvesting activities are coordinated with scientific research and other activities taking place within the area. This coordination could include the development of a plan for harvesting within the area in advance of any such activities taking place
    • Ensure the long term protection of scientific, ecological, and other values of the Area through the minimization of disturbance 

The use of a special code of conduct should permit the overall management and operational principles for the area.  Should be important that all persons visiting the  area with special protection be aware of guidelines  specified for the area.
In this code of conduct it should be underlined the limitation for access to and movement within the area, the activities that may be conducted in the Area, the various installations and structures localized in the area, including Bases, scientific or logistic field camps. Should be emphasize the extreme attention for the native species flora and fauna and take into account a special waste management plan.


Conclusion

The main objectives in proposing an ASMA is to maintain a wide and general vision as possible on the ecosystem along the coast between Terra Nova Bay and Wood Bay, in order to protect and manage the more sensitive areas.

One has to take into account that an ASPA of this size, instead of an ASMA, would be surely more binding from the point of view of the evaluation, description and characterization, for the exceptional scientific values that justify the complete protection of the areas of more elevated scientific interest and the marine and coastal area included in the management plan.

Nevertheless also the idea for some ASPAs with a corridor in order to allow the management of the Italian Base Mario Zucchelli and Gondwana Station, could find the general agreement. 

Actually it would be more practical to propose separately a few ASPAs that in this case would turn out more limited as to the size (coastal areas or at most areas with a marine component).  In a reasonable period of time they could be submitted to the ATCM and to CCAMLR to get approval.

However in this case the protection of the Ross Sea around Terra Nova Bay would be delegated to a further proposal for a marine protected area (MPA) (or SSRU), included in a wider MPA.

Moreover, be they an ASMA or some ASPAs to be proposed, they would have in any case a limited size and that could not prejudice the proposal for a wider regional MPA for the Ross Sea. 
 
In any case it is exceedingly worth doing to characterize the areas that are expected to be of great scientific interest and to protect the entire regional ecosystem that these areas  represent. At the same time we should maintain an usable area for the scientific research and the logistic activities at the scientific Bases present in the area.
It will also be of great interest that the ASPA/ASMA proposal can serve as a support to the setting up of a MPA in the Ross Sea. It certainly does not represent a threat to it.

Therefore, for all the matter discussed above, what we would propose can be  synthesized as follows.

Among the four areas indicated as particularly sensitive to the human disturbance and  activities and at the same time characterized by exceptional scientific values (Kay Island, Cape Washington, Silverfish Bay and Inexpressible Island) the first step  could be the proposal for the two ASPAs of Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay.

The areas comprise, in addition to the Emperor Penguin colony, the coastal zone of passage of the Killer Whales (just close to Cape Washington) and the Silverfish Bay itself. 

A following step could be the proposal for the ASPAs of Kay Island and Inexpressible Island. 

The first of the two areas is more isolated and less vulnerable by the human activities, while the second has been already widely studied and characterized in previous research projects and subjected sporadically to sightseeing that however will be coordinated, limited and possibly forbidden.



Biblography

Bargagli, R., Smith, R.I.L., Martella, L., Monaci, F., Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C. and Ugolini, F.C. 1999. Solution geochemistry and behaviour of major and trace elements during summer in a moss community at Edmonson Point, Victoria Land, Antarctica. Antarctic Science 11(1): 3-12.
Cerrano C., Bavestrello G., Calcinai B., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Sarà A., 2000b. Asteroids eating sponges from Tethys Bay, East Antarctica. Antarctic Science 12(4): 431-32.
Chiantore M., R. Cattaneo-Vietti, L. Elia, M. Guidetti, M. Antonini, 2002. Reproduction and condition of the scallop Adamussium colbecki (Smith 1902), the sea-urchin Sterechinus neumayeri (Meissner, 1900) and the sea-star Odontaster validus Koehler, 1911 at Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea): different strategies related to inter-annual variations in food availability. Polar Biology 22: 251-55.
Corsolini S. and Tremont R. 1997, Australia-Italy cooperation in Antarcitica: Adelie Penguin monitoring program, Edmonson Point, Ross sea region Newslette of the Italian Biological research in Antartctica 1 (Austral summer 1995-96). 59-64 Olmastroni S, Pezzo F, Bisogno I., Focardi S, 2004. Interannual variation in the summer diet of Adélie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae at Edmonson Point . WG-EMM04/ 38.
Greenfield, L.G., Broady, P.A., Given, D.R., Codley, E.G. and Thompson, K. 1985. Immediate science report of NZARP Expedition K053 to RDRC. Botanical and biological studies in Victoria Land and Ross Island, during 1984–85.
Guglielmo L., Granata A., Greco S., 1998. Distribution and abundance of postlarval and juvenile Pleuragramma antarticum (Pisces, Nototheniidae )of Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antartica). Polar Biology 19: 37-51.
La Mesa M., Arneri E., Giannetti G., Greco S., Vacchi M., 1996. Age and growth of the nototheniid fish Trematomus bernacchii Boulenger from Terra Nova Bay, Antartica. Polar Biology16: 139-45.
La Mesa M., Vacchi M., Castelli A., Diviacco G., 1997. Feeding ecology of two nototheniid fishes Trematomus hansoni and Trematomus loennbergi from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Polar Biology 17: 62-68.
La Mesa M., Vacchi M., T. Zunini Sertorio, 2000. Feeding plasticity of Trematomus newnesi (Pisces, Nototheniidae) in Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, in relation to environmental conditions. Polar Biology 23(1): 38-45.
La Mesa M., J.T. Eastman, M. Vacchi,  2004. The role of notothenioid fish in the food web of the Ross Sea shelf waters: a review. Polar Biol., 27: 321-338.
Lewis Smith, R.I. 1999. Biological and environmental characteristics of three cosmopolitan mosses dominant in continental Antarctica. Journal of Vegetation Science 10: 231-242.
Lauriano G., Fortuna C.M., Vacchi M., 2007a. Observation of killer whale (Orcinus orca) possibly eating penguins in Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 19(1): 95-96.
	Lauriano G., Vacchi M., Ainley D., Ballard G., 2007b. Observations of top predators 	foraging on 	fish in the pack ice of the southern Ross Sea. Antarctic Science, 	19(4): 439-440.
	Olmastroni, S., Corsolini, S., Franchi, E., Focardi, S., Clarke, J., Kerry, K., Lawless, R. 	and Tremont, R. 1998.  Adélie penguin colony at Edmonson Point (Ross Sea, 	Antarctica): a long term monitoring study. 31 August-September 1998; 	Christchurch, New Zealand. SCAR. p 143.
	Olmastroni, S., Corsolini, S., Pezzo, F., Focardi, S. and Kerry, K. 2000. The first five years of the Italian-Australian Joint Programme on the Adélie Penguin: an overview. Italian Journal of Zoology Supplement 1: 141-45.
Olmastroni S, Pezzo F, Volpi V, Corsolini S, Focardi S, Kerry K. 2001b.  Foraging ecology of chick rearing of Adélie penguins in two colonies of the Ross Sea; 27/8-1/9 2001; Amsterdam, The Netherlands. SCAR.
Olmastroni, S. 2002. Factors affecting the foraging strategies of Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Edmonson Point, Ross Sea, Antarctica. PhD Thesis, Università di Siena.
Olmastroni S, Pezzo F, Volpi V, Focardi S, 2004. Effects of weather and seaice on the reproductive performance of the Adélie penguin at Edmonson point, Ross Sea. CCAMLR Science 11: 99-109.
Povero P., Chiantore M., Misic C., Budillon G., Cattaneo-Vietti R., 2001. Pelagic-benthic coupling in Adélie Cove (Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica): a strongly land forcing controlled system? Polar Biology  24: 875-882
Regoli F., Nigro M, Benedetti M., Fattorini D., Gorbi S.  2005b  Antioxidant efficency in real life stages of the Antarctic Silverfish Pleurogramma Antarcticum: Responsiveness to prooxidant conditions of platelet ice and chemical exposure. Acquatic toxicology, vol 75, 43-52
Vacchi M., Greco S., La Mesa M., 1991. Ichthyological survey by fixed gears in Terra Nova Bay (Antarctica). Fish list and first results. Memorie di Biologia Marina e di Oceanografia 19: 197-202.
Vacchi M., Romanelli M., La Mesa M., 1992. Age structure of Chionodraco hamatus (Teleostei, Channichthyidae) samples caught in Terra Nova Bay, East Antarctica. Polar Biology 12: 735-38. 
Vacchi M., Greco S., 1994a. Capture of the giant Nototheniid fish Dissostichus mawsoni in Terra Nova Bay (Antarctica): Notes on the fishing equipment and the specimens caught. Cybium 18(2): 199-203.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., Castelli A., 1994b. Diet of two coastal nototheniid fish from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Antarctic Science 6(1): 61-65.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., 1995. The diet of Antarctic fish Trematomus newnesi Boulenger, 1902 (Notothenidae) from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Antarctic Science 7(1): 37-38.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., 1997. Morphometry of Cryodraco specimens of Terra Nova Bay. Cybium 21(4): 363-68.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., Greco S., 2000b. The coastal fish fauna of Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea (Antarctica). In: Ross Sea Ecology, F. Faranda, L. Guglielmo and A. Ianora Eds., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg: 457-68.
Vacchi M., M. La Mesa, M. Dalù, J. MacDonald, 2004. Early life stages in the life cycle of Antarctic silverfish,Pleuragramma antarcticum in Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Antarctic Science




Fig 1 Boundaries of the proposed Terra Nova Bay ASMA. The continuous red line indicates the
minimal size of the MPA while the dotted black line indicates the increment of MPA inside of the
Ross Sea.



Fig. 2 Satellite image of the Terra Nova Bay Area. Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS), Silverfish Bay and Cape Washington are marked. A few kilometers to the South of MZS (below MZS in the picture) are located TNB ASPA n° 161, and Inexpressible Island. To the North of Cape Washington, just outside the satellite image there are Edmonson Point and Kay Island.


Fig. 3 View of Kay Island in the Wood Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica


Fig.4 Cape Washington emperor penguin colony

Fig 5 A view of Cape Washington and the emperor penguin colony at beginning of summer season



Fig 6 Silverfish Bay area corresponds to the triangle delimited by Oscar Point, the tip of Campbell Ice Tongue and Shield Nunatak


Fig. 7 Inexpressible Island viewed from South


Fig.8 Inexpressible Island and Adelie Penguin colony on the beach.


