





Notes on a Multiple Protection System for some areas of King George Island: Zones under Annex V and their relevance to Fildes Peninsula  and adjacent areas








	Introduction

The choice of an Information Paper (IP) rather than a Working Paper (WP) or a Non-Paper (NP) is not casual. It is intended to set the record of a position maintained by Chile with regard to the option of an Antarctic Specially Managed Area for Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.

In the Preamble of the Annex prepared and proposed by Germany on the revised possible Modules of a Management Plan, it is stated that German scientists have been present in the Region since 1979. This can be corroborated by Chilean scientists who have shared and supported their work.

It is also stated that the project can be seen as a result of the joint United Kingdom and Germany inspection programme conducted in the Antarctic Peninsula in January, 1999. As is rightly stated, this inspection produced the recommendation that “consideration could be given towards further enhancing cooperation for example in logistic support, consistency in waste management procedures and a critical examination of scientific programmes to optimize productivity and minimize duplication”. Chile fully endorses the conclusions of the above mentioned inspection, but fails to see their connection to the “Risk Assessment” focus in the research programme undertaken by the Germsan Federal Ministry for Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety.

A second inspection conducted in 2005 by Australia, Peru and the United Kingdom covered Bellingshausen and Great Wall Stations and “found relatively little co-operation on science between the stations and no-consistent or focused approach to monitoring”. Again, it is difficult to understand the next sentence which, in clear contradiction with the previous one, says that the inspection team “welcomed the initial consultations that had been made, and the baseline surveys then underway, carried out with the aim of proposing the Region as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area”. Either the Russian and Chinese stations were carrying out these baselines surveys, and therefore the conclusion that there was a lack of a “focused approach on monitoring”, or the observation is not pertinent to the inspection report; or someone else was performing this function, a situation not covered by the inspection´s tasks.

This IP is not conceived therefore as a counterproposal to the “Revised Modules of a Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area nº ***, Fildes Peninsula Region, South Shetland Islands, prepared and proposed by Germany. It shares indeed the recommendation in the 1999 tripartite inspection and the weaknesses detected in the 2005 inspection which did not involve Chilean stations and facilities. And its rationale is quite different. The International Working Group has a large membership, including the two Vice-Chairmen of the CEP, while the CEP Chairman has constantly shown its interest in the Fildes conversations. Contribution by IWG members have not been substantial, although their attendance and their interest in bridging the differences between the main stake holders is fully appreciated. This Paper requests from IWG Members a more pro-active participation.

The tasks of the IWG until CEP XII in 2009 were jointly defined by Germany and Chile. Both countries consider useful to work on the basis of the German Research Paper. All Parties have participated in the review of ASPA Nº 150 and now ASPA Nº 125 proposed by Chile and significantly supported by work done by Germany, the Netherlands and Brazil. 

During the IGW discussions of an eventual ASMA, Chile reiterated the convenience of using the German draft in order to improve, enhance or enlarge:
    (a) the description of values to be protected. Chile maintains that the declared objective of the possible ASMA should be to “facilitate research while maintaining stewardship on the environment” and “promote the general coordination of human activities in the region” (Tripartite Inspection, 1999, Anvers Island ASMA).
    (b) Improving the quality of the various codes. We note that the new German document incorporates the improvements in the Code of Conduct of Scientific Research, and this step is important since the combination of the draft with the alternative code gives better environmental advice and guidance to scientists in their fieldwork.
    (c) We expect that the other codes will be equally improved. IAATO will work with us on all areas concerning visitors or sites guidelines. Argentina and Chile have drafted useful guidelines for the visitors area in ASPA 150. Chile will take the lead in requesting the Operators in the Facility/Operations area to develop, more than a code of conduct, a n effective regulatory framework for that area.
    (d) The package as a whole. Since there has been no other input than the additions provided by Germany to their research paper, this IP develops the broad lines of the Chilean approach to this topic.

Within Annex V, article 4, ASMAS are recommended for areas where activities are being conducted or may be conducted

-to assist in the planning and coordination of activities
-to avoid possible conflicts
-to improve cooperation
-to minimize environmental impacts.

As is well known, a mandate from the ATCM exists on these matters (Resolutions XIII-6 and XV-17) regarding inter alia the Fildes Peninsula Region on a general level, reference should be made to the Protocol itself (Article 6). Recently important steps have been taken by Parties in King George Island, pursuant to recommendations by SCAR and COMNAP. It is important, however, to recall that the scope of these recommendations concern activities in  King George Island as a whole.

Rather than addressing the redraft of the German paper on Possible Modules for an ASMA covering the Fildes Peninsula Region and including Ardley Island, Chile would like to draw the attention of all IWG  Members to Chapter 6.1 Previous Management. Section 6. (Management of the Fildes Region, pp. 291-310 of that report). The review of the current situation and the observations contained in this part of the document represent a forecast whose components are mostly sound and well founded. However, Chile does not share the view that all the problems, or even most of them, originate by the growth and intensity of  anthropogenic activity, and reading the management plans of most recent ASPAS and ASMAS one can appreciate that it is almost standard language to refer both to cumulative impacts and to the effects of climate change without making an adjudication. As stated in page 295 of the German report, a Working Group set up by the CEP is currently occupied with drawing up suggested guidelines concerning cumulative effects and the study and reduction of such effects is yet in its early stages and should not be anticipated. But a gap exists between the diagnosis and the remedy. The answer to this dilemma, independently of the underlying scientific truth, is the adoption of a precautionary approach. This is probably the perception of the IWG as a whole. The right question is: ¿which is the best precautionary approach?
 

Conclusions

 The present IP describes the doubts and questions that, in the view of Chile, as a main stakeholder in the Fildes “hub”, arise when the proposal for mitigation of environmental threats or damages is preferentially focused on the designation of an ASMA rather than the effective and specifically focused protection provided by an ASPA or, in the case of Fildes Peninsula, by a web of ASMAS. We firmly believe that, on the basis of the assessment made in the German study , the type of ASMA or multiple protection to be developed should, in our view, cover a broader area, carry a different format, and more important, harmonize its provisions with the biogeographic features present in the Zones associated to Fildes Peninsula, and consequently link the protection of diverse Zones and Values in a protective chain whose effect will be stronger, quicker and more effective than the ritual designation of an ASMA.

    1. The area should definitively be the Maxwell Bay ASMA (fig.7.1) encompassed in the map included in the German report on page 311. The reasons for this proposal are multiple. Brazilian, German, Chilean, Polish scientists have drawn attention on the close geologic and volcanic relationship between King George and Nelson Islands. The ice-free areas in Nelson Island deserve study and protection and the Chilean Military Geographic Institute plans a survey of their current status under the impact of climate change. Above all other considerations, islands such as King George and Nelson should necessarily include their maritime environment whose study and protection have been neglected –with the exception of Admiralty Bay- and contamination of its coastline shall again be systematically surveyed by the Chilean Navy´s monitoring project (Antarctic IPOA). 

    2. In addition to the Maxwell Bay coast of Nelson Island, Barton Peninsula and Potter Cove would also be incorporated if the Republic of Korea would agree to include King Sejong on Barton and Argentina, Germany and the Netherlands agree to the inclusion of the Jubany Base/Dallmann Laboratory complex. If the emphasis of the Maxwell Bay ASMA enhances the coordination of scientific and logistic activities rather than the reduction of environmental impacts, which would occur naturally as a consequence of improved coordination and avoidance of conflicts, the acceptability of this type of protection may probably increase.

    3. If the stakeholders in Barton Peninsula and Potter Cove are not prepared to join in the enlarged Maxwell Bay ASMA, this project may develop in successive phases: initially the maritime boundary in Maxwell Bay linking Nelson and King George Islands would run from O´Cain Point to Weaver Peninsula; if Korea joins, it would link Duthoit Point with the southernmost point in Barton Peninsula; and if the countries associated to the Jubany complex agree, the tip of Duthoit Point would link with the southernmost point in the dividing line with the Admiralty Bay ASMA whose members might also be interested in the coordination of scientific and logistic activities.

    4. The Maxwell Bay ASMA would include the Fildes Peninsula  Region and the adjacent areas and all of or only part of Nelson Island :
        (a) Fildes Peninsula subdivided in the following zones: Enlarged Facility/Operations Zone, ASMA 125 and its diverse clusters, the Historic and Archeological Sites in the north coast, and possibly other areas of extensive vegetation and breeding bird colonies whose delimitation remains complex. 
        (b) Ardley Island (ASPA 150).
        (c) A Facility/Operations Zone for the area of Refugio Astrónomo Cruls on Nelson Island if required.
        (d) The protected ice-free Zones in Nelson Island: Stanburt Peninsula, Ruin Point, O´Cain Point and Duthoit Point.

    2. Attention of the IWG is also drawn in this respect, to Chapter 7 of the German Report entitled “Unanswered questions and research needs”. Leaving apart question (5) which concerns the Maxwell Bay ASMA, the four preceding paragraphs, based on the assumption of lengthy discussions, are indeed very important and, in the context of our proposal, should be addressed even if hopefully, the process makes a swifter and more productive progress. We invite all Members of the IWG to consider the suggestions in this chapter and make the best use of them.
  

