





Report by IUCN The International Union for Conservation of Nature





Report Submitted to the XXXII ATCM
by IUCN
The International Union for Conservation of Nature

IUCN extends thanks to the Government of the United States for hosting this 32nd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).  With its longstanding interest in Antarctic conservation, IUCN welcomes the opportunity to assist Parties in their deliberations at this meeting.  In this submission, IUCN focuses on a few areas of importance with respect to the conservation of the Antarctic environment.
IUCN congratulates the Antarctic Treaty Parties on this fiftieth anniversary year of the adoption of the Treaty in Washington DC.  The Treaty has successfully preserved Antarctica for peace and science while allowing a flexible governance process that has provided for new measures and structures to adjust to changing needs and conditions.  We refer to the adoption in 1980 of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the adoption in 1991 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and five annexes.  Nevertheless, this is not a time for complacency.  More needs to be done.  A sixth annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection was adopted as Measure 1(2005) but has not as yet entered into force.  We urge Parties to take the necessary steps to approve this Measure, thus bringing into force Annex VI.  New recommendations should be adopted at this meeting to address other important threats to the health of the continent and its surrounding ocean and we will outline some ideas below.
(1)  Fourth World Conservation Congress
First, however, IUCN would like to report that the Fourth World Conservation Congress, which was held in October 2008 in Barcelona adopted Recommendation 4 1181 which inter alia expressed deep concern about the emerging impacts on Antarctic ecosystems from global climate change; acknowledged that Annex V of the Protocol provides for a “systematic environmental geographic framework” of protected areas to be established in both terrestrial and marine environments; noted with concern rapidly increased interest in the Antarctic krill fishery, the continued IUU fishing for certain fish species (especially toothfish) and continuing deaths of seabirds as a result of long-line fishing operations; noted also with concern the potential for harmful cumulative impacts on wilderness and scientific values should the number of tourists and size and tourism vessels continue to grow and noted the increasing number of vessels using the Southern Ocean and the absence of an integrated approach to the establishment of appropriate ice-classification standards for those vessels and related issues.  The Congress urged actions to address these issues, some of which we will outline below.
(2)  Antarctic and Southern Ocean Marine Protected Areas
IUCN welcomes the joint CEP SC-CAMLR workshop that was held immediately before this meeting.  We are encouraged that it has been recognized that the two bodies are to work together to promote common goals, including the development and establishment of protected areas.  Work has been ongoing for several years to develop a scientific basis for the identification of representative areas for protection through the process of bioregionalization.  We note in this regard the obligation that Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty have accepted through Annex V Article 3 to “seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas…representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems”.  As some years have passed since this process was begun, it is time to identify such areas, including representative examples.  Marine areas are particularly scarce within the Antarctic Treaty framework and so we hope that Parties at this meeting will move forward quickly to remedy this omission.  Such action would also support the decision that states took in Johannesburg in 2002 to establish representative networks of protected areas by 2012.  Recommendation 4 118 which was adopted by our members at the World Conservation Congress, including by many states that are Party to the Antarctic Treaty, called on Parties to consider declaring the Ross Sea as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area.
The Workshop on Bioregionalization of the Southern Ocean held in Brussels, Belgium from 13 to 17 August 2007, hosted by the Belgium government, was a very important step in this process and we are pleased to see that CCAMLR-XXVI and the Scientific Committee have endorsed the results of the workshop.  As observed by the Scientific Committee, the results from the Workshop are a primary foundation for understanding the biological and physical heterogeneity in the Southern Ocean, which can be used by CCAMLR and the CEP to inform spatial management.
At ATCM 31 Resolution 3(2008) was adopted which recommended that the “Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent” that was annexed to it be used consistently and with other tools as a dynamic model to aid in the identification of areas that could serve as ASPAs within the systematic environmental-geographical framework, as referred to in Annex V, Article 3(2) of the Protocol.  This tool is very helpful.  It is now time to move forward with a similar tool with respect of the Southern Ocean.
At a global level, the IUCN World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) continues to work on promoting the establishment and effective management of a worldwide, representative network of marine protected areas.  The WCPA-Marine program provides strategic advice to policy makers, and works to strengthen capacity and investment in protected areas.  Regional networks within WCPA-Marine include a network for Antarctica, which aims to build communications between members worldwide, and to share knowledge on tools and information for protected area management.  Further information on the work of WCPA-Marine can be found at:  http://www.iucn.org/themes/wcpa/biome/marine/marineprogramme.html
(3) Climate Change
The increase of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is having a profound effect on the world’s climate.  Changes are measurable and observable.  In the Arctic, the retreat of summer sea ice, as photographed by satellites, is swift and astounding in scope.  In the Antarctic Treaty Area similar observable and observed changes are clear and visible.  Ice shelves have collapsed in recent years, and there is no longer doubt that this is the direct result of rising temperatures caused by changes to the Earth’s atmosphere.  IUCN welcomed the adoption of ATCM XXIX Resolution 3 (2007) on Long-term Scientific Monitoring and Sustained Environmental Observation in Antarctica which should help to increase the capacity to detect, understand and forecast the impacts of climate change. 

IUCN urges Parties, on the basis of precaution, to ensure that the management of human activities is done in such a way as to minimize as far as is possible the carbon footprints of national programs in Antarctica as well as those of activities for which they have an obligation to give advance notification.  Also of significance this year will be the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  It will be critical that progress is made this year to allow for the adoption at that Conference of a new instrument that will require meaningful reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases.  IUCN urges Antarctic Treaty parties to send a message to the UNFCCC COP that urgent and significant action is necessary to combat climate change as the effects are obvious in polar regions, where ice cover is changing.  It is expected that such changes will soon be obvious in tropical and temperate regions as well.  Already, there has been a measurable shrinkage in the size of many glaciers in these regions.  Urgent action is necessary now – not only to protect the Antarctic environment – but also in self-interest to protect the health and welfare of humankind.

In this regard, IUCN notes that various geo-engineering schemes have been proposed to mitigate the effects of greenhouse gas emissions.  While IUCN recognizes the need for scientific investigation, we are concerned that such schemes may go ahead without first conducting a full environmental impact assessment.  As one area of interest with respect of iron fertilization has been the Southern Ocean, IUCN notes that any such activities organized in, or proceeding from, a Party to the Protocol on Environmental Protection is subject to the provisions of the Protocol, and in particular article 8 with respect of advance Environmental Impact Assessment.
(4)  Tourism
The number of visits by tourists has continued to grow substantially in recent years, with the number of tourists landing almost tripling since the beginning of the decade.  Whether because of this growth in numbers or because of physical changes in ice and water conditions or for some other reason, the number of accidents involving tourism vessels has increased sharply, with the loss of the Explorer and the grounding of several vessels in recent years.  Clearly, something needs to be done, both to improve safety and to protect the environment.  Such groundings and other accidents require services from national Antarctic programs and thus divert resources that were intended to support science.  They threaten the Antarctic environment.  Whereas the impacts of small numbers of tourists may have been minor or transitory, the overall increase and growing diversity of tourism may have impacts that are more than minor or transitory at certain sites or through certain activities.  It is time to further develop work already undertaken to consider cumulative impacts of tourism activities at heavily visited sites and to develop additional measures so that such impacts can be avoided or minimised and monitored.  Two areas for priority consideration may include the construction or use of buildings or other permanent infrastructure for tourism in Antarctica and the impacts of large cruise ships and other large vessels. 
In the interim, Parties should ensure the notification of “all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding from its territory” as required under Article VII(5)(a) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Following on this obligation is an obligation to ensure that all vessels so subject to notification are fully able to conform to Protocol obligations.  If vessels do not have the capacity to comply with these obligations, the notifying State and the Flag State should ensure that such vessels do not travel to Antarctica.  In this regard, rapid approval of Measure 1(2005) which contains the text of Annex VI on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies to the Protocol on Environmental Protection would provide a useful tool to Parties to ensure better regulation of tourism.  Parties should consider whether and how they could implement the Annex domestically in advance of its entry into force as a part of the Protocol.
As noted previously, any review of the impact of such vessels would necessarily reflect the obligations of Parties under Annex IV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Parties should undertake a review of the requirements incorporated in Annex IV in order to assure themselves that they are sufficient to protect the Antarctica, including its dependent and associated ecosystems.  The review should inter alia examine whether the impacts of discharge of sewage, garbage and other substances is harmful even beyond 12 nautical miles from land or ice shelves and whether vessels travelling to Antarctica should discharge into the sea any food wastes whatsoever within the Antarctic Treaty Area..  Also in view of safety and emergency response considerations, IUCN again stresses the need to consider further steps to restrict the activities of large vessels in Antarctica in order also to protect human life, to safeguard the unique environment of Antarctica and to promote the values of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
(5)  Shipping
The Report of the Continued Intersessional Contact Group (IGC) on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters notes several areas of concern, described as possible deficiencies in control measures.  At the World Conservation Congress last October, our members adopted Recommendation 4 118 calling on Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, the Protocol and CCAMLR and to the IMO to collaborate to:
“(a) take the necessary steps to set appropriate ice-classification standards for vessels operating in 
the Antarctic; 
(b) consider a ban on the carriage and use of heavy fuel oil; 
(c) strengthen regulation of sewage and grey-water discharge; 
(d) take steps to prevent entry of alien species through various pathways, including ballast water 
and biofouling; and 
(e) enforce the prohibition on the dumping of garbage into the Southern Ocean.”

In addition, IUCN reiterates that it is time to review again the Code of Arctic Shipping and to draw from it elements that also apply to the Antarctic to further develop a Code of Antarctic Shipping that would be approved through the International Maritime Organization.  Though the existing Code for the Arctic is voluntary, Parties could adopt through a Measure a Code for the Antarctic and then work through the IMO to have it adopted with respect of vessels flagged by all states that are members of the IMO.  IUCN welcomes a call to work through the IMO to extend the Antarctic Special Area northward from the 60°S parallel to the boundary of the Antarctic convergence.

IUCN notes that the possible deficiencies in control measures as identified through work undertaken by the IGC Concerning Passenger Ships also apply with respect of non-passenger vessels travelling through the region.  For this reason, IUCN urges all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to work through their maritime administrations to ensure adequate and proper crew training, equipment and vessel construction and maintenance to allow ships to operate safely around Antarctica, noting the current limited availability of up-to-date nautical charts and search and rescue capability.
(6)  Bioprospecting
Though there is no commonly agreed definition in international use, the Convention on Biological Diversity defines genetic resources as “genetic material of actual or potential value” and genetic material as “any material of plant, animal, microbial or other origin containing functional units of heredity”.  The Secretary-General of the United Nations in a report to the General Assembly has written that:
“It is difficult to differentiate scientific research from commercial activities involving genetic resources, commonly referred to as bioprospecting.  In most cases, genetic resources are collected and analysed as part of scientific research projects, in the context of partnerships between scientific institutions and industry.  It is only at a later stage that the knowledge, information and useful materials extracted from such resources enter a commercial phase.  The difference between scientific research and bioprospecting therefore seems to lie in the use of knowledge and results of such activities, rather than in the practical nature of the activities themselves.”2
In a later report, he wrote:
“…While there is no universally agreed definition of bioprospecting, the term is generally understood, among researchers, as the search for biological compounds of actual or potential value to various applications, in particular commercial applications.  This involves a series of value-adding processes, usually spanning several years, from biological inventories requiring accurate taxonomic identification of specimens, to the isolation and characterization of valuable active compounds.  As a mere prospecting activity, bioprospecting is only the first step towards possible future exploitation and stops once the desired compound or specific property has been isolated and characterized….”3

Thus, a definition of bioprospecting could be the search for and collection of genetic materials and their study with the goal of commercialization of those genetic materials.  As suggested by the Secretary-General, the difference between bioprospecting and scientific research may hinge on intent, that is whether the study is promote human knowledge of itself or whether the intent is to seek to derive commercial profit from that knowledge.  Clearly, bioprospecting has at its root scientific observation.

Antarctic Treaty Parties adopted Resolution 7(2005) entitled “Biological Prospecting in Antarctica” recognizing the link between scientific research, bioprospecting and the obligation in Article III of the Treaty that scientific observations and results from Antarctica are to be exchanged and made freely available.

IUCN reiterates that in the Antarctic context, bioprospecting, as any other activity, is subject to the obligations that Parties have accepted under the Treaty and related instruments, including the Protocol on Environmental Protection.  Thus, for all expeditions organized in or by their ships or nationals or proceeding from their territory advance notification is required, as provided for under Article VII of the Treaty.  Flowing from this, an environmental impact assessment procedure must be undertaken, in accordance with Article 8 of the Protocol and Annex I.  In accordance with Article III of the Treaty scientific observations and results from Antarctica should be exchanged and made freely available to the greatest extent feasible and practicable.  IUCN remains of the view that a desire for commercialization does not overcome this obligation to make the observations and results freely available as it does not affect feasibility or practicability.  Furthermore, as bioprospecting involves the collection of living samples, this must be done consistent with obligations under Annex II of the Protocol to Conserve Antarctic Fauna and Flora.  In keeping with the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and related instruments, Parties should consider a Measure to ensure the protection of all native biota, including micro organisms, such that any collection would not be in such quantities to affect significantly their local distribution or abundance.  In areas designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) the management plan is to include a clear description of the conditions under which permits may be granted inter alia regarding “the collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit holder”.  Furthermore, for both ASPAs and ASMAs information is to be exchanged among Parties and the CEP on the number and nature of permits issued, including a summary description of activities conducted by persons subject to its jurisdiction in such areas.  Finally, Parties may wish to consider ways to ensure fair rules for a sharing of benefits resulting from the commercialization of products derived from Antarctic biota.

Should bioprospecting include taking of marine living resources in Antarctica, then additional factors arise.  If it involved harvesting of marine living resources to include fin fish, molluscs, crustaceans and all other species of living organisms, including birds found south of the Antarctic convergence, then the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) would apply to any party to CCAMLR which would have to notify the CCAMLR Commission and seek a conservation measure before allowing any harvesting to go forward.  If the action involved seals, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals would apply.

Bioprospecting has the potential to raise certain concerns with respect of management and governance in relation to Antarctica.  At ATCM XXIX Information Paper 13 entitled “In search of a legal regime for bioprospecting in Antarctica” presented by France raised the issue of a competent authority to authorize a bioprospecting activity.  With reference to Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty it was noted that there could be a divergence of views with respect of sovereign rights and access to resources and genetic materials.  It was suggested that states had faced a parallel issue with respect of the issuance of operating permits for mineral resources activities.  The Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA), adopted in Wellington in 1988 but not in force, provided for a permitting system through a Commission and a Regulatory Committee in a way that took into account various positions and interests with respect of territorial claims.  It was suggested that the regime foreseen under CRAMRA could provide a model for bioprospecting.

In the immediate term, it would appear to be prudent to accept that bioprospecting includes scientific research as a preliminary step.  Parties should require that all expeditions organized in or by their ships or nationals or proceeding from their territory provide advance notification, conduct an environmental impact assessment procedure and ensure that their scientific observations and results are exchanged and made freely available.  In our view, patents should not in any case be available for naturally occurring genomes as they themselves are not new, novel or inventive as foreseen under various rules and conventions overseen through the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)4.


IUCN Background:
Created in 1948, IUCN the International Union for the Conservation of Nature is the world’s oldest and largest global environmental network - a democratic membership union with more than 1,000 government and NGO member organizations, and almost 11,000 volunteer scientists in more than 160 countries.  Its mission is to “influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable”.  The Union is a multicultural, multilingual organization with 1,000 staff located in 62 countries.  Its headquarters are in Gland, Switzerland.

