





Policy Implications Arising from SCAR’s Report: Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment





Policy Implications Arising from SCAR’s Report: 
Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment

1. Introduction

The Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE) project is an initiative of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), which aims to provide an up-to-date assessment of the climatic changes that have taken place on the continent and across the Southern Ocean, give improved estimates of how the climate may transform over the next century and examine the possible impact on the biota and other aspects of the environment.

The final report of the ACCE project follows on from the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA), published in 2005 by the Arctic Council and the International Arctic Science Committee and the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), published in 2007. While the IPCC’s Assessment Report was a tremendous initiative that provided a major advance in our understanding of natural climate variability, the role of anthropogenic factors in recent climate change and the best projections yet for how climate may evolve over the next century, its scope was global and there was limited space to consider the Antarctic. The ACCE review shares similar goals with the ACIA to provide a detailed regional review of past and possible future climate in a climatically sensitive region.

The ACCE review does not formulate any policy recommendations from the vast body of information that it contains. Like the IPCC Assessment Reports and the ACIA, the information contained in the ACCE review has significant implications for how the human society should respond to climate change, as well as management of natural resources on regional and global levels. In ASOC’s view, the ACCE review not only has the potential to make an important contribution to our understanding of the role of the Antarctic in the global climate system, it is also one of the best available resources on which to base effective, equitable, and science-based management and policy decisions regionally and globally.

ASOC would like to take this opportunity to complement the publication of the ACCE Executive Summary by SCAR by highlighting some key policy implications that, in ASOC’s view, arise from the science covered by the review. ASOC urges Treaty Parties to consider the policy implications arising from the ACCE review in earnest and take action accordingly.  Concrete local and regional-level action in Antarctica would contribute to mitigate the effects of Antarctic climate change:
2. Policy implications arising from the ACCE review

In ASOC’s view, the science reviewed in the ACCE document supports the following policy implications that should be considered in earnest by Treaty Parties:

1) Support global reductions in carbon emission

According to the ACCE:
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean play a critical role in driving, modifying, and regulating global climate. The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) – the largest of the world’s ocean currents - flows around the Antarctic continent and connects the Pacific, Indian and Atlantic Ocean basins. The resulting global circulation redistributes heat, salt, freshwater and other climatically and ecologically important elements. It has a global impact on patterns of temperature, rainfall and ecosystem functioning. In recent decades, the ACC has shifted southward and its waters have warmed more rapidly than the global ocean as a whole. These changes in the ACC have arisen in response to changes in the atmospheric circulation. Changes in ozone in the Antarctic stratosphere and greenhouse warming have led to a shift in the Southern Hemisphere Annular Mode – a pronounced climate cycle in the high southern latitudes – to the positive phase, resulting in increased westerly winds over the Southern Ocean that have driven the observed changes in the ACC. In the next 100 years, as a result of continued greenhouse warming, computer models forecast the Southern Ocean to become warmer, fresher and windier and the ACC to continue to shift southward. 

Implications:
Changes in the world’s largest ocean current will have profound and complex repercussions on Earth’s climate and ecosystems in patterns that we do not fully understand. Allowing carbon emissions to rise unabated commits all the planet’s inhabitants and their future generations in an uncontrolled and unpredictable global experiment. 

According to the ACCE:
There has been an overall reduction in total ice shelf area on the Antarctic Peninsula by 27,000 km2 in the last 50 years. Some ice shelves, such as the Wordie (>1000 km2), Larsen (>6500 km2), Prince Gustav (2000 km2) and the Wilkins (14000 km2) Ice Shelves underwent rapid and sometimes catastrophic disintegrations. Recent observations have shown that the Amundsen Sea sector – holding approximately one third of the ice of the entire West Antarctic Ice Sheet - is currently the most rapidly changing region of the entire Antarctic. The attribution of ice loss on the Antarctic Peninsula to human-driven warming is now strong and, although not yet proved conclusively, there is a strong hypothesis that a similar case can be made for an even greater portion of West Antarctica. Continued increase of atmospheric greenhouse gases is expected over the next century, if they continue to rise at the current rate, will be remarkably rapid. Even if only changes no greater than those already observed were to continue through the 21st century, it is expected that the Antarctic Peninsula and the Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica would continue to lose land-based ice, offsetting any slow growth that may take place in East Antarctica. More disturbing is the possibility, albeit impossible to quantify at this time, of a number of climate influences that could amplify loss of Antarctic ice and accelerate future sea level rise. Until improved predictive capability is available, a reasonable upper bound of Antarctica’s potential contribution to global sea level would lead to a 6m sea level rise by 2100. Even a significant fraction of such a contribution would come at great human and environmental cost. 

Implications:

The Amundsen Sea embayment contains enough ice to raise sea level by ~1.5 m and a reasonable upper bound of Antarctica’s potential contribution to global sea level would lead to a 6m rise by 2100. Even a significant fraction of such a contribution would come at great human and environmental cost. While the contribution of sea level rise from Antarctic ice sheets may take place over decadal time scales, in the meantime, the more immediate effects of greenhouse warming, including changes in temperature, precipitation, extreme weather events, etc., are likely to result in significant impacts on physical and biological systems as well as human livelihoods and well-being1. 

ASOC urges a resolution from the Treaty Parties calling for an equitable, effective, and science-based agreement to reduce carbon emissions at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen in December 2009.

2)  Put in place consistently strong measures to prevent the establishment of invasive species

According to the ACCE:
Over the past 50 years, there has been significant warming across the Antarctic Peninsula and West Antarctica but little change across the rest of the continent. Although significant surface warming over Antarctica is projected over the 21st century, the temperature of the interior will remain well below the freezing point. As a result of their adaptations for the specific existing climatic conditions in Antarctica, terrestrial biota have a reduced ability to adapt to change. That makes them vulnerable to the impact of colonization by better competitors that may be more advantaged under warmer climatic conditions around the edges of the continent. The combination of increased human visitation across the entire Antarctic region and the lowering of dispersal and establishment barriers implicit through climate warming on the Antarctic Peninsula are expected to act synergistically and result in a greater frequency of transfers, possibly leading to successful establishment of non-indigenous species. Similarly, the potential for non-indigenous species to arrive and affect Southern Ocean biodiversity in the coming century is considerable. This is due to 1) historic Southern Ocean isolation and its domination by endemic species, 2) the lack so far of non-indigenous species, 3) the slow response time of native organisms because of their inherent, cold-adapted long generation turnover times, 4) the lack of durophagus predators (predators that eat hard food, such as molluscs), and 5) accelerating transport opportunities for non-indigenous species in a region of intense warming. 

Implications:

Through the relatively limited number (in absolute terms) of access routes, vessels and journeys to Antarctica, it is among the most practicable of continents on which to apply control measures to minimize this risk in order to maintain its unique terrestrial and marine ecosystems. Possible measures include stringent procedures to ensure rodent-free status of ships and aircraft, logistical planning to minimize the risk of intra-regional and local transfer of propagules, control of visitor numbers and access to more sensitive including pristine sites, and cleaning/sterilization of high risk transport locations for aliens, such as cargo surfaces, foodstuffs and clothing (important in both inter- and intra-regional contexts)2,3,4,5.  Measures to prevent the establishment of invasive species should be applied consistently by all Antarctic operators.
ASOC encourages the ATCPs to implement a comprehensive set of biosecurity management tools throughout the Antarctic. These practices should include precautions that reduce the risk of non-native species introductions to the Antarctic as well as plans to immediately and thoroughly remove accidental introductions should they occur.


3) Apply a precautionary approach to the conservation of marine living resources
According to the ACCE:
Over the next 100 years, as a result of continued greenhouse warming, computer models forecast the Southern Ocean to become warmer, fresher and windier and the ACC to continue to shift southward. The Southern Ocean is projected to increase its absorption of CO2 from the atmosphere, thereby increasing the acidity of its waters. Computer models project with strong confidence Antarctic-wide decreases of sea ice extent and continued but accelerated retreat off the Western Antarctic Peninsula. Over the 21st century, all components of the ecosystem closely related to sea ice are expected to retract in response to the predicted 33% reduction of sea ice extent. In areas with an originally high krill population size the population is likely to stabilize at a low level. The implication is that there will be a significant limitation on the food supplies of the large whale stocks using the Southern Ocean as feeding grounds, and of other krill consumers, such as seals, penguins and fish. Mammals and birds having the highest energetic life styles will be affected most. 
Implications:
The loss of sea ice and the southward migration of the ACC will alter the middle trophic-level ‘forager species’ and extend the migratory routes of predators. This could increase the costs of movement of migratory species that feed in the Southern Ocean and reduce the duration of their main feeding season6. Longer migrations, less food, fishery depletion, and ocean acidification will increase stress on the ecosystems. 
In view of the high-level of uncertainty and potentially significant implications, a precautionary approach should be applied in the conservation of marine resources in face of greenhouse warming. Marine protected areas, including open and closed areas, should be used to conserve healthy ecosystems and maintain biodiversity banks. Non-climate stresses, such as exploitation, invasive species and pollution, must be reduced in order to give ecosystems more “breathing space” to adapt to the stresses arising from climate change.
 3. Antarctica’s continuing contribution to climate change solutions
Scientific research in Antarctica will continue to be a major contributor to our understanding of the Earth’s climate system. The deployment of energy efficient and renewable energy technology is also becoming more feasible and attractive in Antarctica as a result of recent advances and the high price and negative environmental impacts of fossil fuels. In ASOC’s view, Antarctic research and logistics have a unique role to play in the promotion of solutions for climate change. These include:

    • Improving our understanding of the global climate and how the Earth’s physical and biological systems respond to climate change. This is particularly important because in certain, but limited portions of Antarctica the impact of climate change on biological systems can be studied without the complicating factors of direct human interventions and pressures;
    • Being an example for the rest of the world in the deployment of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies with the highest possible environmental standards;
    • Making research results and information on best practices available to the non-Antarctic community,  feeding into the next round of IPCC Assessment Reports, thereby contributing to the global understanding of the physical basis and impacts of climate change, and sharing experience on mitigation techniques.



