





Preliminary results of the Russian studies in the Antarctic under the IPY 2007/2008 Program




Preliminary results of the Russian studies in the Antarctic under the IPY 2007/2008 Program
In 2007 – 2008, Russia carried out field investigations in the Antarctic under the following projects of IPY 2007/2008: 
 “Comprehensive Meteorological dataset of active IPY Antarctic measurement phase for Scientific and applied Studies”
 “Impact of Climate induced glacial melting on marine and terrestric Coastal communities on a gradient along the Western Antarctic Peninsula”
 “Antarctic Climate Evolution”
 “Climate of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean” 
 “Synoptic Antarctic Shelf-Slope Interaction” 
 “Monitoring of the upper ocean circulation, transport and water masses between Africa and Antarctica”
 “Antarctic Sea Ice in International Polar Year”
  “Subglacial Antarctic Lake Environments – Unified International Team for Exploration and Discovery”
 “Trans-Antarctic Scientific Traverses Expeditions – Ice Divide of East Antarctica” 
 “Polar glaciers and ice caps as indicator of climate change” 
 “Antarctic Surface Accumulation and Ice Discharge”
 “Permafrost Observatory Project: A Contribution to the Thermal State of Permafrost”
 “Antarctic permafrost and climate change”
 “Antarctic Permafrost Age: Implications to the Earth & Planetary Geo/Bio Sciences”
 “Antarctic Permafrost And Soils”
 “Ozone layer and UV radiation in a changing climate evaluated during IPY” 
 “POLAR-AOD: a network to characterize the means, variability, and trends of the climate-forcing properties of aerosols in polar regions”
 “Solar Drivers of Atmospheric Change” 
 “Integrated analyses of circumpolar Climate interactions and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean–International Polar Year”
 “Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic: the Response of Life to Change”
 “SCAR-MarBIN: the information dimension of Antarctic Marine Biodiversity”
 “A Census of Antarctic Marine Life”
 “Polar Ocean Gateway Evolution”
 “Origin, evolution and setting of the Gamburtsev subglacial highlands: Exploring an unknown Antarctic territory”
“Polar monitoring network – POLENET” and 
“Ecological penetration and studies of the sub-glacial lake Vostok” This is a Project of the national IPY realization plan. The other projects being full projects adopted by the International IPY Committee

The most important results obtained under separate IPY Projects are given below.
In the framework of the Project “Comprehensive Meteorological dataset of active IPY Antarctic measurement phase for Scientific and applied Studies” (COMPASS) as a result of deployment of automatic meteorological stations at the sites of earlier temporarily closed Molodezhnaya, Russkaya and Leningradskaya stations, the Russian circumpolar observation network in the Antarctic was reconstructed. The results of measurements are presented at the internet-site of the subprogram “Study and research of the Antarctic” http://www.aari.aq. 
Estimates of the tendencies for climatic changes in the Antarctic were performed showing that the year 2008 was the warmest year for forty years of observations at Bellingshausen station. A significant contribution of prevailing changes of large-scale atmospheric circulation (Antarctic annular mode) was established. 
An assessment of climatic changes in the atmosphere over the Antarctic Peninsula was obtained. It is shown that surface warming occurs together with warming in the troposphere and cooling in the stratosphere. The maximum warming in the troposphere is observed at the level higher than the 500 hPa and the strongest cooling in the stratosphere (in the layer of 200–20 hPa) – between the first and second tropopause levels. 
Under the project “Impact of Climate induced glacial melting on marine and terrestric Coastal communities on a gradient along the Western Antarctic Peninsula (CLICOPEN)”, an assessment of regional warming in the troposphere as a factor of external impact on marine and terrestrial ecosystems was made. The processes of retreating ice sheets, corrosion of sedimentary rocks, changes of surface water salinity of the Southern Ocean, increased recurrence of iceberg generation and colonization of ice-free areas were studied. Response of the local ecosystems to warming in the form of changed species composition of zooplankton community, changed structure of coastal communities and change in the food webs were established. The distribution of main species of lichen and birds on King George Island was investigated.
In general, estimates of parameters of spatial-temporal variability of thermal regime of the Antarctic atmosphere in the surface layer, in the troposphere strata and in the lower stratosphere for the period of instrumental observations were obtained in the IPY projects on current climate studies. It was found that a significant climate warming for the last decades is observed in the vicinity of the Antarctic Peninsula both in the surface layer and in the troposphere. The process of warming determined by a unique by intensity development of cyclonic and mesoscale vortex activity in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula has already influenced the marine and terrestrial ecosystems, in which thermophilic biotic components began to appear. 
In the study of the subglacial Lake Vostok, the most important results are connected with investigation of the new ice cores. At the present time, the borehole depth has reached a mark of 3668 m. In the course of the studies of the lake ice cores, new data on the mineral composition and age (by uranium-lead dating of zircon) of sedimentary rocks of the lake, a databank on isotopic, gaseous and biological composition of lake ice, size of crystals, composing it and orientation of their main axes was set up. An analysis of the results of the studies allowed specifying our knowledge of the mechanism of lake ice formation and obtaining important information on the gaseous, isotopic and hydrological regimes of the subglacial water body. Estimates of the changes of air temperature and thickness of the ice sheet in the central regions of Antarctica in the period of time 0.5-1 million years BP were carried out. 
Based on the materials of field radio-echo sounding and seismic studies made in 2007-2008, updated charts of the location of coastline of the subglacial Lake Vostok, ice sheet thickness, water layer thickness and subglacial surface relief at the scale of 1:1000 000 were prepared and the morpho-structural scheme of the region was specified. According to specified data, the lake area without the islands comprises about 15500 km2, the area of the islands being about 70 km2. The coastline extent is 1030 km, including 70 km of the islands. The altitudinal location of coastline changes from -800 m to -200 m.
Assessment calculations of the age of lake ice were performed and the areas of formation of its different layers at the glacier flow line across Vostok station were delineated. It is shown that lake ice 1 (3539–3609 m) was formed during the period of time 40–30 kyr BP at a distance of 60–45 km from Vostok station in a relatively shallow part of the lake in the vicinity of the island lying near or in the ice flow line. Formation of the studied part of the layer of lake ice 2 (3609–3667 m) occurred 30–18 kyr BP at a distance of45–30 km upward along the flow line from Vostok station in a relatively deep part of the lake. 
Marine oceanographic studies from board the R/V “Akademik Fedorov” were carried out during the seasonal period of the 52nd and 53rd RAE (2007 and 2008, respectively) and aimed to investigate the structure and parameters of the main fronts of the Southern Ocean and water structure in the areas of the shelf and the continental slope in Prydz Bay and the Amundsen Sea.
In Prydz Bay, based on the studies in 2007, regions of formation and pathways of spreading of Antarctic shelf and modified circumpolar deep water were delineated and typical features of transformation of their properties were determined. A new water mass – bottom water of Prydz Bay was revealed, its thermohaline and hydrochemical parameters were determined and its role in ventilation of circumpolar deep water and formation of Antarctic bottom water was shown. 
At transects made by means of ХВТ-probes, crossing of the main zones and fronts of the Southern Ocean, reaching a subtropical gyre in the north were determined. 
At transect in the Amundsen Sea, 19 CTD soundings were made. The main peculiarity of thermohaline water structure at this transect is presence of practically not transformed circumpolar deep water, occupying deep and near-bottom layers on the shelf and at the continental slope. The characteristics of the uniform surface layer were also unusual (its thickness was about 20 m, temperature of -1.4 to -1.7°С and salinity was anomalously low – not greater than 32.8‰). A possible explanation of the existence of layer with such characteristics is spreading of melt water from beneath the nearby outlet and shelf glaciers. 
Under the Project “Ozone layer and UV radiation in a changing climate”, Russian specialists carry out total ozone (TO) measurements on a regular basis. Daily TO measurements at Vostok, Mirny and Novolazarevskaya stations for the last six years show that a significant decrease of ozone concentration, called the “ozone hole” occurs every year in spring in Antarctica after the end of the polar night. The largest “ozone hole” for the last years was observed in 2006, comprising 29 million km2. The total ozone mass losses within the boundaries of the zone where the TO was less than 200 DU, were 40 megatons. In 2008, the hole reached its maximum size of 27 million km2 on 12 September, beginning then slowly to decrease. But until the middle of October, it remained one of the largest by area for the last twenty years. The deficit of ozone mass on 3 October was 35 megatons.  
In heliogeophysical studies (project “Solar drivers of Atmospheric Change”), estimates of the influence of galactic rays directed by solar wind, on the temperature and wind regimes in the South near-pole area were given. As a result of the studies made, it was found that the state of the atmosphere critically depends on variations of solar wind parameters, and namely, of the interplanetary electric field.
In the coastal zone in the vicinity of Progress Base, studies of the species diversity and numbers of the population of different benthic forms were conducted using scuba divers. As a result, data on the structure and distribution of bottom biocenoses were obtained and estimates of the numbers and biomass of ice biota in the coastal zone of Nella Bay in Prydz Bay were given (Project “Integrated analyses of circumpolar Climate interactions and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean–International Polar Year”).
In addition, under the Project “Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic: the Response of Life to Change”, the species composition and seasonal distribution of zooplankton in the freshwater Lake Kitezh (Fildes Peninsula) in the area of Bellingshausen station were investigated. 
Joint Russian-German marine seismic surveys at the profile in the Southern Ocean were carried out in the area of Kerguelen Plateau (the Commonwealth Sea) with participation of the research vessels "Akademik Aleksander Karpinsky” and "Polarstern". Simultaneously with the seismic studies, aeromagnetic observations from helicopter were performed in a corridor along the seismic profile. The work was carried out in the framework of the Project “Polar Ocean Gateway Evolution”.
 



