





Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) Report to XXXII ATCM 





Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) Report to XXXII ATCM 
1. What is AFoPS?
AFoPS, the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences, was established in May 2004 when the three directors-general of the polar research institutes of China, Japan and South Korea gathered in Shanghai. The director-general of the Korean Polar Research Institute (KOPRI), Dr. Yeadong Kim, chaired AFoPS until 2006, followed by Dr. Yoshiyuki Fujii, the director-general of Japan’s National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR) until 2008, and Dr. Yang Huigen, the director-general of the Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC). India and Malaysia joined AFoPS, and for the first time delegates from the five countries gathered at the VI Delegates Meeting held in Tokyo in February 2007. In September 2008, scientists from Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam were invited as observers to the delegates meeting at KOPRI in Inchon, South Korea. 
The heads of the national polar or Antarctic research institutes of each member country act as national representatives in AFoPS. There are five working groups in AFoPS: Earth Science (ES), Life Science (LS), Planetary Science (PS), Engineering and Logistics (E&L) and Public Relations and Data Management (P&D). Workshops have been held by working groups in specific research fields like glaciology and logistics. For further details, refer to www.afops.org.
2. AFoPS Activities 
2.1. IX Delegates Meeting in Inchon, 2008
The IX AFoPS Delegates Meeting was held on 22 and 23 September 2008 at the Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) in Inchon, South Korea, hosted by KOPRI (Figure 1). A total of 35 delegates and observers from five AFoPS countries, China, India, Japan, South Korea and Malaysia; four invited countries namely Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam; and one organization, the Sustaining Arctic Observing Networks (SAON), participated in the meeting. A revised committee member list was distributed and at the end of the meeting a new chair was appointed by the members: Dr. Yang Huigen, director-general of the Polar Research Institute of China, will be the chair for the next two-year term.
The member countries introduced research activities and plans in the Arctic and Antarctic as well as activities relevant to IPY 2007–2008. China introduced a collaborative Arctic cruise by the R/V Xuelong up to 80°25' N from July to September and reported an inland traverse to/from and research activities around Dome A station with five snow vehicles transporting a cargo of 175 tons from December 2007 to February 2008. They also reported education and outreach activities of sending 10 selected university students to Svalbard from February to March 2008 as one of the Chinese programs for IPY 2007–2008. India reported its Antarctic research activities in geology, glaciology, meteorology, and biology, including microbiology and medical science, in the Maitri Station area and Larsemann Hills. They reported that their Arctic expedition to Svalbard from June to July 2008 included ionosphere physics, geology, glaciology, and biogeochemical studies as well as the establishment of the Himadri Station. Outreach activities were introduced, including visits by students to the Arctic and their talks at schools, colleges, youth clubs, and special auditoriums open to general public after their return from the Arctic.
Japan reported research activities in the Arctic in the 2008 season and announced the First International Symposium on Arctic Research to be held in November 2008 in Tokyo, titled “Drastic Change in the Arctic under Global Warming.” Plans for the 50th Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE50) for 2008–2009, in collaboration with the Australian Antarctic Division, were introduced. South Korea introduced major projects for 2006–2010: Climate Change, Biology & Ocean Sciences and Infrastructure, including the launch of the Korean icebreaker, the Araon (ca. 6,950 GRT), in 2009; and a plan to establish the second Korean Antarctic research station in 2011. They reported the 20th anniversary of King Sejong Antarctic Station with the president’s congratulations. South Korea also informed its application to Arctic Council observer and MOU exchanged with China for polar science cooperation. Malaysia introduced Antarctic research plans on life science and physical science for 2008–2009 with its scientists participating in several national programs. They announced that their application for full membership in SCAR had been accepted, and they appreciated support from AFoPS members and the 4th Malaysian International Seminar on Antarctica to be held in early April 2009 in Kuala Lumpur.
A scientist invited from Indonesia introduced Antarctic research activities on marine living resources and climate change since 1996, in collaboration with the Australian Antarctic Division. It announced future plans to establish the Indonesian Antarctic-Arctic Division in 2011 with a research focus, such as climate change/global warming, natural resources, food/biogenetics, and fresh water, to set up research programs and to join the Antarctic Treaty System. A scientist invited from the Philippines introduced their interests in climate change research in Antarctica for their risk of natural hazards caused by typhoons and dry spells. Scientists invited from Thailand reported participation of faculty members in JARE46 (2004–2005) for marine biological research and in an Antarctic cruise for oceanography as well as publication of a new booklet on Antarctic animals resulting from their marine biological research. They introduced their plan to establish the Antarctic Research Forum in Thailand with potential research projects on marine and freshwater biology, physical oceanography, microbiology, and atmospheric science. A scientist invited from Vietnam expressed interest in polar research in various disciplines. 
SAON was invited to the Delegates Meeting at its request to introduce its system to Asian countries working in Arctic science. It introduced its vision that users of Arctic data should have access to free, open, and high-quality data that will realize pan-Arctic and global value-added services and provide societal benefits. To attain this vision, the ultimate goal is to enhance Arctic-wide observing activities through coordination and integration and to promote sharing and synthesis of data and information. 
The first chair of AFoPS, Dr. Yeadong Kim, proposed reviewing current AFoPS performance, presenting what it has achieved and what it missed with inactive working groups in comparison with our initial goal. Some members proposed reconsidering frequency and timing of the Delegates Meeting, which have been held twice a year for the last two years. Members agreed to establish a review committee comprising one member from each of the five member countries and two cochairs, Dr. Yeadong Kim and Dr. Yang Huigen, the new AFoPS chair. The committee was asked to submit a review report with a proposal for improvement in about one year.
For the next annual general meeting of the Asia Oceania Geosciences Society (AOGS) to be held in Singapore in mid-August, members agreed to propose a session on polar sciences with conveners from each AFoPS country. It was decided that the next AFoPS Delegates Meeting will be held from late April to May, after Dr. Yang Huigen, the next chair, returned from an Antarctic cruise. Participants enjoyed excursions to visit laboratories for polar sciences at KOPRI after the meeting.

Figure 1 - Participants in the IX AFoPS Delegates Meeting at the Korean Polar Research Institute on 22 and 23 September 2008.

2.2. Other Related Activities
A session titled “Recent Advances in Polar Sciences and Global Warming” was organized and convened by AFoPS scientists at the AOGS held in Busan, South Korea, in mid-June, which was agreed on at the VII AFoPS Delegates Meeting in Tokyo in 2008. A total of 18 presentations were given at the session.
Activities of the Glaciology WG and a collaborative research project by Chinese, Indian, Japanese, and Korean glaciologists on drilling ice cores in Svalbard, possibly in 2009, were reported. Some of the member scientists were to apply for funding for the project in each country. Two glaciologists from PRIC and the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research in India were invited to NIPR from spring to summer 2008 as part of the NIPR visiting scientists program, which was announced at AFoPS Delegates Meetings.


