





Results of the Romanian scientific Antarctic activities in Larsemann Hills




Results of the Romanian scientific Antarctic activities in Larsemann Hills

1. International cooperation within the Antarctic Treaty
 Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic and of the Article 6 of the Protocol, Romania makes efforts to promote such collaborations with other states operating in the same research areas and fields. 
1.1 Cooperation with Russian Federation.
Recent Romanian Antarctic activities have been performed based on the scientific cooperation with Russian Federation in Larsemann Hills and Schirmacher Oasis, within the 52th Russian Antarctic Research Expedition, 2007, summer season.  The research in cooperation with the Russian scientists is focussed on studies of climatic changes, biochemistry and determination of certain pollutants in the Southern Ocean waters and snow. 
During the anchorage of ships in the vicinity of the Russian Antarctic stations Molodezhnaya, Novolazarevskaya, sampling (water, snow, ice, soil) was performed in view of the subsequent researches, some of which are summarized below. Most of the research activities were performed in Larsemann Hills, Law-Racovita Base.
          
2. Colaboration with University of Copenhagen Faculty of Life Sciences Department of Ecology Genetics and Microbiology Section, Denmark 

Screening of polar streptomycetes able to produce cold-active hydrolytic enzymes using common and chromogenic substrates
(RO-20)
Investigators
1 University “Dunărea de Jos” Faculty of Food Science and Engineering, Bioengineering Department, Galaţi, Romania 
2 Romanian Polar Research Institute, C.P. 42-29, Bucharest, Romania 
3 University of Copenhagen, Faculty of Life Sciences, Department of Ecology Genetics and Microbiology Section, Denmark

The aim of this study was to develop new plate techniques for semi-quantitative screening of polar streptomycetes able to biosynthezise cold-adapted hydrolytic enzymes such as amylases and proteases. 
The Streptomyces strains were isolated from Antarctic soil samples sampled from East Antarctic coast. 30 Streptomyces strains were studied, 7 strains from the Microorganisms Collection (coded MIUG) of “Lower Danube” University Galati, Romania, and 23 new strains isolated from polar soils from Grove Mountains and Spitsbergen Archipelago. 

Financial support from Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest, Romania; Bio Food Platform, CNCSIS Project Code 62, Romania; 
Scientific support from University of Copenhagen Faculty of Life Sciences, Department of Ecology Genetics and Microbiology Section, Denmark for scientific support. 


The results of this research were published, among other journals, as
 Mihaela Cotarlet, Teodor Negoită, Gabriela Bahrim, Peter Stougaard, 2008, Screening of polar streptomycetes able to produce cold-active hydrolytic enzymes using common and chromogenic substrates, Romanian Biotechnological Letters, Special issue edited for International Conference on Industrial Microbiology and Applied Biotechnology, vol. 13, no 5, supplement, pp 69-80, ISSN 1224-5984  

3. Polar Biomedical Cooperation Research in the context of IPY 2007-2008  

The bipolar international project „Evaluation of the immune, hormonal and psychological responses in Romanian expeditioners to extreme environment of Antarctica compared with the Arctic” (RREEAA) was an activity related to the SCAR Project Taking the Polar Pulse - IPY 2007-2008 (TTAAPP)” (ID 181) - managed by SCAR Life Sciences Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine. Based on the initial agreement with the Australian Antarctic Division confirmed on April 29th 2006 (ATCM 2006, IP 37), the confidential health data of Romanian polar expeditioners were submitted to Australian Antarctic Data Centre.
This project opens new frontiers by the new approach regarding implication of neurotrophins as “adaptation molecules” in neurohormonal mechanisms of immune function modulation in response to extreme environments. We investigated the interactions between the neurotrophins (NT) and Ist and IInd type cytokinic cascade TNF, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10), secretion of thiroidian and suprarenal hormones (e.g. cortisol as indicator of the stress levels in Antarctica compared to the Arctic), the antioxidant capacity of acute-phase proteins, relating to diet, solar UV radiation and other climatic change factors. 
Research was performed in Antarctica (Larsemann Hills) in “Law-Racovita” Australian-Romanian Station, “Progress II” Russian Station and “Zhong Shan” Chinese Station, on “Akademic Fedorov” Russian icebreaker (2007), and in the Arctic in Greenland - Illulissat (2008) and Svalbard – Spitsbergen (2008).   
Current state of the polar environment and changes in the polar regions were assessed concomitant with their impacts on human health and relationships between people within small groups/communities exposed to phychic and psychosocial isolation. Our project was endorsed at national level by the Romanian Excellence Research Project entitled “Promotion within a European and international partnership of biomedical research under extreme life conditions”, coordinated by the Virology Institute of Romanian Academy of Science. 
This broad international collaboration involved institutions from Romania (Virology Institute-as Principal Investigator, Astronomical Institute of the Romanian Academy of Sciences, Romanian Polar Research Institute, “Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, “I. C. Parhon” Endocrinology Institute, Bucharest), Russia (Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute), China (Academy of Medical Sciences, Arctic and Antarctic Administration), Australia (Antarctic Division), USA (Sondrestrom Research Facility), Norway (Polar Research Institute).     
 
    4. Romania was accepted as an Associated Member in SCAR on July 13, 2008  at the 50th  SCAR Meeting at Moscow.
    5. Scientific Comunications at SCAR/IASC/IPY Open Science Conference St. Petersburg, Russia, July 8-11 2008

Romania participated in this joint conferrence with 7 papers (oral comunications and posters) in sections S1.7, S1.8, S.3.3, S4.2, S5.2, S5.5. These papers were published in the conferrence abstract volume „ SCAR/IASC/IPY Open Science Conference – Polar Research – Arctic and Antarctic Perspective in the International Polar Year, St. Petersburg, Russia, July 8-11 2008, Abstract Volume, 502 p., 2008, published by Elektrostandard Print Joint-Stock Co., 2008, ISBN 978-5-98364-013-09. 
	Among these papers, we mention:

Chemical and biological characterization of Larsemann Hills Soils, East Antarctica
T.Gh. Negoita1, Gh. Stefanic1, N. Gheorghita2, N. Dumitrescu2, M. Cotta1
1 - Romanian Polar Research Institute, Cryopedology, Bucharest, Romania
2 - University of Agronomical and Veterinary Sciences, Soil Microbiology, Bucharest,  Romania

Pedochemical analyses revealed high organic carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus contents in 3 locations in Mirror Peninsula (Ct%=0.85-0.99; P mg/100g soil=164-263); 7 locations in Stornes Peninsula (Ct%=1.13-1.73; Nt%=0.100-0.232, P mg/100g soil =0.04-284); 4 locations in Broknes Peninsula, Law Racovita Base (Ct%=0.83-3.54; Nt%=0.039-0.499, P mg/100 g soil=0-210). The Ct=3% value can be considered in polar soil classification. Soil vitality in Larsemann Hills various biotops was put into evidence by: bacteria contents (cfu x 100/g soil d.w.), respiration potential (CO2 mg/100g soil d.w.) and cellulosolytic potential (% hydrolyzed cellulose). These parameters average values were, in Progress Station, 2 cfu x 100/g soil d.w.; 9.2 CO2 mg/100 g soil d.w.; 15.0% hydrolyzed cellulose; and Stornes Peninsula, 3 cfu x 100/g soil d.w.; 7.5 CO2 mg/100 g soil d.w.; 3.6% hydrolyzed cellulose. Respiration potential was very low (CO2=8.14 mg/100g soil/24 hours), showing that, except for biogenic resources such as organic wastes from birds/seals, there are no important reserves for biological cycles sustaining soil formation processes. To assess the soil evolution stage we used the Indicators (created in 1994 by Stefanic - Romania) of: Vital Activity Potential (IVAP%), Enzymatic Activity Potential (IEAP%) and Biological Synthetic Indicator (BSI%).

Microfungi in Schirmacher Oasis soils, East Antarctica
Gh. Stefanic1, T.Gh. Negoita1, V. Kuznetsov2, M. Cotta1
1 - Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest, Romania
2 - Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia

Antarctic microfungi populations shown quantitative values similar with those found by the Romanian scientists in Arctica. In half of the soil samples from around Novolazarevskaya Station, the fungi microflora developed similar, non-numerous populations (11x103 cfu/g soil d.w.). In other samples a rich, diverse micoflora developed (e.g. 137x103 cfu/g soil d.w.; 7 species: Cladosporium herbarum, Chrysosporium sp., Phoma exigua, Aspergillus oryzae, Acremonium strictum, Penicillium waksmanii, Fusarium sp.), fact also reported for bacterial flora. Dominant species belong to Cladosporium genus. Phoma exigua pycnidia, recently frequently isolated from Antarctic regions with temperatures below the previous tolerance limits of this genus, suggest its continuous adaptation to Antarctic climate. Actinomycete absence in Topping medium plates is noted, in contrast with the Arctic actinomycete abundant samples. 

6. The 3rd International Symposium of Polar Scientific Research, International Polar Year  2007-2009, Bucharest, Romania, June 27, 2008  
This Symposium was organized by Romanian Polar Research Institute, Astronomical Institute and Virology Institute of Romanian Academy, under the auspices of the Romanian Academy.

Agenda of the meeting:
- Impacts of climate modification on ecosystems and bio-systems in extreme environments      (Arctic and Antarctic), 
- EUROPOLAR CONSORTIUM, PolarCLIMATE  Call for JRP proposals 
- Workshop on Polar Remote-Control Telescope 
- Human Health in Antarctica and Viruses in Antarctic Ecosystems/Promotion within an European and international partnership of biomedical research under extreme life conditions.


The following countries informed on their participation in the PolarCLIMATE project: Denmark, Estonia, France, Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Romania, United Kingdom as Individual Projects, and Bulgaria, Czech Republic, India as Associated Projects.

ACTIVITY  PLAN  FOR   2009-2010
I
-  Preparation of the Romanian Antarctic Expeditions 
- Improvement of the strategy for activity management of Antarctic research in Larsemann  Hills, Law-Racovita Base.
- Location of a small building (about 12–30 sq.m) or two standard containers, near the existing main building in the Base for laboratory and washroom with:
	1. a basin for freshwater with a very small water heating station based on gas;
 	2. a stainless steel basin for the storage and eventual treatment of wastewater and urine and other necessary equipment such as a washing machine, that all should avoid any contamination risk. 
If this structure will be located near the existing mean building, it will observe the design and appearance of the latter one.     
II
Logistic and multidisciplinary scientific preparation of an international research expedition in Larsemann Hills, Law-Racovita Station, in case our project submitted to European Science Foundation, PolarCLIMATE Program 2009, will be accepted.  
We mention that in this Joint Research Project 13 countries are involved, including India and Russian Federation. Cooperation with China in the same area is welcome.   

