





South American Network on Antarctic Marine Biodiversity (BioMAntar) and South American Consortium for the Census of Antarctic Marine Life (LA CAML): an update






South American Network on Antarctic Marine Biodiversity (BioMAntar)
South American Consortium 
for the Census of Antarctic Marine Life 
(LA CAML)


In accordance with Article III of the Antarctic Treaty “scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available”, and following Article VI of the Madrid Protocol: “The Parties shall co-operate in the planning and conduct of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area”. The South American Network on Antarctic Marine Biodiversity (BioMAntar) was conceived in the light of the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and of the Madrid Protocol. It is a multinational project approved by the Brazilian Council for Research and Technological Development (CNPq) in October 2007, intended to last, in principle, until 2010. 

The BioMAntar creation was motivated by the activities of the Census of Antarctic Marine Life in South America (LA CAML), which has promoted the integration of Antarctic scientific activities between Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela since 2006. 

The BioMAntar has structured a thematic network on Antarctic marine biodiversity by stimulating the interaction amongst scientists and administrators in order to promote data acquisition on marine biodiversity to the Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML), and organize a series of activities towards this aim.

There are three thematic subprojects within the framework of the BioMAntar/LA CAML: 
Pelagic Realm (plankton and oceanography);
Benthic Realm (microorganisms to megafauna) ;and 
Top Predators (cetaceans, pinnipeds and seabirds). 
Activities in the network include sampling protocols standardisation, data input into the information system linked to CAML, the SCARMarBIN (Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research - Marine Biodiversity Information Network), academic and research exchange, elaboration of scientific documents, and establishment of a series of education and outreach activities related to the CAML in South America by the BioMAntar/LA CAML partners. 
The progress of the BioMAntar/LA CAML in the period of February 2008 to March 2009 has been summarised as follows: 
(1) Activities of dissemination, education and outreach: participation in a meeting organized by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MCT) with the Brazilian Press on the Brazilian Antarctic Research, including the activities of the BioMAntar/LA CAML within the scope of the International Polar Year (IPY). Elaboration of LA CAML E&O material (folders and video screenplay).
(2) Integration of South American efforts: Workshop on South American Strategies for Antarctic Research, organised by the MCT; III OLA CAML, coordinated with the MCT meeting; I LA CAML/BioMAntar (South American Network on Antarctic Marine Biodiversity) Workshop. These activities consisted of the working groups (Benthic Zone, Pelagic Zone and Top Predators) discussions and plans for the BioMAntar/LA CAML milestones and outcomes. 
(3) Participation in meetings involving other Census of Marine Life (CoML) programmes: meeting of the VI Sector Plan for Sea Resources (PSRM), of the Inter Ministry Commission for Sea Resources (CIRM). 
(4) LA CAML joined the SCAR SO-CPR (SCAR Southern Ocean–Continuous Plankton Recorder) Survey Programme, coordinated by Dr Graham Hosie, for the next 2008/2009 season. Dr. Hosie supported one LA CAML researcher to attend the training workshop for the use and operation of the CPR (Hobart, Australia) in October 2008. The CPR equipment was sent to two South-American Antarctic Programmes (Brazil and Chile) during the Antarctic summer 2008/2009. The Brazilian Programme received the equipment by 15 December 2008 in Punta Arenas, Chile, and transported it to Antarctic. Chile received the CPR by 15 January 2009 in Antarctic and transported it to Punta Arenas. The main area for the use of the CPR was the Drake Passage.
(5) Scientific Exchange Activities: (a) scientific cooperation between Ecuador and Brazil for intertidal sampling and adaptation of the NaGISA (Natural Geography In Shore Areas) protocols through María de Lourdes Guerra and Manuel Cruz joining the Brazilian Antarctic Program in Admiralty Bay, Antarctic (Project MABIREH - Antarctic Marine Life Biodiversity - coordinated by Lúcia S. Campos,); (b) Ignacio Moreno from MABIREH Project (Cetacean sub-project), Brazil, trained the Cetacean specialists of the Uruguayan Antarctic Program (Cecilia Passadore team) using a standardized methodology of Distance Sampling for cetacean abundance.    
(6) SCARMarBIN / OBIS (Ocean Biogeographic Information System): Andre Monnerat Lanna (technical position), OBIS mini-grant, in order to aggregate the South American Antarctic marine biodiversity data to input this into the SCARMarBIN. Anderson da Silva Netto (graduate student) with funds received from the University of Rio de Janeiro (UERJ) has organised a ‘Database of South American Antarctic Scientific Publications on Marine Mammals Research’ as part of his Bachelor´s monography. The dissertation has been already submitted to the University and the viva occurred in March 02, 2009. This database has been prepared in a format ready for input the information into the SCARMarBIN and OBIS.
Milestones for 2009:

    1. Organization of Scientific Meetings and Courses 
        ◦ Integrated meeting IV OLA CAML / COMARGE, September or October 2009.
        ◦ Working towards integrating the LA CAML/BioMAntar Courses with the V Latin American Symposium on Antarctic Research, La Libertad/Salinas, Ecuador (2 to 4 September 2009):
            i. Antarctic Ecology and Evolution: molecular tools. Coordinator: Elie Poulin.
            ii. Methods to study microbial ecology applied to extreme environments. Coordinator: Vivian Pellizari. 
            iii. Reprodutive patterns of Antarctic benthic invertebrates. Coordinator: Therezinha Absher. 
        ◦ Workshop on the Antarctic Crustacean Taxonomy (need to prepare the terms of reference with Polish partners and Claude De Broyer)
        ◦ Distance Sampling Course: cetaceans’ abundance methodology. To be held in the Rio Grande University (FURG), Brazil (May or June 2009).

    2. Participation in Scientific/Administration Meetings 
        ◦ Representation at CAML’s major Synthesis Symposium, Genoa, Italy, May 2009. 
        ◦ X SCAR (Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research) International Biology Symposium and SCAR LSSSC (Life Sciences Standing Scientific Committee) Meeting, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan, 26 to 31 July 2009.
        ◦ Peruvian Symposium on Antarctic Biodiversity, Lima, Perú, July 2009.
        ◦ V Latin American Symposium on Antarctic Research, La Libertad/Salinas, Ecuador, 2 to 4 September 2009.
        ◦ XX RAPAL (Administrators Meeting of South American Antarctic Programmes), local and date to be defined.
        ◦ XVII SPA (Brazilian Symposium of Antarctic Research), São Paulo, Brazil, date to be defined.
        ◦ Other meetings that might require representation or might be interesting to LA CAML/BioMAntar activities. 

    3. Logistic and Scientific Exchange Activities

Benthic Realm
    • Venezuela – Brazil: Biodiversity mapping and comparison between Admiralty and Maxwell bays   
    • Brazil – Chile: It has been planned for a master student from Lúcia S. Campos’ team to go to Chile in order to undertake molecular analysis with Elie Poulin on benthic samples (holothurians) from Brazil and Antarctic deep sea margins. Additionally, benthic samples exchange (sea urchin) between Brazil and Chile.
    • Argentina – Chile – Samples exchange of Nacella concinna from Orcadas Islands between Nestor Coria (Argentina) and Claudio Gonzalez (Chile). 
    • Ecuador – Brazil – UK – Venezuela/Uruguay – Dr Cruz, Lúcia S. Campos, Cath Waller, and Elizabeth Huck. NAGISA protocols application: coordinating sampling experiments (Brazil, Ecuador, UK) adapting the NaGISA protocols to the Antarctic intertidal, specially taking into account the following areas: King George Islands, Greenwich Islands, and Dee island.

Top Predators
    • Argentina (Alejandro Carlini) is going to collect more genetic samples for the Chilean project on Antarctic fur seals.
    • Integrated field work between Argentina, Brazil, Peru and Ecuador on sea bird data. 
    • Brazil (Eduardo Secchi, MABIREH Project) is collecting samples of humpback whales bones in some Antarctic beaches for archaeological molecular studies with Dr Per Palsboll (Stockholm University, Sweden).
    • Chile, Ecuador and Brazil are exchanging information on Humpback whale photo-identification (migrations studies).
    • Integrated data on cetacean species and abundance for the Drake Passage area (long time series data), between Brazil (Eduardo Secchi) and Chile (Anelio Aguayo).

Pelagic Realm
    • SCAR SO-CPR Survey: continuing the partnership. 

    4. Outreach and education
    • Meetings with the ICSU Regional Director for Latin America and Caribbean on issues related to the outreach activities of LA CAML and BioMAntar.

    5. Database work
    • Meetings with the OBIS Manager Committee Chairperson to establish cooperative with SCARMarBIN and OBIS including South American Antarctic research data into these systems.

