





Statement of the delegation of Romania at the celebration of 50 years of Antarctic Treaty





Statement of the delegation of Romania
at the celebration of 50 years of Antarctic Treaty


Excellency, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,

On behalf of the Romanian delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to express my vivid gratitude to the USA Government for its splendid hospitality, as well its excellent preparation for this meeting. With your permission I would like to retain your attention with a short statement on the celebration of  50 years of Antarctic Treaty.
As you know the Antarctic Treaty became a successful of model international treaty as it was continuously improved in order to fulfill its functions. This improvement is the result of the contribution of all its members, consultative and non-consultative parties. And this effort is continuing. The fact that we are in the States that is the Depositary of Antarctic Treaty enable us to be confident that our meeting will generate new steps in understanding Antarctica, by a retrospective view and looking to the future.	
Romania signed in 1971 the Antarctic Treaty as the 17th state. Romania also ratified the Protocol of Madrid, including its Annexes I-V, and is a member of SCAR. We remain fully committed to the Antarctic Treaty and we hope that this meeting will represent a new important step in the Antarctic Treaty system.
Romania participation in Antarctica consisted, up to now, in the following activities:
    • scientific research projects within the national research - development  programs;
    • participation in scientific expeditions along with the teams of the states members of the Antarctic Treaty, such as the Australia, China and Russian Federation;
    • participation in the working meetings and intersessional groups within the Antarctic Treaty, CEP and SCAR and scientific activities in IPY;
    • projects jointly developed with member states of the Antarctic Treaty, such as Argentina, Australia, United Kingdom, New Zealand in the field of environmental protection in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.
    • the Cooperation Agreement in Antarctica between the Governments of Uruguay and Romania
    • Establishment of first Romanian research station in Antarctica, “Law-Racovita” in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica with the essential support of Australia.
          
Besides the scientific research reported on the occasion of previous meetings of the Antarctic Treaty, Romania is concerned with the environmental protection in Antarctica. Despite all efforts made in the Antarctic Treaty system, by means of legislation and concrete actions on the spot, Antarctica remains a lonely area, more and more affected by the emerging dissequilibriums in the man – nature relationships.   
Environment pollution in other areas of the Earth generates effects on Antarctica and this can be considered a breach of ethic norms and a non-observance responsibilities for the pollution prevention. Alarming signals come from everywhere over the world referring to the nature deterioration: pollution, forest clearing, soil destruction, climate changes, flooding, etc. Also alarming are the findings related to human health: incidence increase of cancers and malformation in children, diseases generated by the polluted air or by contaminated water, epidemic caused by the wastes, etc. And even if we add the biosphere scarcity following the disappearance of certain species, the influence of the dust storms carrying pollutants and microorganisms over thousands of kilometres towards the polar regions including Antarctica, we still do not have a complete picture of all the perturbations in the global environment.

A report that should tackle these problems is, of course, almost impossible and it is not our intention. We could, instead, scan the future of Antarctica based on a “radiography” of the world environmental conditions and starting from this one, sometimes only summarily ascertained. 
It is remarkable, in this regard the effort of the most specialized international organization and current IPY program that are elaborating, based on the state of the art scientific method, regional and global studies regarding the climate changes causes and impacts in an attempt to reduce this impact.    
It seems that 90% of the total number of scientists ever born is alive. This means an unprecedented agglomeration, an extraordinary density of people decided to assail the unknown part of knowledge. A simple law of nature states that, the more dense a population, the more severe the fight for living of the individuals. In the biological field, this fight has no other law, but that of the most powerful. Nothing jeopardizes the observance of the ethic laws more than crowd does. The man differs from other species mainly by admitting some laws of the spirit. As regards the research activity, the strategy must not become “homocentric”, that is not to put the human interest before the interest of the nature in general. On the other hand, the man is just a component, not necessarily indispensable, as Antarctica existed millions of years without the presence of humans. But humans cannot live without the cold region support in general and in science. 
We trust that the Antarctic Treaty, as it was initially established by 12 countries and subsequently enlarged with the other states that adhered to it, Consultative and Non-Consultative parties, will continue in a joint effort to guaranty the preservation of Antarctica. The anticipated results can be obtained following the cooperation of all of the member states of the Antarctic Treaty and of the other countries in the World, that try to save the great Antarctic values, not only for ourselves, but only for the generations to come.

