





Ukraine in Antarctica: Second Decade of Research




Ukraine in Antarctica: Second Decade of Research
Currently Ukraine runs the State Research Program in Antarctica for 2002-2010, which is approved by the Cabinet Council Decree in 2001. The Program is financed by the State budget and includes following research areas:
    1. Oceanographic and bioresource  research
    2. Hydro-meteorological research
    3. Atmosphere and near space physics research
    4. Geological-geophysical research
    5. Medico-physiological research
    6. Biological research
    7. Nuclear physics research
    8. Engineering and realization of technological innovations
    9. Scientific information and tourist activity
The Program’s customer is the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine; the Program’s authority is the National Antarctic Scientific Center of Ukraine (NASC). To perform the Program and organize Ukrainian Antarctic expeditions NASC broadly involve institutes and organizations of high school, the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, other state and non-state organizations. 

Within the bounds of 9 research areas Ukraine presented 16 projects for III International Polar Year, collaborate with 14 countries (Argentine, Chile, Peru, Greece, Spain, Luxembourg, Poland, Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Slovenia, Slovakia, Russia, Great Britain, and USA).  Results of Ukrainian scientists’ research are regularly presented at international scientific conferences and in scientific-technical literature. Ukrainian school of Antarctic research is continually replenished with young scientists. 

In 2004 Ukraine was given a status of a Consultative Party of the Antarctic Treaty and in 2006 – a full Member of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).  The new status afforded an opportunity of more full and systematic representation of Ukraine in the Antarctic Treaty System, wider participation in international Antarctic research projects, and more active promotion of Ukrainian national interests in Antarctica. In 2008, for the first time in its history, Ukraine had the honor to host in Kyiv the XXXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 

In connection with completion in 2010 of the term of validity of the current State Research Program in Antarctica and also in connection with a new status in the Antarctic Treaty System, Ukraine started elaboration of a new State Special-Purpose Scientific Research Program in Antarctica for 2011-2020. In compliance with national procedures, a new Program Concept should be elaborated, which will be considered by the Ukrainian National Science Committee on Antarctic Research, presented in mass media, discussed by specialists, general public and after that undergo endorsement and approval by the Cabinet Council of Ukraine.   

The approval of the Program Concept will be followed by elaboration of the Program proper and further – the same procedures as with the Concept: consideration, discussion, endorsement and approval by the Cabinet Council of Ukraine. To implement the new Program Verkhovna Rada (the Ukrainian Parliament) should pass a special law. 

At present NASC jointly with institutions and organizations of Ukrainian high school, the National Academy of Sciences, other state and non-state organizations has prepared a draft Program Concept which is undergoing an examination and approval by experts and specialists from Ukrainian leading institutes and organizations for Antarctic research. 

In 2010 Ukraine is planning to submit for consideration of Antarctic community a new State Special-Purpose Scientific Research Program in Antarctica for 2011-2020, which will facilitate the consolidation and further development of international collaboration in Antarctica and in the Antarctic Treaty System on the basis of harmonious combination of national interests of Ukraine and other Parties of the Antarctic Treaty. 

