





Antarctica – 50 Years of Scientific Monitoring




Antarctica – An overview of 50 years of 
British scientific monitoring
 (1959-2009)
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Introduction & Background

Science has always been at the centre of human endeavour in Antarctica. It is just over 50 years since the International Geophysical Year (1957-58) established many of the long-term research and monitoring programmes now undertaken there. On the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty, and on completion of International Polar Year (2007-08), it is timely to reflect on the importance of Antarctic monitoring and look to its future.

Antarctica is a pivotal component of the Earth System and has a profound effect on the world’s climate and ocean systems. It provides a unique natural laboratory for the study of global processes, including climate change. The 50th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty gives us an opportunity to consider future science and long-term monitoring requirements.

The United Kingdom has prepared a short publication (which will be distributed as hard copy at the ATCM) to highlight the importance of scientific monitoring and research in the Antarctic.  This report shows that the science carried out is wide-ranging and consists of an integrated set of inter-disciplinary research, monitoring and survey activities. These scientific programmes are highly interconnected and involve significant national and international collaborations.

The UK considers it is essential that the ATS continues to monitor the Antarctic environment and extends this work to include new long-term research and monitoring for scientific areas about which we know very little. These include surveying the unknown deep-sea life in the Southern Ocean, understanding the causes and impact of ocean acidification, and determining the effects of climate change on Antarctic ecosystems. 

Antarctica still has much to tell us about our future. Only by continuing to work together can we address some of the key challenges.  




