





Science Supported by Antarctica New Zealand 2008/2009




Science Supported by Antarctica New Zealand 2008/2009

Information Paper Submitted by New Zealand

Summary
Antarctica New Zealand supported twenty nine science events in the 2008/2009 season. The research undertaken by these events fall under three interdisciplinary research themes that are outlined in the New Zealand Science Strategy for Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (2004-2009) that Antarctica New Zealand published in 2004. Each theme is subdivided into several sub-themes for clarification purposes. Following is a summary of the research undertaken under these themes.

1.  Antarctic Physical Environments Research
    a. The Lithosphere:
The main project under this sub-theme will produce a modern 1:250,000 geological map and web-accessible GIS database of the area encompassed by Ross Island and the Transantarctic Mountains compiling 50 years of geological mapping. This is a NZ funded IPY project. A smaller project recalibrated the gravity base station at Scott Base.
    b. Climate Change:
There are three projects in this sub-theme: The NZ portion of the international project ITASE aimed at collecting and analysing ice cores to determine the spatial climate variability across Antarctica over the last 200 focusing on coastal cores, which have been shown to be very sensitive to climatic variability; a project aimed at studying the response of the Antarctic ice sheet to future climate change by combining glacial, geomorphological and climatological approaches; and a new project aimed at deriving a terrestrial paleotemperature proxy based on the isotopic composition of pedogenic carbonate in Antarctic soils.
    c. The Cryosphere:
There are three projects in this sub-theme: One aims to develop an understanding of the interactions between glaciers and permafrost that will permit models of glaciers to realistically parameterise ice motion, thus improving their ability in predicting glacier response to climate change. a second project aims to improve the accuracy of remotely sensed, satellite-derived, snow and ice data by calibrating these data with ground-truth measurements.  In addition, a long-term study on sea ice and Southern Ocean processes is looking at the physical oceanography of McMurdo Sound, the turbulence that exists under sea ice and its influence on ice formation, circulation in Antarctic fjords, and the physical processes involved in the formation of frazil ice beneath land-fast sea ice (NZ-funded IPY project). This group currently has a team over-wintering at Scott Base.
    d. The Atmosphere:
Five long-term studies are supported under this sub-theme. These monitor: the general circulation of the atmosphere, in particular the behaviour of wave-driven circulation in the middle atmosphere and how this effects the transport of energy and momentum to higher altitudes; magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling and space weather at high latitudes; the drivers of change in the atmosphere, particularly those involved in the formation of the Antarctic ozone hole; human-induced long-term trends in trace gases to determine changes in oxidative capacity of the atmosphere; and the Scott Base climate record from 1957. A short-term project under this sub-theme studies the role of Bromine oxide in the regular depletion of tropospheric ozone during the Antarctic springtime to help us understand how these processes might influence the global tropospheric chemistry which is important for the changing concentrations of greenhouse gases.
2. Southern Ocean Research
    a. Oceanography of the Ross Sea:
Long-Term monitoring of tides at Cape Roberts and at Scott Base.
b/c.	Marine Biodiversity and Ecosystems:
A strong and diverse marine programme is made up of 5 projects. These aim to: study the distribution and abundance of meroplankton (larvae of benthic marine invertebrates and fish) in the water column by using morphological and molecular approaches to identify common larval types; study the productivity of algae that live in and under the sea ice and determine what the effects of global climate change will have on this productivity (NZ-funded IPY project); determine increased UV-R radiation damages the DNA of Antarctic invertebrate larvae and embryos and the impacts on how they recover from such damage, and the effects of ocean acidification on the development the invertebrate’s skeleton; and define and quantify the role of sea ice for ecosystem functioning in Antarctic coastal ecosystems, specifically, the interaction between sea ice, pelagic and benthic communities. The final project is a long-term study aimed at characterising the structure and function of benthic marine communities and determine their relationships to key environmental factors as this is important for an improved understanding of Antarctic biodiversity and ecology, and management of the Antarctic coastal zone (NZ-funded IPY project).

3. Antarctic Ecosystems Research
    a. Terrestrial Biodiversity:
Three projects under this sub-theme are aimed at: studying microbial speciation, biogeography, and evolution of thermal adaptation at a geographically isolated geothermal site; studying the biodiversity and performance of lichens, mosses, springtails, mites and nematodes along the Victoria Land coast; using an interdisciplinary approach to determine the present status of Dry Valley biodiversity, and to predict the effects of multiple potential impacts on these ecosystems (NZ-funded IPY project).
    b. Ecosystem Functioning:
Four projects under this sub-theme aim to: undertake a long-term study on the population dynamics of the Adèlie penguin population of the Ross Sea as a biological indicator of local, regional and global change; study the polar evolution of springtails by looking at growth rates, responses of the metabolic rate to temperature and the connection between activity, growth and evolutionary rates; understand how terrestrial organisms have adapted to changes in the Antarctic climate during the last 35 million years by conducting physiological and phylogeographic studies of freezing tolerant and freezing resistant invertebrates; study various aspects of Antarctic aquatic ecosystems, geochemistry of ponds, and photosynthetic and nitrogen fixation rates of microbial mats to assess model predictions against actual observations (NZ-funded IPY project).
    c. Human Ecology
A project examining the relationships between circannual patterns of psychological and physical activity in Antarctica to generate recommended countermeasures for any decrements in health, safety, and job performance that may arise due to low periods of human activation while on deployment to Antarctica.
    d. Management and Conservation:
Research supporting environmental protection and management of ice-free areas of the Ross Sea region by increasing the fundamental knowledge and understanding of Antarctic soils including soil distribution and climate, and vulnerability to human impact, and quantifying the cumulative impacts of human activities on Antarctic soils, identifying areas of greater vulnerability.
The current science strategy document plus further information on these projects (including web links to the project home pages, recent publications and metadata) can be found on Antarctica New Zealand’s website at:  www.antarcticanz.govt.nz. Also on New Zealand’s IPY website: http://ipy.antarcticanz.govt.nz/

