





Joint medical evacuation from Davis Station, Antarctica 




Joint Medical Evacuation from Davis Station, Antarctica
by the United States and Australia

Summary

On November 5, 2008, the United States and Australia successfully completed the air evacuation of a badly injured program participant from Davis Station, Antarctica.  The patient, a winter-over employee of the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), suffered multiple fractures during an all-terrain vehicle mishap on October 20, 2008 while on a field trip at Trajer Ridge, a site approximately 25 kilometers from Davis Station.  Although the patient transport was accomplished after an uneventful ten-hour flight in a ski-equipped LC-130 Hercules transport from Davis Station, Antarctica to Hobart, Tasmania, this was the culmination of several weeks of intense operations and logistics coordination between the United States Antarctic Program (USAP) and the AAD.  The patient had been scheduled to return to Australia in mid-November, after a year-long deployment at Davis.

Operations

The initial notification of the incident at Davis Station came from the AAD to the National Science Foundation (NSF), the manager of the USAP, shortly after the accident occurred.  Based on the medical assessment of the patient’s condition, NSF and the AAD immediately began discussing the range of options for how the evacuation could be completed.  As part of the initial notification, both the New Zealand and Australian Rescue Coordination Centers (RCCs) were notified of the situation.

The operational concept approved for the evacuation was to use a U.S. ski-equipped LC-130 Hercules aircraft to fly from McMurdo Station to Davis, remain overnight for crew rest and refueling, and then fly the next day from Davis Station to Hobart, Tasmania.  

A temporary sea-ice runway was prepared by Davis Station personnel using heavy machinery in the week before the mission execution.  The makeshift runway was 3000 meters long and 1.8 meters deep.  NSF, the U.S. Air Force, and the AAD worked together extensively to ensure that the runway would be able to meet the rigorous Air Force safety standards for landing the LC-130 Hercules, which weighed 59 tons.  The pilot of the LC-130 Hercules later commended runway engineers on a job well done, stating that a poorly prepared surface would have created an ocean wave upon landing, potentially cracking the ice in front of the aircraft.

Medical Assistance

The eight-member medical team on board for the evacuation consisted of an Australian doctor and nurse, a Joint Medical Attendant Transport Team of three U.S. Army medical personnel from Tripler Army Medical Center, and three U.S. Air Force medical personnel.  Using a Hercules that was on regular deployment to the Antarctic, the medical team flew out from Christchurch, New Zealand to McMurdo before heading to Davis some 1500 miles away.  The patient was in serious but stable condition, suffering from multiple serious injuries.  Prior to their arrival, the patient was cared for by the only doctor at the Davis station.
Resources and Equipment

Due to the timing of the accident and the fact that it occurred early in the season, the initial response capabilities for both the U.S. and Australia were limited.  The U.S. was in the process of mobilizing aircraft to Antarctica for the austral summer and had only C-17 Globemaster aircraft support available.  Australian assets included the research and resupply ship Aurora Australis and helicopters.  The runway at Casey Station was not operable, and no ski-equipped aircraft were on-continent to support the evacuation.  Although the Aurora Australis was diverted from the Casey station to Davis soon after the accident, its progress was slowed by bad weather and sea ice.  Air evacuation using the LC-130 proved to be a faster instrument for the rescue mission.

The LC-130 aircraft in the USAP are operated by the 109th Airlift Wing of the New York Air National Guard and support research and logistics activities for the NSF in both the Arctic and Antarctic regions.  The military aircraft are ski-equipped to allow for landings on snow and ice; the skis retract and the aircraft can also land on traditional runways.  They also have jet-assisted-takeoff rockets which are used for shorter takeoff runs and operations from rough, unprepared snow surfaces.  

In addition to the aircraft, the evacuation mission used the NSF-funded Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction System (AMPS) to forecast the Antarctic weather.  Utilized routinely by the USAP, the AMPS weather forecasts were crucial for the operational planning of the complex medical evacuation flight.


