





Bioprospecting activities of Brazil in Antarctica: a short report




Brazilian biological prospecting activities in Antarctica: a short report

Information Paper submitted by Brazil
Agenda item ATCM 17


The study of Antarctic biodiversity and biological processes in Antarctica has been a major topic in Antarctic Science since the establishment of SCAR. Antarctica has unique environmental characteristics, and biota associated to Antarctic ecosystems present adaptations to extreme or peculiar conditions which can be of great interest for application in several man related processes. Organisms that have been studied in bioprospecting projects include krill and other small invertebrates, sponges, fish, algae, lichens and microorganisms, such as bacteria, archaea, actinobacteria, molds and yeasts. A number of products sourced in Antarctica have already been developed and are commercialized nowadays in areas such as food and beverages, pharmaceutical/medical, cosmetics, personal care, molecular biology and biotechnology. 

Brazilian activities related to bioprospection in Antarctica so far have focused mainly in the search for potential applications of biodiversity in areas of biotechnological interest, with no patent or commercialized products being generated so far. A recent example include a project of the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (EMBRAPA) which aims at the development of frost resistant products to be used in agriculture and cattle raising based on anti-freezing molecules from Antarctic fish (site in Portuguese: http://www.embrapa.br/imprensa/noticias/2007/maio/foldernoticia.2007-05-11.5628368136/noticia.2007-05-15.1728390562/). 

Microorganisms are also being studied as source of potential application in biotechnology, as part of the Brazilian activities during IPY (FP#403, under MERGE and CAML umbrellas). In a thorough assessment of microbial diversity in different terrestrial and maritime ecosystems of King George and Deception Islands, molecular biology and cultivation methods are being used to study the diversity, ecology and biogeography of bacteria, archaea, fungi, cianobacteria and viruses. Strains obtained in this study are being searched for their potential for biotechnological application, including screening for specific enzymatic and cytotoxic activity, sequencing of catabolic genes involved in hydrocarbon degradation, and production of bioactive compounds. Table 1 summarises the results obtained so far in this topic. 

Table 1. Summary of results obtained from the assessment of Antarctic microbial diversity potential for biotechnological applications.
  
Organism
Source
Target
Status
Bacteria
Soil
Amylases, proteases, phosphate solubilizers
25 isolates, 4 producing proteases

Associated to vascular plants (Deschampsia sp. and Colobanthus sp.)
Anti-freezing proteins
Cultivated

Associated to macroalgae (Palmaria sp.)
Extracellular lipases
Cultivated
Activity detected

Marine sediment
Catabolic genes related to aromatic and aliphatic hydrocarbon degradation
Genes sequenced and deposited in GenBank

Soil and Marine sediment
Compounds with chiral activity for chemical industry application
8 isolates presenting target activity
Magnetotatic bacteria
Lake and marine sediment
Compounds with application in Nanotechnology 
Cultivated

Cianobacteria
Lake and marine water and sediment
Bioactive substances  for pharmaceutical application
Cultivated
Fungi
Marine and lake sediments and water, conventional and ornithogenic soil, associated to  vascular plants and macroalgae
Bioactive compounds for pharmaceutical application; antimicrobial activity;
Cytotoxic activity against human tumoral and parasites’ (Leishmania and Trypanosoma) cells
1200 mold isolates
800 yeasts isolates
603 extracts being assayed for target activities
 
Even though many of the isolates obtained so far belong to known species, the assessment is allowing for detection of physiological processes adapted to Antarctic extreme conditions, as the presence of cold active proteases, or genetic particularities, as new gene sequences coding for known hydrocarbon degrading enzymes. The use of modern molecular tools, such as pirosequencing, construction of DNA or functional genes libraries, and fingerprinting methods such as DGGE (denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis), is also contributing to expand the knowledge on the microbial diversity including the huge universe of the uncultivated species. 

The Antarctic microorganisms isolated by this study as well as data associated to these organisms will be deposited in the Brazilian Collection of Microorganisms of Environment and Industry (Coleção Brasileira de Micro-organismos de Ambiente e Indústria – CBMAI, http://webdrm.cpqba.unicamp.br/), and will be available for public access and future Research & Development projects. This collection is part of a program financed by the Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology which focus on the establishment of a Brazilian Network of Biological Resource Centers, which is in consonance with the Global BRC Network (GBRCN), an initiative of OECD to promote international collaboration in this area aiming at the support to social and economical development.  

Brazilian view on biological prospecting in Antarctica

Brazil believes that discussions regarding concepts, definitions and processes related to biological prospecting in Antarctica should continue under the Antactic Treaty System (STA). 

Brazil considers that appropriate regulation within the ATS should be encourage in order to promote the benefit of Antarctic bioprospecting activities for all countries, in line with the principles established under the Antarctic Treaty, especially those concerned with cooperation and exchange of information. Brazil also believes that there are aspects related to biological prospecting of a broader nature, which could benefit from  the ongoing debates in other fora.  It should be recognized that the issue also has implication that are specific to the Antarctic Treaty context. Due to the complexity of the issue, discussion could initially focus on some definitions, such as “bioprospecting”, “genetic resource”, “genetic material”, “scientific research”, “applied scientific research”, “marine biodiversity” etc.

As for specific contributions for further discussions Brazil considers that: A) Sovereignty -  it should be made clear that the CDB establishes sovereign rights of States over its natural resources, which includes genetic resources; B) Access - Brazil considers important to “clarify how access to Antarctic genetic resources should be conducted, for what purposes and under what conditions”, taking into consideration that  biological prospecting could lead to economic exploitation, including patent applications, and that the Antarctic Treaty does not explicitly deals with this issue. It is therefore pertinent to discuss the possibilities of different rules/procedures covering different situations; C) Commercialization: Brazil agrees with the view that no action should be taken that discourages Antarctic research. However, one should acknowledge that if patents are obtained, information is no longer freely circulated, which raises the issue of consistency with article III.1. It would therefore seem warranted  to further discuss this issue, while recognizing its complexity; D) Benefit Sharing, Brazil considers it necessary to undertake a discussion on the matter, including the possibility to use biological prospecting as a means for the protection of the Antarctic Environment.


