





Initial Environmental Evaluation Law-Racovita Station





Initial Environmental Evaluation
Law-Racovita Station

Romanian Antarctic Activities are developing under the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which Romania signed in 1990 and ratified in 2003, with all its Annexes, requiring that all activities proposed to be conducted in Antarctica are subject to prior assessment of their impacts on the Antarctic environment and on dependent or associated ecosystems. On the other hand, our activities are carried out taking into consideration the Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations (EIA) and the revised COMNAP “Practical Guidelines”.

As the Romanian Antarctic Foundation determined that our activities in Antarctica had a minor impact on the Antarctic Environment, an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) has been elaborated before the International Antarctic expedition at Law-Racovita Station organized by Romania with a support of India and Australia.

1. Description of the proposed activity
Title: International Antarctic Expedition (Australia, India, Estonia and Romania) 
 Location: Law-Racovita Base, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, 69023'16"S and 76022'47"E
 Duration: January 10, 2009 – February 08, 2009
 Number of team members: 4
 Type of activities: pedobiological, limnology researches 
 Organization Responsible for the preparation of the IEE: Romanian Antarctic Foundation
                
Comments: Our activities will be carried out in Law – Racovita Station and in Larsemann Hills area.
1. During the daily regular activities, we will not disturb the local environment as the base is located on monolith rock;
2. During the sampling activities that require some routes in the area, we will use only  those routes on the rock, whenever possible, avoiding to step on sand, not to disturb the biotope;
3. In order to go to Progress and Zhong Shan Stations will use the way of the cars in accordance with the Management Plan;
4. One Honda-type of 0,900W will be used a few days and a few hours per day, only for laboratory equipment. The generator is not generating significant noise and emissions. For the rechargeable battery we use a solar panel and for other necessities we will call the neighbouring stations;
5. The storage of food is located in a special place so as not to affect the environment; 
6. Management and handling of waste grey water and kerosene will be performed carefully. For kerosene we use a metal sheet plateau to avoid any leakage as drops towards the lakes in the valley;

We strictly observe for all activities, in order to minimise the environmental impact, the Guidelines to Law-Racovita Base elaborated by Australian Antarctic Division in accordance with Protocol of Madrid.    

Analysis of expected impacts          
The expected impact from the International activities in Law-Racovita Base area is minor, practically it does not exist.
This IEE assessment is elaborated by Romanian Antarctic Foundation and the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs is informed about it.   

Contact name and address:
Eng. Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, Ph.D
President of the Romanian Antarctic Foundation
C.P. 42-29, Bucharest-4, Romania
Tel/Fax: 0040213372986, mobile: 0040743009984
Email: negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com   

