





Concepts, Terms and Definitions, including a Comparative Analysis

(biological prospecting)





ATCM Information Paper

Concepts, Terms and Definitions, including a Comparative Analysis

 28 February 2009

1.	Introduction
SCAR, CEP, the reports of ATCM XXVI, XXVIII and XXXI and the report of the ICG noted the value of defining some of the terms associated with biological prospecting, particularly the need for a working definition of the concept “biological prospecting. Other such terms included “biological resources”, “biological material”, “genetic resources” and “genetic material”.  It was also noted in the ICG report that “use could be made of the work carried out in other forums, such as the CBD”.
An Informal Intergovernmental Meeting of Experts on Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area was held in Baarn, Netherlands, 3-5 February 2009. The purpose of this informal meeting was to consider issues raised by biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area, with a view to assisting ATCPs prepare documents in order to support a more informed, structured and focused discussion at the ATCM XXXII. The discussions on concepts, terms and definitions focused in particular on biological prospecting, biological resources, genetic resources, access and benefit sharing. 
This paper is one of the papers discussed during that meeting. It explores definitions that are being used, or have been proposed for use, on the international, regional and national level, including particularly in the context of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). In doing so, the paper recognizes the difficulty of defining the terms associated with biological prospecting. In many cases (for example in the context of the ecosystem approach used by CCAMLR) it is possible to move forward with implementation and practical work before official definitions have been agreed upon. Definitions that are practical and useful may be developed only after a certain degree of experience has been acquired.
2.	The Antarctic Treaty System
There are no specific relevant definitions in the ATS for terms such as “biological prospecting”, including what distinguishes “biological prospecting” from “harvesting activities”, “biological resources”, “biological material”, “genetic resources”, “genetic material”, “commercially confident information” and “benefit sharing”.
CCAMLR defines “Antarctic marine living resources” as “the populations of fin fish, molluscs, crustaceans and all other species of living organisms, including birds, found south of the Antarctic Convergence”.
3.	Bioprospecting or biological prospecting
There is no internationally agreed definition of “biological prospecting” or any related terms such as “bioprospecting”.
Examples of definitions used in various contexts:
“The sampling of diverse organisms for genes, gene products and other compounds that are of value to humans.”
Nature.com glossary
“Systematic search for genes, natural compounds, designs, and whole organisms in wild life with a potential for product development by biological observation and biophysical, biochemical, and genetic methods, without disruption to nature.”
The Encyclopedia of Biodiversity
 “The exploration of biodiversity for commercially valuable genetic and biochemical resources” and “The process of gathering information from the biosphere on the molecular composition of genetic resources for the development of new commercial products.”
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity 
“Exploration of biodiversity for commercially, scientifically, or culturally valuable genetic and biochemical resources.”
United Nations Environment Programme, Division of Environmental Law and Conventions
Discussion
Attempts to distinguish fundamental science from applied science in the marine context have been ongoing in the law of the sea discussions for many years. “Marine Scientific Research” (MSR), an important freedom of the seas and the subject of a significant part of UNCLOS, was left undefined due to the inability of the negotiators to reach a consensus about how to distinguish MSR from more applied, commercially orientated activities, not a freedom of the seas. At the fifth meeting of the ICP in 2004, it was reiterated that the distinction between fundamental and applied MSR had never been accepted universally, since there was no perceivable difference in activities or methods. In that context it was generally recognized that the main distinction lies in the intent and purpose of the research, as well as the use of the knowledge and results of the research. Attempts at clarifying the relationship between bioprospecting and MSR and highlighting elements of difference have met with resistance, in particular from developing States.
Despite the importance of bioprospecting to the objectives of the CBD and the attention it has received over the last 20 years within that process, especially during the recent negotiations of the international regime on access and benefit sharing, the CBD does not define the terms “biological prospecting”, “bioprospecting”, “prospecting”, “exploration” or “development”. In part that is due to the fact that provisions of the Convention do not draw a distinction between fundamental and applied research and only require Parties to promote and encourage research that contributes to the conservation and  sustainable use of biological diversity in general.  However, a note prepared by the CBD Secretariat has defined bioprospecting (see above).
In the CBD process, it has often been suggested that distinguishing between non-commercial and other research might be best done by concentrating on the purpose of the research activity, rather than in the character of the research activity as such. 
A variety of definitions of bioprospecting are provided in several domestic laws.  Under New Zealand’s Biodiversity Strategy, bioprospecting is “the search among biological organisms for commercially valuable compounds, substances or genetic material.” Within the context of the European Community, bioprospecting “entails the search for economically valuable genetic and biochemical resources from nature.” The South African 2004 Biodiversity Act defines bioprospecting as “any research on, or development or application of, indigenous biological resources for commercial or industrial exploitation, and includes the systematic search, collection or gathering of such resources or making extractions from such resources for purposes of such research, development or application (...)”.
The US National Park Service uses: “Scientific research that looks for a useful application, process, or product in nature is called biodiversity prospecting, or bioprospecting.  In many cases, bioprospecting is a search for useful organic compounds in microorganisms, plants, and fungi that grow in extreme environments, such as rainforests, deserts, and hot springs.”
The Australian House of Representatives Standing Committee on Primary Industries and Regional Services noted, “(t)he committee's first task at the start of the inquiry was to understand the meaning of the term, 'bioprospecting'. It soon became clear that there is no standard definition and there are different views on how far ‘bioprospecting’ extends down the commercialisation path.”  (see Bioprospecting: Discoveries changing the future,Report to the Parliament).
A survey by UNU-IAS of the term biological prospecting presented to the sixth meeting of the ICP in 2005 (see Bioprospecting of Genetic Resources in the Deep Seabed: Scientific, Legal and Policy Aspects, available at  http://www.ias.unu.edu/binaries2/DeepSeabed.pdf) suggested there was emerging “common understanding that the term “bioprospecting” involves research for commercial purposes”. Possible elements of a definition of bioprospecting include:
    • systematic search, collection, gathering or sampling of biological resources for purposes of commercial or industrial exploitation;
    • screening, isolation, characterization of commercially useful compounds;
    • testing and trials; and
    • further application and development of the isolated compounds for commercial purposes, including large-scale collection, development of mass culture techniques, and conduct of trials for approval for commercial sale.
While definitions still diverge as to whether bioprospecting covers the subsequent stages of the search and sampling of resources, including further application and development, many of the comments made within the ATCM about the issue have assumed that fundamental scientific research should be encouraged and not further regulated, but that more commercially orientated applied research needs further consideration.
Distinguishing between fundamental scientific research and commercial bioprospecting activities in Antarctica is at least as complicated as it is elsewhere.  Commercial companies have formed partnerships with scientific research organizations to fund expeditions and to collect samples. Alternatively, commercial interests have relied on material provided by national culture collections where strains are often deposited by universities and institutions involved in scientific research. Strains of many microbes are available for a nominal fee from several culture collections and some are even offered for sale over the internet.  Also, over time, uses change, so there are instances where the biological specimen was collected for fundamental science (taxonomic classification of lichen) but 20 years later a company accessed the specimen and used it to develop a new product.  In practice, any discussions related to non-commercial and other research may need to take into account both the research and commercialization processes, including the possibility of fundamental scientific research resulting in commercial developments sometime in the future. At the same time, only a minority of commercially-oriented research results in actual products for marketing that are later successfully sold for monetary gain. This reality will need to be taken into account in further discussions related to access and benefit-sharing.
4.	 Biological and genetic resources
Biological resources - includes genetic resources, organisms or parts thereof, populations, or any other biotic component of ecosystems with actual or potential use or value for humanity.
CBD Article 2
Genetic resources - means genetic material of actual or potential value.
CBD Article 2
Discussion
The definition of genetic resources used by the CBD has widely been accepted by the international community. For example, it was the basis for the definition of genetic material used by the subsequent International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. CCAMLR defines its relevant “resources” in similarly broad ways.
In practice though these definitions have caused problems.  In the discussions of the CBD Group of Legal and Technical Experts on Concepts, Terms, Working Definitions and Sectoral Approaches in December 2008, some participants were of the view that research is showing that DNA and RNA, the functional units of heredity, are found in virtually all cells and cell types and in many other parts of organisms.  They felt that, for example, wood and wool contain DNA and could therefore be considered genetic resources as well as being biological resources and commodities, depending on their use.  One country suggested that in practical terms, genetic resources are any biological material, or material of biological origin, that can be reproduced in order to use genetic traits of actual or potential interest. Genetic resources, in turn, can be defined as “DNA and RNA molecules, together with the inheritable properties or traits that are characteristic of them, and that have actual or potential value or use”.
It was also noted in the CBD discussions that further clarification might be needed in regards to the term “of actual and potential value”. Actual or potential use of genetic material indicates an attribution of value. Therefore, it might be useful to consider the categories of activities and uses of genetic material that takes placein the Antarctic Treaty Area. The following five ways of taking advantage of biological and genetic resources were suggested by one country in the CBD process:
    a) molecules for the production of pharmaceuticals and other industrial products
    b) enzymes, especially for the food and chemical industries
    c) genes, for genetic production and improvement
    d) parts of or entire organisms for the development of natural, homeopathic, cosmetic and other products
e)   information for new markets, such as biocomputing, genomics, etc.
The Madrid Protocol definitions of "native mammal" (means any member of any species belonging to the Class Mammalia, indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there seasonally through natural migrations); "native bird" (means any member, at any stage of its life cycle (including eggs), of any species of the Class Aves indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there seasonally through natural migrations); "native plant" (means any terrestrial or freshwater vegetation, including bryophytes, lichens, fungi and algae, at any stage of its life cycle (including seeds, and other propagules), indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area) and "native invertebrate" (means any terrestrial or freshwater invertebrate, at any stage of its life cycle, indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area), have raised questions as to the scope and application of its provisions as well.  For example, as a result of using these definitions it is assumed that its provisions do not apply to microorganisms.
The CBD process has for many years grappled with the need for definitions in order to clarify its provisions relating to biological prospecting.  Despite the value of having such definitions, consensus has eluded the Parties and few definitions have been adopted.  In the negotiations of the Bonn Guidelines, for example, the Parties focused on trying to define a number of  terms, such as access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing.
However, consensus eluded the Parties and these terms were not defined in the Bonn Guidelines.  The reasons for this were many and complex.  As highlighted by the summary above of the discussions about genetic resources, a significant reason was that the terms have different meanings in different contexts and languages and resolving these differences in the absence of experience proved too difficult and complex.
Nevertheless, in the Antarctic Treaty Area, there is a specific legal framework that implies that specific definitions have to be found for its context in order to arrive at an agreed regulatory regime for biological prospecting south of 60 degrees South.

