





Report of the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group




Report of the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group
Information Paper submitted by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom and United States 


Abstract
Following the adoption of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 Deception Island at ATCM XXVIII, the Parties active in Deception Island established a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the ASMA Management Plan. This paper gives a brief report on the Management Group’s activities to date.
Introduction
Deception Island was formally adopted as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 by Measure 3 (2005). Working Paper XXVIII ATCM/ WP 20 and Information Papers XII SATCM/IP8, XXIV ATCM/IP63, XXV ATCM/IP28 and XXVI ATCM/IP48 submitted to the CEP summarise the extensive consultation amongst those Parties with major interests in Deception Island, and the process that lead to its adoption as an ASMA.
Following the formal adoption of ASMA No. 4, XXIX ATCM/IP19 reported on the establishment of a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the plan, and on the success of the Deception Island management group in its first year to effectively resolve the previously reported conflicts between science and tourism. At XXX ATCM, IP 108 and ATCM XXXI, IP 126 gave an overview of the activities undertaken on Deception Island during the 2006/07 and 2007/08 austral summers, and informed the Meeting of the planned intersessional work that the Management Group were considering.  
This paper is a summary of the intersessional activities undertaken by the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group and the planned work over the next intersessional period, in order to fulfil the objectives and principles of ASMA No. 4 Management Plan. 
Work of the Deception Island Management Group
Activities in past inter-sessional period (2008-09)
a) Review process for the ASMA Nr. 4 Management Plan
During the previous intersessional period the Deception Island Management Group conducted extensive discussions related to management of Deception Island. In light of the discussions the Deception Island Management Group has initiated the review process for the ASMA Nr. 4 Management Plan, due in 2010. 
The aim of the Deception Island Management Plan is to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of Deception Island, whilst managing the variety of competing demands placed upon it, including science, logistics, tourism, and the conservation of its natural and historic values.  
In the margins of the XXXI ATCM (Kyiv, 2008) the Management Group hold a meeting at the Argentine Embassy in Kyiv, in order to set the framework and schedule to continue the review of the ASMA No. 4 Management Plan. During the 2008-09 inter-sessional period, the Management Group began a review of the ASMA and ASPA management plan provisions for the marine area of Port Foster. Port Foster is one of the most unique and best-known marine areas in Antarctica, with high scientific importance for studies on marine flora and fauna and the effects of volcanic activity on marine environments. Deception Island also has one of the most complete species estimates for any Antarctic marine area. The UK undertook an initial study to examine possible approaches for management and protection of the marine environment. 
Based on such a study and in order to improve the protection of the marine environment at Deception Island, the Group considered possible options for extending the boundaries of ASPA No. 145 to include a greater variety of habitats, as well as areas of geomorphological interest and existing reference sites. The Group also discussed a range of options for the designation of new zones within ASMA No. 4, based on the distribution of different activities in Port Foster. It was concluded that General Use, Facilities and Reference zones warranted further consideration. 
Recognising the high level of ship traffic at Deception Island, the Group also began consideration of alternative approaches to reduce the risk of accidents. Experiences from Svalbard provide a useful example of the type of management approaches which might be considered, such as guidance on communications between inbound and outbound vessels, consideration of visibility, sea state and current, and speed restrictions. 
b) Site Guidelines for visitors
In addition, on behalf of the Parties involved in the Deception Island Management Group, a set of Site Guidelines for Telefon Bay and Baily Head were presented to the XXXII ATCM as Working Paper No. 28, for consideration of the Meeting. These Draft Site Guidelines, whose contents are based on the Visitor Codes included in the ASMA Nr. 4 Management Plan, were considered by all members of the Group, who provided useful comments which were included in the final version.  
c) Incidents in Deception Island by a private expedition
An Expedition Group led by Mr. Mike Horn, a South-African explorer on board of the Brazilian-flagged vessel called “Pangaea” seemed to have incurred in a number of irregular situations while they visited Deception Island, on October 24th-25th, 2008. The information on this expedition was found at Mike Horn’s website (http://mikehorn.com) and specific information on the Antarctic trip can be found at http://mikehorn.com/index.php/site/page/ist_yep_antarctica_expedition/
According to this website, one of the aims of this expedition, particularly its “Young Explorers Program”, is to give young adults the chance to experience nature and discover its beauty, creating a respect for the planet and its resources. During the project, young adults from each continent would join Mr. Mike Horn for a period of 10 -12 days on 12 projects. One of these projects has included a trip to Antarctica, during late October, 2008. In first place, both Explorer’s logs and photo galleries showed some photos taken inside ASPA Nr. 140 site K (Kroner Lake), although there is no indication throughout the log about the ASPAs existence and/or the need for authorization of any kind. So, presumably they were unaware of the Deception Island Management Plan and, more generally, of the provisions of the Madrid Protocol, in terms of area protection. Secondly, an additional photo shows the group bathing on Whaler’s Bay, inside a ‘pool’ dug in the beach with wood posts on its sides. Firstly, as these posts seem to be part of the remains of HSM 71, so this situation looks like a clear contravention of both the Management Plan and the Madrid Protocol Annex V. Digging swimming pools in the coast had been discouraged by IAATO last year, and the Site Guidelines for Whalers Bay (Resolutiom 2, 2008) expressly states ‘Do not dig bathing pits’.
The Deception Island ASMA Management Group has therefore considered it appropriate to contact both South African and Brazilian authorities, in order to inform them about this situation, and, if possible, to ask them for any likely further information. The Deception Island ASMA Management Group expressed its concerns about this incident since it seemed to have contravened the objectives and principles of the ASMA Nr. 4 Management Plan.

Both South African and Brazilian authorities have promptly responded to the Group’s enquiries. The South African authorities informed that they had received a request from Mike Horn's wife (based and living in Switzerland) asking for them to issue a permit to visit Antarctica. At the time all that was mentioned was that they had planned to take some students on an educational cruise to Antarctica during which time they would assist in cleaning up an abandoned base. The South African authorities accordingly advised them that they did not have any regulations in place to be able to issue them with a permit and informed them to provide South Africa with their detailed plans for their visit. This included dates of their planned activities, area of operation, port of departure, flag state of their vessel etc. 
They were also informed of the South African responsibilities to the ATS and the Protocol and were requested to confirm that they were aware of the inherent dangers, had the necessary contingency plans and insurance in place etc. as prescribed by the Treaty. Unfortunately, the proponents chose not to respond. A reminder for a response also met with no reaction. After the Management Group informed the South African authorities about this situation, they made a further contact to those responsible for such an expedition. This time, they responded to the South African authorities, expressing surprise and confirming the team was totally unaware that Deception Island was restricted ground, and that they all regretted very much that this incidence had occurred. They also informed that the team that was on the island left everything exactly as they found it. Mike Horn’s team also argued they had tried to contact the South African Antarctic Authorities with no success.  
In turn, South African authorities responded to the various allegations, as received from Mike Horn’s team, to the Deception Island ASMA Management Group. Among other things, they made it clear that South Africa had not received any reaction to their initial e-mail dated 8 October 2008 in which the authorities requested detail information on the Pangea Expedition so that they could have provided meaningful advice to such an expedition. 
Finally, the South African authorities kindly expressed its willingness to provide any further information about this activity to the Management Group by the next ATCM.

From their side, Brazilian authorities confirmed that they had been contacted by Mike Horn´s team, based on the fact that the vessel Pangaea operated under a Brazilian flag. In addition, the vessel was leaving from Brazil and part of the staff was Brazilian. However, Brazilian authorities informed that no requests to entry into any ASPAs or ASMAs had ever been made. According to the documentation provided to Brazilian authorities, the team demonstrated to be aware of the provisions of the Madrid Protocol and seemed to care for environmental issues. Besides, Brazil provided specific information to the team about the requirement of permits to get into protected areas. 

The Deception Island Management Group is very thankful to both South African and Brazilian authorities, for their prompt responses to our enquiries, and for the further actions undertaken. The Management Group is very much concerned about such incidents, and plans to consider additional measures to facilitate access of information to the public, in order to avoid that situations like this occurred again. The Group will appreciate that any information on proposals and or requests from private expeditions related to Deception Island directed to Antarctic National authorities be informed to the Group as soon as possible, in order to be prepared to provide any advice or assistance to the proponents. 
d) New record of non-native plants in Deception Island
It has been reported to the Management Group by a member of IAATO that a small number of non native vascular (flowering) plants are growing at Whalers Bay, Deception Island. The species involved has been identified by BAS specialists as Nassauvia magellanica (family Asteraceae, formerly Compositae), which is native to central and southern Tierra del Fuego and southern Patagonia (north to ca. 50oS).  Whether the plant has been introduced naturally (wind or bird) or by human vector - both are possible – remains unknown.

The plant reported at Whalers Bay appears to be well established, suggesting it has survived more than one winter and could be between 2-5 yrs old. It is about 6-8 cm across and comprises about 25 shoots up to 2 cm long.  It is growing in a substrate of fine ash with several species of moss around it. There are three younger plants within its immediate environs. As with many montane plant species native to Tierra del Fuego, N. magellanica would be well-adapted to survive at sea level on Deception Island.

Given the possibility that they could have been introduced anthropogenically, the Management Group members quickly got in touch to explore the possibility of initiating actions aimed to eradicate these plants before they spread further. Unfortunately, the news about this finding arrived late in the season so the Argentine and Spanish scientific staff had already left Antarctica and had been therefore unable to take further actions. The management Group will make all necessary arrangements to ensure this alien species is eradicated as early as possible during the next summer season. 

Planned inter-sessional work (2009-10)
Discussions will be held within the context of the objectives of the ASMA Management Plan, which are to: 
    • assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities in the Area, encourage co-operation between Antarctic Treaty Parties and other stakeholders, and manage potential or actual conflicts of interest between different activities, including science, logistics and tourism;
    • avoid unnecessary degradation, by human disturbance, to the unique natural values of the Area;
    • minimise the possibility of non-native species being introduced through human activities;
    • prevent unnecessary disturbance, destruction or removal of historic buildings, structures and artefacts;
    • safeguard those working in or near to, or visiting, the Area from the significant volcanic risk;
    • provide an opportunity for visitors to experience this unique island, and promote an awareness, through education, of its significance. 

Based on these discussions the Group will, over the intersessional period, work to identify the most appropriate components for the revised ASMA and ASPA management plans. The Group plans to continue the Management Plan review during the 2009-10 inter-sessional period. The possibility of holding a Meeting during the next intersessional period with the aim of speeding up the process of elaborating a draft revised Plan will be subject of consideration by the Group. 
The Group will provide a report to CEP XIII with the progress made on the above.
Conclusions
Based on the assumption that the growth and diversification of human activities on Deception Island may lead to an increase in the risk of environmental impacts and/or shipping accidents, the Management Group has already initiated a review of the ASMA No. 4 Management Plan, originally due to begin in 2010. The Group will consider different alternatives to underpin the comprehensive protection of the unique and scientifically important environment of Deception Island and Port Foster, and to monitor and mitigate the cumulative impacts of human activities. 



