





Inspection undertaken by Norway in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty





Inspection undertaken by Norway in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty
Submitted by Norway


Abstract:  Norway undertook an inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty in February 2009. The inspection covered 3 stations and installations in Dronning Maud Land and Coats Land.  The report from the inspection is still being compiled, and a full report of the findings will be finalized and circulated to the Antarctic Treaty Parties in due time before ATCM XXXIII (2010).

Information: Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty entitles each Consultative Party to designate observers who shall have the right to carry out unannounced on-spot inspections. The purpose of these inspections is to promote the objectives of and ensure compliance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the measures adopted under it.  Inspections have been carried out on a regular basis in Antarctica since the inception of the Treaty. All in all around 45 inspections have been conducted during the first 50 years of the Treaty’s existence (including the 2009 Norwegian inspection). 

Inspections have been undertaken by Norway in January 1990, December 1996 and January 2001. A fourth inspection was carried out during the period 19-22 February 2009. This inspection covered 3 stations and installations in Dronning Maud Land and Coats Land:

    • Princess Elisabeth Antarctica (71°57’S , 23°20’E)
    • Halley (75°35'S, 26°34'W)
    • Novo Airbase (70°49'S, 11°37'E)

One station was just recently opened and still under construction (Princess Elisabeth Antarctica), while one was operating at the end of its lifecycle (Halley V).  Two of the operations were scientific research stations (Halley V and Princess Elisabeth Antarctica), while one installation provides support functions to inter alia national Antarctic programs (Novo Airbase). Neither Princess Elisabeth nor Novo Airbase had been inspected previously. Halley was last inspected in 1993/94 (Sweden), the only time the current station complex at Halley (Halley V) has been inspected earlier.

The 2009 inspection team is still working on compiling its report from the inspection. Due to the short time between the inspection was carried out (in the end of February) and the time of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (in the beginning of April) it has not been possible to complete the work, especially considering that there has been a need for follow-up communication with some of the inspected entities, and as there need to be time available for consultation with the inspected parties with respect to a draft report. A full report of the findings from the inspection will therefore be finalized and circulated to the Antarctic Treaty Parties in due time before ATCM XXXIII (2010). 

