





Neumayer Station III Completion of construction and start of pilot operation 
in February 2009





Neumayer Station III 
Completion of construction and start of pilot operations in February 2009
1. General overview
After two seasons of construction the new German winter station Neumayer Station III was opened by the German Minister of Education and Research Dr Annette Schavan and the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) on 20 February 2009. The inauguration ceremony took place in Berlin under wide attention of the media and the public. The event was directly communicated via satellite to the Neumayer Station III. 
At the station the key was passed to the Director of the AWI Prof Dr Karin Lochte in the presence of the construction team, scientists and technicians, who completed the construction and started operation the new station. The Minister for Science and Technology from South Africa, delegates from Norway, the Netherlands and Russia as well as representatives of the German research associations, the construction companies and senior scientists of AWI visited the new station and participated at the opening ceremony in Antarctica the same day.
The construction of the new Antarctic research station was technically and logistically the most challenging project of Germany to establish advanced infrastructure in Antarctica during the International Polar Year (IPY). Despite of heavy sea ice conditions and adverse weather periods the construction and scientific installations were completed at the end of 2008/2009 summer season. This outstanding result is due to the excellent work of all staff at the construction site and likewise due to the efficient international logistic coordination of air transportation and ship operations. 
The new station replaces Neumayer Station II, an underground structure which now, after 17 years of service, had to be given up due to destructive forces of the ice. Neumayer Station II itself was a follow-up building to the first base on Ekström Ice Shelf, where the AWI started its permanent Antarctic research and monitoring with three observatories in March 1981.
Neumayer Station III is - in contrast to its predecessors - an above ground building combined with sub-surface garage and storage structures. A highly innovative design has been implemented which allows to keep the station in level with the ever increasing snow surface around it. This implies that no building parts will get buried in the snow and thus become un-retrievable when the station will have to be dismantled under the regulations of the Environmental Protocol after its service time has ended. The station is planned to last 30 years. 
Neumayer Station III provides more room and facilities as compared to the previous base in order to meet the grown scientific and logistic demands. The scientific observations were fully transferred to the new station with no or minimal interruption. Since the commissioning in February 2009 the Neumayer Station III regularly feeds data to global networks and is fully integrated in the international scientific and logistic cooperation as the previous Neumayer Station II. 
During the coming two years the technical running of the station will be carried out with very special care and with thorough observation of all structure-underground interaction and construction management, comprising the adjustment of the building to the snow accumulation of one year. This period of pilot operation is considered to adjust the procedures and performance of the technical building installations for the long-term utilization. Moreover this pilot operation includes the testing and incorporating of the newly developed 30 kW wind generator as part of the energy management at the station. 
2. Neumayer Station locality and utilization
Neumayer Station is situated at 70° 41' S / 8° 16' W (2009) on Ekström Ice Shelf next to Atka Bay at the north-eastern edge of the Weddell Sea in Dronning Maud Land. The ice shelf is here 240 m thick and moves at a rate of about 170 m/a towards the breaking edge some 20 km away in the north (FIG. 2). Temperatures range between -10° C summer mean and -26° C winter mean, with extremes at +4° C and -45° C. There is snow drift 60 percent of the time, characteristic to the place. The annual snow accumulation amounts to 80 cm. Winds are predominantly from the east.
Research priorities are in the fields of meteorology, geophysics, and air chemistry. In 2003 a fourth observatory, comprising an infrasound array, has been installed as part of the international monitoring system of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organisation. And recently a Marine Acoustic Observatory has been set up at the ice edge. All observatory programmes are integrated in quite a number of international monitoring networks. 
Over the years, Neumayer Station has furthermore developed into a logistic centre serving scientific expeditions and flight operations in the area of Dronning Maud Land and beyond during summer season. The population at the base varies strongly, with 9 to 11 persons wintering and often more than 40 persons at a time during summer. A considerable fleet of tracked vehicles, mobile cranes, generating plant and fuel tanks plus about 30 heavy cargo sledges are stationed and maintained at Neumayer. A 1,000 m long and 60 m wide snow runway is maintained north-westerly of the Station in summer, usable by small aircraft with STOL capacity. Weather forecasting and flight weather consultation for a wider area is provided as an important service contribution to the Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN).
Neumayer Station is supplied by ship in summer. Transports between ship and base are carried out with tracked vehicles and sledges. Neumayer is also the starting point for all traffic to Kohnen Station. 
The continuation of the observatory programmes at the same location, and the continued provision of logistic support, have been the main reasons and justification for the station rebuild. 
3. Progress during the season 2008/09
The station had been assembled up to the roof of the below-ground part in the previous season 2007/2008. During the following winter the structure was repeatedly surveyed by the wintering team of Neumayer Station II. Settlements and deformations remained within the calculated limits, and no intermediate adjustments were necessary.
Thanks to the intercontinental air link (DROMLAN) the first complement of the construction team could start the second season's construction as early as 5 November 2008. As the loss of five weeks of construction time in the first season due to adverse sea ice conditions had to be compensated, the workforce was considerably reinforced and two-shift operations were introduced to make best use of time and machinery. During peak times 53 men were employed at the site. 
Progress was not unduly hampered by bad weather, and thus the above-ground steelworks were finished on 13 December, and the closure of the protective shell of the platform on 14 January. From then on the technical installations inside the building could be continued independent from weather, a welcome change at this advanced moment of the season. Meanwhile also the installation of the hydraulic lifting system had been finished, and for testing purposes the station was twice raised by a few centimetres. Power and heating by the new cogeneration plant of the station was turned on for service on 18 February. On 27 February 2009 the station was handed over to the first team of nine men and women wintering at Neumayer Station III – the 29th wintering in series on the Ekström Ice shelf.
All materials had been brought with MV NAJA ARCTICA to Antarctica in the first season, so that only return cargo had to be transported this season. The AWI as a member of the DROMSHIP consortium made use of MV IVAN PAPANIN for these transports. The sledge transports and loading of the 1,200 tons of return cargo, mainly comprising heavy construction plant and 168 TEU Containers (including 32 construction camp containers), represented a major task on its own. The PAPANIN left on 21 February bound for Cape Town and further for Bremerhaven. 
The total effective construction time for the Neumayer Station III at the site in Antarctica, including over-ice transports, amounts to 1,676 man-days (md) during the first and 4,018 md during the second season, together 5,694 md. Waiting times and time off due to bad weather add up to 1,475 md during the first season and 408 md during season 2, together 1,883 md. Travel times to and from the site were 292 md during the first and 609 md during the second season, together 901 md.
4. The new station building Neumayer III
The new building, basically a three-dimensional steel structure, comprises an underground section placed in a 76 m long and 26 m wide trench in the snow, a 6 m elevated platform surrounded by an insulated hull of 68 m length and 24 m width containing the two-storied station proper, and the 26 m long, lid covered access ramp to the garage at 8.2 m below the snow surface. Altogether there are 4,900 sqm of protected space, of which 2,100 sqm are heated.
The lower deck of the trench section is used for parking the station vehicle and plant fleet. There is a deck above the garage, covering almost the full trench area, containing storage rooms and workshops as well as the snow melter and the central hydraulics unit. The two decks on the platform house the cogeneration plant, the biological waste water treatment plant, and the living and working facilities for summer and winter crews of the station. On the roof of the hull, at 16.5 m above ground, most of the antennae of the base are mounted, and the weather balloon filling shed (FIG. 3). A staircase runs from garage to balloon shed, and a lift connects all decks from garage to upper deck in the hull. Heavier loads can be managed with three cranes or hoists.
The shape and elevation of the hull have been optimized by means of wind tunnel tests, where also wind loads were determined and snow drift patterns and scouring at the edges of the underground section's roof were investigated. This flat roof prevents the forming of deep scours as can be seen elsewhere under elevated platforms on snow ground. 
The horizontal deformation of the ice shelf, measured along the flow line that the station will follow in the coming years, will reach plus and minus 2.5‰ per year in varying directions at times. Neumayer Station III is not - as was common until now - designed to resist the forces resulting from such deformation of the underground, but rather to give way and thus avoid any undue increase of strain in the structure. This is achieved by articulated joints at the upper and lower ends of the hydraulic cylinders in the garage, which act as legs or stilts between steel structure and foundation pads bearing the total 2,600 tons of the building. As the horizontal holding force of the snow at the skirted rim of the roof is limited the cylinders were doubled at all 16 legs and inclined to form V-shaped bipods. Hereby the bipod cylinders take vertical as well as horizontal loads and can furthermore be used to align the building horizontally. 
The main purpose of the bipod hydraulic cylinders, however, is to use them for the compensation of equal and differential settlements and for raising the building once a year to bring it again safely in level with the surrounding snow surface. Actually the station is raised above surrounding level, which will then grow up to the roof level during one year. The raising measure is smaller than the snow accumulation because of the compression the 8.2 m high trench walls undergo in a year. Thus also the thickness of the snow layer to be placed on the garage floor is smaller than the height of the annual snow layer at the surface. The 16 steel foundations will be lifted in pairs with the cylinders to allow backfilling with ground snow underneath. Loads are planned to be applied again after 24 hours of age-hardening of this snow. 
The ramp cover lid will be raised in parallel with the building, also by use of hydraulic cylinders. These raising operations are expected to be the only works the station will require in response to annual snow accumulation. The AWI calculates with 85 to 100 man-days, after some experience hopefully fewer, to do the station raising. This will be less than was previously needed at Neumayer Station II, where elevating parts for all shafts, staircases and the ramp had to be manufactured, transported and installed every year, and where often realignments of the inner structures had to be carried out.
5. Overview on technical and operational building installations
Cogeneration plant
3 (+ 1 standby) diesel generators of 150 kW effective electrical and 178 kW thermal output each. Average electric station demand 120 kW, peak demand in summer may reach 220 kW. Peak heat demand 212 kW includes 40 kW for snow melting and 30 kW for water heating. Observatories have considerable permanent electric demand, as e.g. the air chemistry observatory needing 25 kW for pumps alone. The electrical net is of the TN-C-S type. 
Wind generator
New machine of 30 kW nominal performance (as compared to 20 kW machines used so far at Neumayer) will supply on average 127,000 kWh/a or about 12 percent of the power demand under the wind conditions at Neumayer. Upgrading of wind power generation at Neumayer is planned.
Uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
Lead-gel-batteries providing 2*17 KW for 20 minutes. 
Heating and air-conditioning, hot water
Station design is based on the double shell principle. Inside the hull temperatures will be kept at slightly above 0° C, normal room temperatures only in the inner building block. All heating, air-conditioning and hot water production is powered by excess heat (cogeneration and wind generator plant). Living and working spaces are supplied with moisturized air and in the air conditioning circuit latent heat is recovered. 
Water production, waste water treatment
Snow melter with wide variability in water production rates to serve strongly differing demand in summer and winter. Fully biological wastewater treatment plant with ultra-filtration for sludge segregation and UV-disinfection. All station waters are treated in this plant, and the effluent is reused for toilet flushing. 
Hydraulic lifting system
32 bipod cylinders, each 1.5 m stroke, 154 tons pushing power at 200 bar, 25 tons pulling power at 50 bar. Fail safe system by steel spindles. Two independent, automated systems for measurement of deformations/settlements and alarm giving. Additional control via oil pressures as loads are permanently resting "on oil". Remote control from Bremerhaven is possible via satellite link. 
Building services management system
Comprehensive system for the control and management of almost all building services. Modular assembly to allow selective use of services or areas. The AWI is confident to be able to maintain the services also in future with a team of only two technicians/engineers during winter. 
Automated fire fighting
High-pressure water fog extinguishing system for power plant and attached installations; fog extinguishing system for deep-fat cooking equipment, exhaust hoods and ducts with special hygienic agent.
6. CEE performance
The Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for construction of Neumayer Station III, for operation of Neumayer Station III and removal of the old Neumayer Station II was discussed and approved at the meeting of the Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) during ATCM XXVIII in June 2005. The national permit was issued by the Federal Environment Agency in October 2005.
The technical design, manufacturing, construction and commissioning has been performed according to the specification of the CEE. The pilot operation scheduled for the coming two years until season 2010/2011 is also approved in the frame of the CEE. 
The planning of removal of the old station is currently developed in detail. The removal operation will be performed as a joint project between AWI and the South African Department for Environmental Affairs (DEAT). In order to avoid additional ship operations the dismantling should be done over a period of 3 to 4 years with ships of national operators in the frame of regular resupply at the end of every season.
7. Acknowledgements
AWI is very grateful to all national and international partners who contributed to the success of the project over the years. The construction of Neumayer Station III was not only a national effort but likewise an excellent example of international cooperation and support.
First of all we highly appreciate the work done by the construction team as well as scientists and technicians of AWI and supporting companies during both seasons in Antarctica.
The very successful international cooperation of ship-borne and air-borne transportation was a crucial part of the project. Thanks are to the master, crew and shipping companies of MV NAJA ARCTICA, MV IVAN PAPANIN and RV POLARSTERN. Under the leadership of the Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) the coordination of ship transportation was very helpful. The Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) was the logistic backbone for transportation of all personnel and special equipment during both seasons. AWI highly appreciates the high quality flight management by the Antarctic Logistics Centre International (ALCI) and the excellent commitment of pilots and crew of the IL-76TD aircraft and the Basler BT-67 aircraft as well as ground staff in Antarctica to ensure the great number of intercontinental and intra-continental flights. Both DROMLAN and DROMSHIP have proven the high standard of international cooperation in the region.
Special thank is to our neighbour - the South African station SANAE IV - for support whenever it became necessary.
The Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) encouraged the concept of alternative energy use donating the first wind generator. Last but not least the logistics department of AWI highly recognises the very helpful discussions with our colleagues of the French Polar Institute Paul Emile Victor (IPEV) and of the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) during the technical design.
8. Further information on Internet web sites
8.1 	Information on Neumayer Station III
http://www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station_iii
http://www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station_iii/new_architecture_in_the_antarctica
http://www.awi.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Infrastructure/Stations/Neumayer_Station_III/hydraulic.avi
http://www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station_iii/new_architecture_in_the_antarctica/aerodynamic
http://www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station_iii/new_architecture_in_the_antarctica/energy_supply

8.2 	Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
http://www.umweltbundesamt.de/antarktis/archiv/NMIII-UVS.pdf

