





Cumulative Impacts from Walking in the Dry Valleys





Cumulative Impacts from Walking in the Dry Valleys
1. Introduction
As a result of minimal human activity, Antarctica has the most pristine environment of all the Earth’s continents. However, the demand for Antarctica as a tourist destination is increasing. In the austral summer of 2004-2005, over 26,000 tourists visited the continent and the numbers continue to grow. At the same time the unique cold desert environment also attracts scientists to the continent for ground-breaking research. Unfortunately, if the ecosystem reacts like other arid and unproductive regions, it can be non-resilient and highly susceptible to changes. Thus, impacts to the Dry Valleys’ environment from foot traffic have been examined and summarized below.
2. Research
Over a period of ten years, researchers sampled soils in Taylor Valley within the McMurdo Dry Valleys region of Antarctica to determine the direct impact of foot paths in the area. Researchers evaluated soil fauna by collecting and comparing soil samples in the austral summers of 1995-1996 and 2003-2004 along paths which were established two years prior to the first sampling (Ayres et al., 2008; Attachment 1). Additionally, soil respiration was measured via CO2 efflux in the austral summer of 2006-2007. All sampling and measurements occurred on paths that were classified in three categories as highly trampled (50-80 walks a year), moderately trampled (10-15 walks a year), or not trampled at all.
3. Findings
Soil samples revealed three animal phyla: Rotifera, Tardigrada, and Nematoda. While the low occurrence of rotifers and tardigrades found could not be analyzed statistically, two endemic species of nematodes (Scottnema lindsayae and Eudorylaimus sp.) were more commonly collected. 
Both juvenile and adult S. lindsayae were found in decreasing abundance within areas of increasing disturbance.  In addition, both adult and juvenile Eudorylaimus sp. were found in decreasing abundance at the surface soil level and in areas of increasing disturbance.
Researchers also noted that the ratio of living to dead S. lindsayae and Eudorylaimus sp. differed in the three classifications of area disturbance. More living Eudorylaimus sp. were found in undisturbed soil than dead Eudorylaimus sp, with the live to dead ratio reduced by 75% in disturbed areas. S. lindsayae had the greatest live to dead ratio in areas of mid-level disturbance, although this was due to two anomalous soil samples that contained no dead individuals.
Of the three hydrologic basins measured, one (the Fryxell basin) had reduced respiration rates in areas of high trampling. This basin was one of two basins measured with generally high respiration rates, as well as highest soil temperatures. However, it was noted that the paths in the Fryxell basin may have had more foot traffic than paths in other basins, indicating that the reduced respiration rates could be site-specific. 
Soil moisture was not found to be significantly impacted by disturbance, concurring with previous studies in the area or similar environments. 
4. Conclusion
Overall, live S. lindsayae and Eudorylaimus sp. were reduced by 52% and 76%, over 10 years respectively, in areas of high trampling versus areas of low trampling. Thus, even the relatively low disturbance on the area (50-80 walks a year) can impact the nematode population. 
As one could have guessed, the abundance of S. lindsayae measured in the 10 years after a path’s creation was also lower than one collected 2 years after the path was created, likely due to a longer time period and increased exposure to disturbance. Furthermore, the live to dead ratio of Eudorylaimus sp. was decreased by 75% in disturbed areas, caused by increased mortality and/or reduced fecundity associated with human trampling effects. 
The impacts of these disturbances should not be taken lightly.  As human impact increases with visitations, the effects of increasing foot traffic to the highly sensitive soil fauna should be carefully considered.
5. Literature Cited
Ayres, E., Nkem, J.N., Wall, D.H., Adams, B.J., Barrett, J.E., Broos, E.J., Parsons, A.N., Powers, L.E., Simmons, B.L., & Virginia, R.A. (2008). Effects of Human Trampling on Populations of Soil Fauna in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica. Conservation Biology, 22(6). 1544-1551. 




