





India’s Antarctic Science Programme 2008-09




India’s Antarctic Science Programme 2008-09
Introduction
“National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR)” Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India, is the nodal agency to undertake, organize and co-ordinate Indian Polar Science Programme and the logistics support to Antarctica scientific research. The present paper highlights the research activities carried out during winter as well as the ongoing austral summer. This is a multi-institutional scientific research programme where India’s premier institute participates from research organization, universities and leading private research organizations. During the austral summer of XXVIII Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica (InSEA), thirty three new and old scientific programs were taken up by members from twenty two national organizations and institutions. Under aegis of the student participation programme four students from two different institutes - Forest Research Institute Dehradun and The Institute of Science, Mumbai, participated during XXVIII-InSEA. A scientist from University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA also participated and carried out biological research, staying at Maitri station as also an Estonian Scientist participated with the Indian team to sample the permafrost as also profiling of lakes in the region close to Russian Novolazarevskaya Station. This strengthens international cooperation in Antarctic.
The Antarctica research programme is concentrated in the fields of but not limited to:  Atmospheric Sciences, Meteorology and Climate Change, Biology and Environmental Science, Earth Science, Glaciology and Engineering and Communication. Various scientific activities carried out during winter 2008 and summer 2009 is described below.
Atmospheric Science Meteorology and Climate Change 
Under the project: Temporal and spatial variations of energy balance of different snow and ice media in Antarctica using RRTS (Radio based Remote Telemetry System) data”, two Automatic Weather Stations were installed in the past  over continental ice sheet for the energy balance study, around two and eight km from Maitri respectively. Hourly observations of various snow-meteorological parameters were carried out for: incoming solar radiation, outgoing solar radiation, sun shine duration, net radiation, average ambient temperature, maximum temperature, minimum temperature, instantaneous temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, wind direction, atmospheric pressure, snow surface temperature, snow depth.
Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) Programme is specifically aimed at preparing a data archival of meteorological parameters over Antarctica to understand their relationship to the Indian weather in general and monsoon behaviour in particular. Continuous recording of the various surface and upper air meteorological parameters including synoptic hour’s observations is being carried out.  Also real time transmission of main synoptic message (4 times a day) over GTS is transmitted for use by the weather forecasters all over the world. Continuous recording is done for surface wind speed, wind direction, surface atmospheric pressure, temperature, humidity, surface ozone, diffuse solar radiation & direct solar radiation. 
Geophysical study at schirmacher oasis initiated by Indian Institute of Geomagnetism (IIG), included various experiments for the measurement of Earth’ magnetic field started including: Digital Flux Gate Magnetometer for X,Y and Z magnetic components, Flux gate magnetometer for D,H, F and Z of the earth magnetic fields, Riometer for the study of D-region absorb ion studies, GPS experiment for the study of crustal deformation studies. However, no significant storm or disturbance is observed during the summer period. Atmospheric electricity parameters are continuously monitored using EFM-100. 
National Physical Laboratory (during winter period) studied on Ionospheric variability of different parameters like TEC, L-band scintillation and position data through already installed GPS antenna. Very low frequency (VLF) system is installed for the study of the ionospheric properties of the lower ionosphere and set with a frequency of 19.8 KHz to receive the Australian NWC at Maitri. 


Few more studied continued during summer 2008-09 for old as well as new projects i.e:
“Monitoring of the upper ocean circulation, transport and water masses between Africa and Antarctica” continued by NCAOR” with objectives - to employ surface data in validation of satellite products (ISRO’s scatterometer on board OCEANSAT-2 and numerical weather forecast fields), to study upper-ocean heat content and relate the changes to quantify the feedback on the heat fluxes of the surface atmospheric boundary layer computed using Automatic Weather Station data and satellite products. These data sets will serve as a database for ingestion into numerical models in the near future.
“Investigations of Atmospheric Aerosols over the southern oceans as well as over the pristine environment of Antarctica during the Antarctic Summer” initiated jointly by Space Physics Laboratory (SPL-ISRO) and NCAOR. The objectives of the study are: to characterize the physical properties of atmospheric aerosol particles from Antarctica and its inter annual variability, to assess the effect of human impact (in terms of aerosols) in the Antarctic regions, to understand the spatial gradient in aerosols over Indian Ocean and Southern Ocean, understanding the inter-hemispheric transport of aerosols, estimation of clear sky radioactive forcing. Aerosol data were collected using, aerosol spectrometer, aethalometer, high volume sampler, sunphototmeter, quartz crystal microbalance and multistage impactor.
Earth Science and Glaciology
Under the project: “In-situ lake bottom sediment coring to delineate the sedimentation characteristics and palaeoclimatic history” initiated by Geological Survey of India (GSI) collected three lake bottom sediment samples from the lake E-12.  Soil sediment samples were collected from different glacial terraces in Schirmacher Oasis. Samples were collected to understand the environmental changes through the rate of sediment supply, deposition, biological/organic communities, fossil contents and geochemical parameters. Sediment cores will provide information regarding their provenance, transport mechanism, depositional processes and bio-geochemical history having direct link with the prevailing climatic conditions. The bathymetric studies of major lakes of Schirmacher Oasis, in Antarctica during winter carried out using, MLF antenna  for GPR survey of epishelf lakes, setting-up in 16 MHz frequency for deeper penetration. Total sixteen lakes were surveyed. The maximum depth recorded (without CMP corrections) is ~160 meters in lake E-14. Geological traverses, mapping and sample collections was done from Zweissel mountains of cDML, East Antarctica as also monitoring was done of the Dakshin Gangotri glacier.
A project initiated by NCAOR: “Studies on surface and sub surface snow samples from the coastal and inland regions of east Antarctica” with the objectives-to study the spatial and temporal variability in the snow accumulation and its characteristics from the ice edge to inland polar plateau region and to evaluate the natural background of aerosols accumulated in the Antarctic snow, its source and the intricate processes involved in controlling the biogeochemical cycling of various species.
A long-term project continued by the National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI)-“Studies on seismotectonics snd geodynamical processes between Antarctica and southern Indian peninsula: continuous operation of permanent seismological observatory at Maitri, Antarctica”.  Regular observations and preliminary analysis of broad band seismic data was carried out for both Geotek and Reftek Broad band Seismometers.  Regular downloading of Topcon and Ashtech GPS data is in progress. The final processing and analysis shall be executed at NGRI.  During the reporting period, 36 seismic events were clearly identified.
Environment and Biology
National Botanical Research Institute (NBRI) initiated experiments on “Study of photosynthesis and water relations of Antarctic lichens with special reference to desiccation tolerance”. Lichen, moss and sediment sample collected around Maitri station. Preliminary identification resulted in five taxa namely: Rhizocarpon geographicum, Umbilicaria sp., Candelariella flava, Rinodina sp., Leprolomma sp. Observations indicate that the foliose lichens have the ability to hold more water in comparison to the crustose forms. This may be due to more surface area and spongy nature of foliose lichens.
Awadh University continued the ongoing programme “ Studies on the influence of ultraviolet-B radiation on survivorship and pigment concentration of flora over Schirmacher oasis”.   Lichen and Moss specimens sample collected and estimation of chlorophyll-a, chl.-b & total chlorophyll, carotenoid and UV absorbing compounds content is carried out. UV filter frame study for two different lichen (Xanthoria & Umbilicaria) and one moss sample is undertaken. Samples are studied under natural sunlight and under UV filter frames and a comparative analysis is done in respect to chlorophyll-a, chl.-b & total chlorophyll, carotenoid and UV absorbing compounds content.
A science team member of the 2008-2009 Tawani Antarctic Expedition (University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA) initiated study on selected Schirmacher Oasis lakes and rocks surfaces to study the microbial biodiversity; microbial adaptation to cold temperatures; and the study of microbial pigments and metabolites in ultraviolet tolerance and the potential application of these pigments to the benefit of human health and medicine. The objective is to collect field data and samples from 3 different categories of lakes, (1) Land-locked lakes; (2) Epi-Shelf lakes and (3) Pro-Glacial lakes. Samples were collected of water, lichen and algae samples from these lakes and rock surfaces for further study.
Shriram Institute of Industrial Research (SIIR) has been entrusted with project to undertake long-term monitoring programme of Indian research base in Antarctica. Study included collection of surface water samples from water bodies of Schirmacher Oasis as well as Larsemann Hills area. This is being carried out for physico-chemical, trace metal analysis and phytoplankton & zooplankton study. Measurements of physico-chemical properties of surface water like temperature, pH, total dissolved solids, conductivity, dissolved oxygen, transparency and color, alkalinity, hardness, chloride, nitrate, nitrite, phosphate, iron and ammonia is conducted in the laboratory at Maitri station. Samples of green filamentous algae, littoral benthic algae and periphytic forms from different substrate have been collected for the assessment of their biological diversity. Diurnal variations in primary productivity and physico-chemical characteristics of Priyadarshani and some other important lakes are also carried out.
Human Physiology and Medicine
Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Science initiated study on “Effect of Antarctic Environment on Immune Response of Indian Expedition Members” with an objective to determine the effect of extreme cold isolation and stress factors on the immune system of the body. In this study the effect of extreme cold, isolation and other stress factors at Antarctica which may bring changes in the immune system of the body of Indian Antarctic expedition members will be put to test and monitored at the Antarctic Research station. The various immunological parameters including cytokines and chemokines will be studied in serum and saliva as per the experimental protocol.
Student Participation
Under student participation programme following projects are initiated and required data collection is in progress:
    • “Assessment of Mercury in the air water bodies around Maitri and new research site in Larsemann Hills” by Forest Research Institute (FRI) and NCAOR. Study objectives include- comprehensive assessment of mercury level in air and water around Indian stations; comparison between Maitri station which is well established Indian station affected by human activities and the new research site at Larsemann Hills which is relatively untouched by human interference and to assess the harmful effect of mercury at these sites.
    • FRI and NCAOR started study on-  “Trifluoroacetate (TFA) in Antarctic snow precipitation”. The objective of study are, to study the distribution of trifluoroacetate (TFA) in surface snow and near surface ice, to understand the spatial variations in the rate of accumulation of TFA in the Antarctica ice and the effect of various transporting factors
    • The Institute of Science initiated study on “Study of physiological and biochemical responses of Antarctica Krill to climate change”. This study is aimed to examine the physiological and biochemical responses of Antarctic Krill to the climate change with special reference to change in salinity, temperature and pH in their surrounding medium. Various physiological and biochemical parameter like O2 consumption, ammonia excretion and phosphate excretion are important indicators of the animal’s health. This project proposed to analyze these parameters both under normal as well as under stressed conditions.

