





Update on the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica




Update on the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica
Introduction
India circulated draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) Report, approved and endorsed by the Government of India, on 29 December 2006 to all Consultative parties and the Chair of CEP-X. The written comments on the draft CEE were received from Australia, Germany, United Kingdom and New Zealand. Full text of draft CEE was submitted as an attachment to IP-007, while the Non technical summary and additional baseline data collected during austral summer of 2006-07 was submitted as WP-004 and IP-139 respectively to XXX-ATCM. The CEP concluded that the draft CEE met the requirement of Article 3 Annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to Antarctic Treaty and therefore recommended its endorsement to ATCM. Several Parties suggested that suggestions made during the discussions be incorporated in the final CEE. An information paper (IP-16) on the update on the CEE was submitted to XXXI-ATCM, stating the progress towards construction of the new Indian research base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica.
Progress after XXX-ATCM
During 2007-08, meetings/conferences were held between National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research of India and the IMS Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH, Germany (the Consultant Architect which won the global competition for conceptual design of the Station Building) and their associates to finalize the document on contract. As a result of the continued and long deliberations, an agreement along with other supporting documents was generated, which went through vetting process by legal experts from both the sides. The final agreement was signed by both the parties in December 2008.  India is working closely with architects/consultants to plan the time lines for various activities.  An architect of the IMS Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH, Germany, visited the proposed site for new base at Larsemann Hills in first week of February 2009 to make an on the spot study of  the site conditions for station layout and construction of a jetty to off-load the construction equipment and other material. 
During summer 2009 (January-February) scientific studies, including collection of baseline data for air, water, land environment and bio diversity were carried out at Larsemann Hills. The rocks and soil were studied for their load bearing strength and other engineering properties. To support few instruments for year-round collection of data, Wind Energy Generator (WEG) of 6 KW was installed at the station site. An IEE in this regard has already been submitted.
It is expected that the final design of the station shall be completed by July 2009 where after global tendering process shall be initiated to identify the construction company. New station construction shall commence in summer 2010-11 and the station is expected to be commissioned by the year 2011-12.
Final CEE
The final CEE shall include comprehensive study, detailed description and technical specification of final design of station. Valuable suggestions received from the Consultative parties shall be addressed to take care of the cumulative impacts and their mitigation measures. India shall circulate the final CEE to all parties at least sixty days before commencing the activity related to construction of the station. The final CEE shall also be available on www.ncaor.gov.in




