





Brief report on the construction of Kunlun Station on Dome A in the Antarctic




Brief report on the construction of Kunlun Station on Dome A in the Antarctic
Summary
During 2008-2009 Antarctic austral summer season, the 25th CHINARE engaged in the construction of Kunlun Station on Dome A in the Antarctic. The construction began on January 9, 2009 and finished on January 27, which covered an area of 236m2  The CEE of the Kunlun station has been assessed at the 31th ATCM.
1. Team composition
The team consists of 28 members, including 5 scientists, 4 mechanics, 14 engineering workers, 2 journalists, 2 doctor and a cook. The team set out on December 18, 2008 and arrived at Dome A on January 6, 2009 
2. The Building
As planned in the first phase of Kunlun Station, one building was established at Dome A area, which includes 18 rooms.
The main structures of the building were prefabricated at home and also examined by preassembled to ensure the process of construction on the filed. The building frame is made of steel which was set on a platform over ice surface.  The whole structure was spliced by each frame unit. The out wall is made of double layer insulation thermal structure and the internal wall is color-composite steel, between which the heat-insulation material is installed.
3. The scientific work 
During and after the construction of the Station, scientific observations such as auto-meteorological observation, auto-earthquake observation, astronomic observation, shallow ice core drilling, surveying and mapping around the station area and GPS survey of the movement rate of the ice sheet were carried out. 
4. The logistic work
During the traveling and construction period, the team strictly adhered to the measures for the environmental protection, collected, classified and packed the domestic garbage and construction materials, shipped them back home by the vessel via Zhongshan Station. In addition, on the way back to Zhongshan Station from Dome A, the team provided assistance to AGAP project by carrying 5 sledges of used oil drums and some parachute packs. 
5. The future step
The second phase construction of the Kunlun Station will be done during 2009-2010 austral summer season. After the completion of the construction, the Station can hold 15-20 members for summer activities. By that time the Station can be used as a base for various scientific activities such as ice core drilling, astronomic observation, and geological survey to the ice covered mountains, ice sheet movement observation, glacial-meteorological observation, atmospheric background observation and human medical studies. 
The management of the Station will be in an open way and make it as a platform for not only the Chinese scientists but also international scientists to cooperate in a broad way and make a contribution to the peaceful use of Antarctica.

6. Acknowledgement
After the completion of the first phase construction of the Kunlun Station, we have received many comments and congratulations from our friendly parties, here we `d like to express our sincere thanks to them for their good will and friendship, and hope to have a good cooperation in Antarctica in the near future.


