





Southern dimension for polar research




Southern dimension for polar research
Information Paper Submitted by Bulgaria

Introduction 

The countries in Southern and South-Eastern Europe are in different stages with their Polar Research Programs:
    1) Countries without developed Polar Programs: Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia, Montenegro, Macedonia, Albania and Turkey.
    2) Countries with Polar Programs in Initial Stage: Portugal, Greece, Austria and Switzerland. 
    3) Countries with Polar Programs and Antarctic Bases: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Ukraine and Romania.
    4) Countries with well developed Polar Programs and own logistic: Spain, France and Italy.



The Antarctic cooperation between South and Southeastern EU countries has long standing tradition. Bulgaria operate her Base “St. Kliment Ohridski” at Livingston Island and carry out scientific research thanks  the logistic support  of the Spanish vessels “Hesperides” and “Las Palmas” and Base “Juan Carlos I” since 1993. This two Southern-European nations work together more than 15teen years in strong coordination and collaboration in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty. 
France and Italy – Southern countries with very well developed polar programs share their costs and logistics and jointly operated one of the most modern and best scientific equipped base in East Antarctica – Concordia. 
Activities and concept
The first step for strengthening cooperation between South and Southeastern European countries with well developed polar programs and other Southern EU countries in Polar research is informational exchange, workshops and open lectures for young people and broad audience. Policy makers in countries without or in initional stage polar programs have to be informed of the importance of Polar Regions for Europe and whole planet. Very good beginning was the realization of Workshop in Rila Mountain, Bulgaria in July 2007, where representatives from Netherlands, Finland, Bulgaria, Romania, Greece and Portugal discussed the collaboration between South and Southeastern EU countries in strategic areas as climate and environmental changes and life in extreme environments.
Good example of such cooperation is the ongoing three years project between Spain, Bulgaria and Portugal “Permafrost and climate change in Maritime Antarctic (PERMANTAR)”.  	PERMANTAR involves 3 Portuguese research centres rated Excellent by the Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, a Spanish research group working in the South Shetlands since 1989 and involved in 11 Antarctic campaigns and the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute contribute with logistic support of his Antarctic base and also scientists involved in the realization of the project. Argentinean researchers from the University of Buenos Aires also participated in the scientific work. An experienced Swiss company is responsible on permafrost drilling. The project is strongly interdisciplinary in nature and there is multinational collaboration between all the research centres in all science tasks.
	The study area is the South Shetlands, one of the Earth’s regions where warming has been more significant in the last 50 years. Field activities focus in two islands with similar climate, but contrasting geological and geomorphological settings: Livingston Island and Deception Island, where Bulgaria and Spain operated three stations.
The common scientific interests of Southern and Southeast EU countries (Portugal, Greece, Austria and Switzerland – countries with polar programs in initial stage, Bulgaria, Romania and Czech Republic – countries with polar programs and Antarctic bases and Spain, France and Italy – countries with well developed programs and own logistic) are in climate change and global warming in the polar regions. The most important step in the near future is collaboration and coordination between these countries with their scientific communities, laboratories and logistic facilities in the realization of the EUROPOLAR ERA-NET Polar CLIMATE project.
Cooperation between Southern and Northern Dimension EU countries
The geographic position of the Southern European countries between Arctic and Antarctic is very important link for studding climate changes in both Polar Regions and the influence of the Mediterranean.
The countries from Southern Europe present strong interest of Polar research in Antarctic with operating bases and focus their scientific programs in the southernmost continent. The cooperation between Southern and Northern Dimension countries is very important for active involvement of Southern Dimension in scientific research in Arctic, where Northern Dimension has long standing interests and presence in Northern Polar regions. 
The first steps to involve South European countries with sporadic arctic research in Arctic scientific community are open lectures for students and broad audience and informational exchange with Northern Dimension countries. Good example of such preliminary integration is the visit of the Director of the Norwegian Polar Institute in Trömso in Sofia, Bulgaria (12-14 October 2008) for several lectures in Bulgarian Universities pointed on the importance of Northern Polar Regions for climate change and the future of the whole Planet. 
Portugal scientists and journalists visited Svalbard in September 2008 that is good beginning to involve Portugal scientists in the arctic research and to inform the broad audience for the significance of the Arctic regions.


