





Russian research in the Antarctic in 2008




Russian research in the Antarctic in 2008
In 2008, the concluding stage of the Russian Federal Target Program “World Ocean” began. The Antarctic studies in the framework of this program are carried out under a separate subprogram “Study and research of the Antarctic”, which includes five research programs that are implemented by 25 research institutes of Russia. Investigations of the South Polar Area were carried out on the basis of the analysis of meteorological, oceanographic, glaciological, geophysical, biological and geological data collected in the 52nd (2006-2008) and 53rd (2007-2009) Russian Antarctic Expeditions (РАЭ). Mathematical modeling of the state of dynamics of the natural processes was performed and satellite data materials were analyzed. 

Project 1 “Determination of changes in the Antarctic environment under the conditions of changing climate”
A yearly cycle of measurements of surface concentration of carbon dioxide and methane were carried out for the first time at Novolazarevskaya station. Based on the results of measurements from April 2007 to January 2008, increased amplitude of seasonal variations of these gaseous components of the atmosphere was registered compared to the other Antarctic stations. It was determined that temporal variability of these parameters differs significantly depending on landscape features of the observation points (oases and the ice cover). 
Monitoring of the current state, analysis of the tendencies and anomalies of the change of total solar radiation and spectral aerosol-optical thickness of the atmosphere of Antarctica was conducted. It showed that there was no statistically significant trend in the incoming total radiation for a more than a 50-year period. During the period under consideration the integral transparency of the atmosphere in Antarctica was significantly decreasing only after strong volcanic eruptions. In the inter-volcanic periods, both the atmospheric transparency and aerosol extinction were stable and within the natural variability of their non-perturbed values. 
An assessment of the energy exchange parameters between the atmosphere and different types of the underlying surface in the Antarctic was given on the basis of data of energy balance observations at Bellingshausen station. An analysis of data showed that at a general quality similarity one observes differences in the behavior of energy exchange characteristics in different years, related to the local climatic variability.
Multiyear studies of the influence of solar wind (low-energy plasma of solar origin) on the properties and behavior of the high-latitudinal ionosphere and atmosphere in polar “caps” were summarized. It was shown that constant generation of longitudinal currents connecting the boundary layers of magnetosphere with the polar ionosphere was a result of interaction of the solar wind with the Earth’s magnetosphere. This magnetic activity is described by a PC-index, its value characterizing the solar wind energy coming to the magnetosphere and correspondingly, the intensity of magnetic perturbations in the auroral zone. The high-latitudinal electric fields influence (due to the changed parameters of the global electrical circuit) the atmospheric processes in Central Antarctica, where a large-scale system of the vertical circulation of the atmosphere, unique for the Earth, is formed under the winter conditions. Observations at Vostok station showed the influence of the perturbed solar wind to be manifested in such atmospheric phenomena as cloudiness, temperature and atmospheric pressure in Central Antarctica, resulting in the disturbance of the wind system over the entire Antarctic and impacting the atmospheric processes over the Southern Ocean. A new concept of the influence of solar activity on the Earth’s atmospheric processes was proposed and substantiated.

Project 2 “Complex studies of the unique subglacial Lake Vostok including penetration to the lake with lake water sampling and glaciological studies of the Antarctic”
In 2008, studies on revealing microorganisms in deep layers of congelation ice above the subglacial Lake Vostok were continued by means of the methods of epifluorescence microscopy and scanning and luminescent microscopy. 
The results obtained are controversial to some extent with data of analyses of similar ice cores of molecular biology, requiring additional methodological studies. 
The micro-structural ice studies carried out almost continuously in the core interval of 3624-3666.7 m showed that the structure of lake ice reflects the conditions of its formation and growth significantly greater rather than being a result of recrystallizing of primary lake ice. 
Using a scanning microscope, study of mineral composition and petrographic characterization of rock fragments extracted from a large (more than 1 cm) loose aggregate in the lake ice core from a depth of 3608 m was carried out. As a result, mineral composition of all thirteen fragments was investigated and assessment of the quantitative content of minerals was performed. An analysis of paragenesis, relationships and morphology of minerals suggest that the investigated rocks have a primarily sedimentary origin and reflect the composition of bedrock of the east coast of Lake Vostok that was subjected to ice gouging.
A databank on the size and orientation of lake ice crystals, its isotopic composition, total gas content in respect of O2/N2 ratio, concentration of main ions, species composition and viability of the cells of micro-organisms was generated. 

Project 3 “Determination of structure, geological evolution and potential mineral resources of the Antarctic lithosphere”
In the geological-geophysical studies, the most important results are connected with the study of the Dumont d’Urville Sea Basin. As a result of processing and interpretation of geophysical data, obtained in the western part of this sea, a set of charts and sections of the Earth’s crust reflecting its structure and history of tectonic development was prepared. The total thickness of the sedimentary mantle of the western basin of the Dumont d’Urville Sea is shown to comprise 5.0–15.0 km in the investigated part of the outer shelf and at the foot of the continental slope, 2.0–6.0 km in the abyssal valley and 5.0 – 7.0 km within the “rift block of the Adelie Land”.
In addition, a tectonic map of the Antarctic continent at the scale of 1:20 000 000 and of some of its fragments at the scale of 1:10 000 000 was constructed.

Project 4 “Determination of the state of the Antarctic ecosystems, assessment of the state of the environment in the area of RAE operations”
In biological studies, the most important results are related to the analysis of field data obtained at Progress station and in the area of Bellingshausen station. Hydrobiological work under ice using scuba divers at Progress station allowed us to obtain quantitative and qualitative data on the distribution of flora, fauna and bottom biocenoses in Nella Bay in the open part of Prydz Bay and lay a foundation of long-term monitoring of ice and bottom communities in shallow water in the region where no biological; studies were conducted before. 
For three seasons beginning from 2005-06, year-round hydrobiological studies were carried out in Ardley Bay near Bellingshausen station. The studies are made at two constant stations: coastal and at the center of the bay to a depth of 50 m where 10-day samples of phyto- and zooplankton are collected and standard oceanographic data are measured. It is shown that a small depth and a specific hydrological regime of Ardley Bay lead to a significant modification of meso-plankton community compared to deep water areas. In plankton diversity the dominating role belongs to small species breeding the year-round.
The results of lichenological studies in the area of Bellingshausen station were analyzed. A taxonomic analysis of new materials on fauna of lichens was performed. New materials on the state of some components of terrestrial biota were analyzed and an assessment of its biodiversity and adaptation abilities is given. The results of the analysis have revealed 37 species of lichens of 22 Genii of 11 families and 10 species of moss in the composition of flora, also from the regions that were never studied before in botanical respect.

Project 5 “Development of the methods and facilities for generating an information system on the Antarctic environment”
In the activity on the information themes the most important results are connected with preparation of design-technological documentation for creating a software-technological complex for obtaining the calculated characteristics on the Antarctic environment. The design-technological solutions for developing an electronic reference book on the natural environment of the Antarctic in GIS-environment and by means of Internet-technologies were prepared. Modification and expansion of the integrated database of the information system on different disciplines were made. A database management system on hydrometeorology, geophysics, glaciology and biology was developed. The corresponding specialized databases on the given types of studies were supplemented. 



