





Annual Report Pursuant to the Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty




Annual Report Pursuant to the Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
1. Notification of measures taken pursuant to Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the Protocol
In Japan, the Law relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica (Antarctic Environment Law) entered into force on 14th of January 1998, the same day when the Protocol itself entered into force.  Since then, Japan has worked to fully implement the Protocol through the Antarctic Environment Law .  According to the Antarctic Environment Law, in principle, no person shall engage in any activity in Antarctica other than Antarctic Activity Plan that has been certified by the Minister of the Environment of Japan.
The government of Japan worked to implement the Measures regarding new and revised management plans for ASPAs that were adopted at the 31st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) held in Kyiv, Ukraine, through revising the Ministerial Ordinance of the Antarctic Environment Law.
The government of Japan distributes pamphlets and established website in order to inform citizens of natural features, legal procedures required to visit Antarctica, the history of Japanese Antarctic Research and alike.  
2. Contingency Plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol
Japan has in place the Oil Spill Contingency Plan to cover its activities at the Syowa Station.  Information regarding this plan can be obtained from:
Environment Planning Unit, Planning Section, Office of Polar Expeditions, 
National Institute of Polar Research(NIPR)*
1-9-10 Kaga, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8515,
JAPAN 
Tel : +81-3-3962-0548

(* NIPR will be moved to Tachikawa-shi, Tokyo, at the end of April, 2009)
3. Circulation of Information pursuant to Annex I, Article 6(1) of the Protocol 
3-1. Procedures referred to in Annex 1, Article 1
Accordingto the Antarctic Environment Law, no person shall engage in any activity in Antarctica other than Antarctic Activities that has been certified by the Minister of the Environment as satisfying the conditions to protect the Environment in Antarctica in accordance with Annex I of the Environmental Protocol (so called the Certification System).  Engaging in an Antarctic Activity without a certification from the Minister of the Environment is an offence carrying liability to a fine.
Information regarding the Certification System can be obtained from:
Antarctic Section, Global Environment Issues Division, Global Environment Bureau
Ministry of the Environment  
1-2-2 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 100-8975
JAPAN
Tel : +81-3-3581-3351(#6748) 
E-mail: antarctic@env.go.jp
3-2. List of Initial Environmental Evaluation
The following Initial Environmental Evaluation was prepared during the 2008/2009 season in accordance with Annex I, Article 2.
Supervisor: The Director General of Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
 (The Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology)
Activity: Civil engineering and construction works
Location: Syowa Station
3-3. Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, from procedures put in place in accordance with Annex I, Article 2(2) of the Protocol
During the 2008/2009 season, no significant information has been obtained from monitoring procedures put in place in accordance with Annex I.
3-4. Comprehensive Environmental Evaluatins
During the 2008/2009 season, no activity requiring a comprehensive Environmental Evauation was planned .
4. Report pursuant to Annex II, Article 6(2) of the Protocol 
Permits issued under Annex II for the 2008/2009 season are noted in the table in Appendix 1.
5. Report pursuant to Annex III, Article 9(1) of the Protocol
5-1. Waste Management Plan
The Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) introduced the Cord of Conduct about Waste Management, and JARE manages the wastes at the Syowa Station in accrodance with it. Some combustible wastes are incinerated and sewage and grey water are treated by the biological treatment plant before released into the ocean. In addition, ash, sludge and other wastes are brought back to Japan.
5-2. Report of Information regarding implementation of the Waste Management Plan
As shown in Appendix 2, JARE treated the wastes in accordance with the waste disposal classification system in Annex III, Article 8(1).  
6. Report pursuant to Annex V, Article 10(2) of the Protocol 
No Permits were issued under Annex V for the 2008/2009 season.

