





COMNAP Report to ATCM XXXII




COMNAP Report to ATCM XXXII
Submitted by COMNAP to ATCM XXXII under 
agenda item 4 (Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports by Parties, Observers and Experts) 

Table of Content
1. Introduction 
2. Focus
3. COMNAP activities relevant to Antarctic Treaty System work and concerns


ATCM XXXII agenda items

Topic
4
9
10
12
13
14
15
16
3.1
New COMNAP constitution
4
9


13
14

16
3.2
New COMNAP way of working
4
9


13
14

16
3.3
Towards better Search and Rescue coordination and response

9





16
3.4
COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS)

9


13
14

16
3.5
Review of the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)

9


13
14

16
3.6
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)

9


13


16
3.7
Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR)

9





16
3.8
Hydrographic surveying using ships of opportunity

9


13


16
3.9
Information Exchange

9



14

16
3.10
Mapping products

9


13
14
15
16
3.11
Operational publications

9



14

16
3.12
Support of the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008


10

13



3.13
Review of Inspection Checklist A (Stations)



12

14

16
3.14
Mechanisms for logistics collaboration and sharing of facilities




13



3.15
Mechanisms for collaborative support to science




13



3.16
Long Term Monitoring Activities (LTMA)




13


16
3.17
Review of ATCM operational recommendations





14


3.18
Terminology for facilities







16
3.19
Collaboration with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat







16
3.20
Facilitating and promoting wide distribution and use of information and publications







16
4. 2008-2009 officers, topic-based information sharing and strategic projects
5. Meetings
6. Secretariat
7. Conclusion

1. Introduction
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) was formally created on 15 September 1988 to bring together the Managers of National Antarctic Programs, that is the national officials responsible for planning and conducting their nations' presence in the Antarctic on behalf of their respective governments, all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. 
It has now grown into an international organisation bringing together the National Antarctic Programs from 29 Antarctic Treaty Parties from Africa (1), the Americas (8), Asia (4), Australasia (2) and Europe (14). 
COMNAP has just adopted for its 20th anniversary a new constitution and a new way of working. 
The new constitution clarifies and reasserts COMNAP's purpose, to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic, and reasserts its close connection with the Antarctic Treaty. 
The new constitution and way of working provide renewed focus and guidance and are designed to put COMNAP in a better position to address new, upcoming challenges. 
Supporting Science
What National Antarctic Program managers have in common is their national responsibility to manage the support of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area on behalf of their government and in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.  This is what brings them together in COMNAP and, hence, what they want to help each other with.   
Increased ambitions – in particular in relation to climate change research, different and more sophisticated science and more demanding environmental measures contribute to added pressure on National Antarctic Programs, and to an even greater need for international collaboration. 
COMNAP has recognised a greater need for collaborative support, and is addressing it.
Supporting the Antarctic Treaty System
COMNAP was in 1991 given the status of Observer at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, alongside CCAMLR and SCAR.
COMNAP has since remained committed to serve its role in the Antarctic Treaty System and in the protection of the Antarctic environment by providing objective and practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' pool of expertise.
COMNAP has also progressively assumed a number of practical tasks and functions that previously were, or would have been, undertaken by the Treaty Parties directly or by other organisations. Some of these tasks and functions remain formally assigned to those through various ATCM measures that are still current. 
In particular, COMNAP maintains a range of information of practical use to many in the Antarctic Treaty System, and which include and go beyond a range of information that Parties are required to exchange under the Treaty. Every effort is made to ensure this information can easily be used by the Parties to fulfil their information exchange requirements.
This COMNAP Annual Report to the ATCM provides an overview of COMNAP's current activities, with an added focus on their relevance to the Antarctic Treaty System. Particular topics may also be complemented by a formal, standalone paper.
2. Focus
COMNAP's current focus is on:
    • Safety
    • Efficiency
    • Collaborative support to science
    • Environmental management and protection
3. COMNAP activities relevant to Antarctic Treaty System work and concerns
3.1 New COMNAP constitution 
For its 20th anniversary, COMNAP adopted at COMNAP XX (St Petersburg, Russia, 29 June to 04 July 2008) a new, simple and clear constitution.  
It clarifies and reasserts COMNAP's purpose as:
To develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in Antarctica, by
    • Serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner;
    • Facilitating and promoting international partnerships;
    • Providing opportunities and systems for information exchange; and
    • Providing the Antarctic Treaty System with objective and practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' pool of expertise. 
It also confirms COMNAP's close connection with the Antarctic Treaty by reasserting the long-standing principles that:
    • COMNAP membership is only open to those with national responsibility for managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area on behalf of their respective governments, which must have signed the Antarctic Treaty and ratified its Protocol on Environmental Protection; and
    • COMNAP like the ATCM generally follows the  principle of consensus, as the way to reach an opinion or position developed by a group as a whole. 
The new COMNAP constitution provides renewed guidance and will assist in developing a number of strategic objectives. 
For further information, see: ATCMXXXII-IP078 COMNAP's 20 years: a New Constitution and a New Way of Working to Continue Supporting Science and the Antarctic Treaty System (Baltimore, 2009)
3.2 New COMNAP way of working 
In conjunction with the new Constitution, COMNAP adopted in St Petersburg a new way of working so that it will be better placed to address new, upcoming challenges. 
COMNAP will now be a more strategic, project-oriented organisation, defining a small number of strategic projects and each time finding the best people to deliver a result within a defined, limited timeframe.
We no longer operate through a range of formal Working Groups, Committees and Networks with their large membership of national representatives. The valuable communication channels with, and between, experts in each field are maintained through simple topic-based mailing lists and new information sharing systems.   
COMNAP Annual General Meetings will become shorter and more focused, with the plenary given targeted presentations on strategic projects and topics, followed by discussions and consideration of relevant proposals put forward by the project teams.
Development and implementation of this new way of working is in progress. New rules of procedure have been developed and will be reviewed and confirmed at the next COMNAP Annual General Meeting in August 2009 in Punta Arenas, Chile.
For further information, see: ATCMXXXII-IP078 COMNAP's 20 years: a New Constitution and a New Way of Working to Continue Supporting Science and the Antarctic Treaty System  (Baltimore, 2009)
3.3 Towards better Search and Rescue (SAR) coordination and response in the Antarctic 
Under international maritime and aeronautical agreements, Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) of five countries (Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa) share responsibility for the coordination of Search and Rescue (SAR) over the Antarctic region.  
A description of SAR arrangements and systems in place was provided by COMNAP in 2008 in ATCMXXXI-IP099 Search and Rescue in the Antarctic.  This paper and other SAR-related resources are available on the COMNAP web site's SAR section at www.comnap.aq/sar.
Antarctic RCCs and operators have worked together for a long time, though links have often remained informal and on a mostly national level. The situation continues to evolve positively with stronger links being forged. 
The current increase in maritime and air traffic can be of concern in relation both to the capability to respond and to the possible impact on National Antarctic Programs. Of particular concern are very large passenger vessels – their rescue would require considerable assets and resources and could cause major disruptions to nearby stations and vessels and the research programmes they support.
In response to these concerns, COMNAP and RCC authorities decided to convene a workshop to:
    • Improve understanding of the nature and activities of RCCs and National Antarctic Programs, and how they can work together;
    • Review the nature of maritime, aeronautical and land traffic in the Antarctic region and the challenges it poses for Search and Rescue; and
    • Explore options for improved Search and Rescue coordination and response in the Antarctic.
The workshop, Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic, was held in Valparaiso / Viña del Mar, Chile, 12-14 August 2008. It was hosted by the Chilean Directorate General of the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine (DIRECTEMAR) in collaboration with COMNAP.  
The workshop focused on practical issues in an open and collaborative spirit and was very productive. The full report of the workshop outlining key discussions and outcomes is provided at Annex B of ATCMXXXII-WP047 Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic (Baltimore, 2009).
Discussions centred on the following key topics: Links between RCCS; Links between RCCs and National Antarctic Programs; Links between RCCs and their national Antarctic agencies; Contact list and communication protocols; Information on potential rescue assets; Ship position reporting; Advance schedules; Library of information; Land SAR; Long Range Identification and Tracking (LRIT); Automatic Identification Systems (AIS); and Prevention.
Discussions were assisted by the development and review of three hypothetical SAR scenarios (refer Appendix 2 of the workshop report): Large passenger vessel evacuation off Antarctic Peninsula; Commercial airliner crash landing in Mary Bird Land; Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) – hard landing of big cargo aircraft at snow compacted runway. 
Workshop participants adopted a number of Recommendations and decided on a range of Actions to be progressed over the following year (Refer Appendix 1 of the workshop report).  An outline progress/status report on Actions is provided at Annex A of WP047. 
Workshop participants adopted a number of Recommendations directed to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. WP047 invites the ATCM to consider the adoption of a Resolution incorporating these Recommendations, which relate to:
    • recognising the importance for Search and Rescue of 
        ◦ maintaining up to date information on ground facilities, ships and aircraft;
        ◦ providing advance information on ship and aircraft schedules; and
        ◦ communicating ship positions to the relevant RCC
    • resolving that all Antarctic ships should, as far as possible, report their position to at least one of the 5 relevant Maritime RCCs
    • encouraging ships to liaise with vessels they encounter in the Antarctic Treaty area to promote the use of position reporting systems.
A follow up workshop will be reconvened in July/August 2009, in particular to expand on land SAR. 
For further information, see: ATCMXXXI-IP099 Search and Rescue in the Antarctic (Kyiv, 2008) and ATCMXXXII-WP047 Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic (Baltimore, 2009)
3.4 COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS)
The COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS – www.comnap.aq/sprs) has been operational since 2001. It is an optional, voluntary system for exchange of information about National Program ship operations and capabilities. Its primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration between National Programs.
The SPRS cannot, and does not, constitute an operational alert and rescue system on which vessels should count in case of emergency. However it can make a very useful contribution to safety with all SPRS information made available to the Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) which cover the Antarctic region, as an additional source of information complementing all other national and international systems in place. 
The SPRS has been the subject of a recent, significant overhaul that has extended its capabilities and improved ease of use and access to information. Latest positions and other practical information of all participating vessels are broadcast to each of these vessels and their National Program every time they send a position report, and is broadcast every 24h to relevant Antarctic Search and Rescue authorities. All information is also available at any time to National Antarctic Programs and Search and Rescue authorities through the password protected section of the COMNAP web site.
3.5 Review of the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) 
The Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) is a handbook of aeronautical information published by COMNAP as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as recommended by the ATCM in Recommendation XV-20 Air safety in Antarctica (Paris, 1989). 
An in-depth review of the AFIM is under way as one of COMNAP's 2008-2009 strategic projects, following presentation of a comprehensive discussion paper at COMNAP XX (St Petersburg, 2008). Aspects covered by the review include: 
    • the structure of the information and its relation to International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) formats and standards;
    • the management of the updating and publishing process;
    • suitability to the needs and requirements of its various users – including pilots, station personnel, managers and Search and Rescue authorities;
    • implementation of a parallel electronic version of the AFIM. 
The results of the review, and proposals for improving the AFIM, will be presented to COMNAP at its next Annual General Meeting in August 2009 in Punta Arenas, Chile. 
It must be noted that the information contained in the AFIM includes and go beyond information that Parties are required to exchange under a number of Treaty provisions, in particular under Resolution 6 (2001). Management of the AFIM through its electronic version will when appropriate allow simple and reliable exchange of relevant AFIM information with the Antarctic Treaty's Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES). This will significantly reduce duplication of efforts and prevent mismatch of data between systems. 
3.6 Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)
The Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM) is an evolution of the handbook of telecommunications practices that ATCM Recommendation X-3 (Washington, 1979) invited SCAR to prepare.  Recommendation X-3 became effective 08-Apr-1987 and remains effective.
Antarctic telecommunications have shifted from HF radiocommunications to satellite communications integrated in the worldwide public switched telephone system and the internet network. The essential, useful part of the ATOM has become an 'Antarctic communications directory' of direct telephone, fax and email contacts.
The ATOM is being rejuvenated and expanded as part of its migration to the new COMNAP "InfoX" electronic information exchange system. It is more consistent in its format and notations. As far as possible it uses and complies with standard, international notations and conventions – in particular Recommendations from the International Telecommunication Union (ITU – www.itu.int) such as ITU-T Rec. E.123 Notation for national and international phone numbers, e-mail addresses and web addresses. This ITU Recommendation and other  resources for interoperability are available on the COMNAP web site at www.comnap.aq/interoperability.
Importantly, it is no longer limited to stations and ships. It now also includes contact details for National Antarctic Programs, Search and Rescue authorities and a number of other stakeholders. 
The first version of this 'New ATOM' directory was released in December 2008. COMNAP members and Search and Rescue authorities have access to the latest version at www.comnap.aq/atom  (login required). It will also soon be available on the password protected section of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat's web site. 
3.7 Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR)
Information on problems encountered in Antarctica has always been exchanged. The very first ATCM recommended in Recommendation I-VII (Canberra, 1961) that Parties undertake exchange of information on logistics problems; This Recommendation became effective 30-Apr-1962 and remains effective.
A new, comprehensive Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR) system is being designed as part of one of COMNAP's 2008-2009 strategic projects. 
The AINMR's primary objective is:
    • to capture outline information about events that 
        ◦ had, or could have had, serious consequences; and/or
        ◦ reveal lessons to be learned; and/or
        ◦ are novel, very unusual events;
    • so that National Antarctic Programs can learn from each other to reduce the risk of serious consequences occurring in the course of their activities.
This is developed as a tool to learn and is NOT meant to be a register of all serious events that have occurred. “events” here include accidents, incidents and near-misses. These can be real (events that happened) or  simulated (exercises).
The AINMR will need to incorporate and/or replace two existing COMNAP reporting systems:
    • The Environmental Incident Reporting System – EIRS.
    • The Oil Spill reporting format and mechanism introduced through the Guidelines for the Reporting of Oil Spill Incidents Which Occur in Antarctica (CGN 04/1993) approved by COMNAP June 1993 and later endorsed by the ATCM through Resolution 6 (1998). This is now incorporated into the COMNAP Fuel Manual first presented to ATCM in ATCMXXI-IP091 The COMNAP Fuel Manual, incorporating revised guidelines for fuel handling and storage in Antarctica. (Kyiv 2008) 
The AINMR will also, as much as possible, be compatible with relevant Antarctic Treaty reporting requirements so as  to reduce work load and maximise the chances of reports being submitted.  This includes some of the annual reporting requirements under Article 17 of the Environment Protocol, such as:
    • Flora and fauna “taking”, “harmful interference” and “introduction of species”. This is required by Article 6 of Annex II of the Protocol. 
    • Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency (Annex IV, Article 7.2)
    • Information on change or damage to an Antarctic Protected Area - ASPA, ASMA or HSM (Annex V – Article 10.1.b)
The design and implementation plan for the new AINMR will be presented to COMNAP at its next Annual General Meeting in August 2009 in Punta Arenas, Chile. 
3.8 Hydrographic surveying using ships of opportunity
Hydrographic surveying and charting have been the subject of four ATCM recommendations adopted between 1989 and 2008: Recommendation XV-19 (1989), Resolution 1 (1995), Resolution 3 (2003) and Resolution 5 (2008). 
The waters of the Southern Ocean around Antarctica represent one of the most challenging marine regions on the globe, and also one of the most fragile.  The International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO) estimates that less than 1% of these waters within the 200m contour has been adequately surveyed to meet the needs of contemporary shipping entering Antarctic waters. The channels and approaches to bases around the Antarctic Peninsula have seen the most intensive effort, yet even here some 60% of the area within the 200m contour has never been systematically surveyed, whilst the remainder needs re-survey. 
Hydrographic activity is expensive and assets are scarce. Coordination of international effort is of the utmost importance.  
The IHO's Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (HCA) brings together the national hydrographic offices of 22 Antarctic Treaty Parties. It promotes technical co-operation and exchange of information, and stimulates its members to widen hydrographic activity in the region.
A need was identified for more information on how hydrographic surveys could be conducted using ships of opportunity – without this, it was very difficult to understand if and how National Programs could assist.  
As one of its 2008-2009 strategic projects, COMNAP is working with the HCA to develop guidelines for collection of hydrographic data by ships of opportunity operating in the Antarctic. 
These guidelines will be presented to COMNAP at its next Annual General Meeting in August 2009 in Punta Arenas, Chile. This will include a keynote presentation by the HCA. 
For further information, see: ATCMXXX-IP050 International coordination of hydrography in Antarctica: significance to safety of Antarctic ship operations (Delhi, 2007).
3.9 Information Exchange
The re-developed COMNAP 'infoX' electronic information exchange system manages a range of dynamic information on National Program capabilities and activities including stations, airfields, ships, medical facilities, monitoring activities, operational contact details or ship position reports. This includes and goes beyond information that Parties are required to exchange under a number of Treaty provisions, in particular under Resolution 6 (2001).
The primary objective of the system is to facilitate exchange of relevant information between National Programs with a view to facilitating partnerships, increasing efficiencies and, very importantly, increasing our capability to support new or smaller Programs. 
The system provides a framework to collect, manage, manipulate and explore this information, but also to exchange it with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat's Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) and other systems. 
Close cooperation over the last few years between the Antarctic Treaty and COMNAP secretariats has resulted in a coordinated development of both sides' information systems with a view to avoiding duplication. It will be possible for Parties, with just a few clicks, to export relevant information maintained on the COMNAP systems to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat systems for the purpose of meeting their exchange of information obligations under the Antarctic Treaty.  
3.10 Mapping Products
Paper maps
COMNAP produced in 2006 a large format 'wall map' of Antarctica showing the main facilities operated by National Antarctic Programs, together with a range of reference information. A smaller, 'folding map' version was also produced with several thousand copies distributed. 
A simplified, semi-automated process can now be used to update the wall map and the folding map at regular interval – for example annually. 
The wall map can now be made available to National Programs in electronic form in a way that makes it easy for them to customise the map as needed. This is supported by the release of the map under a Creative Commons 'Attribution - Share Alike' license that promotes the distribution and re-use of the work while protecting the rights of contributors. For more details, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
The folding map is made available in the form of the original PDF used for production of the map, and suitable for professional reprints.
Simple topical maps are also produced from time to time as needed.
Updates of the wall map and the folding map have been issued in March 2009. These include new information about Search and Rescue Regions and Rescue Coordination Centres. Copies of the folding map will be distributed at ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009). Electronic copies of the maps are available through www.comnap.aq/maps.    
GoogleEarth / GoogleMap layers
Information on Antarctic facilities maintained on the COMNAP electronic information exchange system ('infoX')  can be exported as a 'KML' layer which can be viewed over maps or satellite imagery using GoogleEarth or GoogleMap. This should be available in the near future for any adequately geo-referenced information held in the infoX. 
3.11 Operational publications 
COMNAP publishes a number of operational publications in support of Antarctic operations, in particular in support of safety and best environmental practice. This includes a number of operational guidelines, manuals and workshop reports. 
COMNAP publishes and regularly updates the hardcopy Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as per ATCM Recommendation XV-20. It contains exhaustive information on Antarctic airfields and on procedures to contact and access these airfields. It is primarily intended for use by National Antarctic Programs but is also made available for purchase by anyone that needs a copy. More information on the AFIM is available at www.comnap.aq/afim . A comprehensive review of the AFIM is under way (see Section 3.5 for more details).
COMNAP also maintains the Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM), an evolution of the handbook of telecommunications practices prepared as per Recommendation X-3 (1979).  A new version has been introduced in December 2008.  It is no longer limited to stations and ships and now also includes contact details for National Antarctic Programs, Search and Rescue authorities and a number of other stakeholders (see Section 3.6 for more details).  
3.12 Support of the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008
COMNAP member National Antarctic Programs have provided a significant contribution to the support of National and International IPY projects in the Antarctic, in particular through their national IPY committees. The normal processes in place whereby scientists dealt with their respective National Program, and National Programs worked with each other as appropriate, continued to work well, including for multinational IPY projects. 
COMNAP contributed clearly to that success through the provision of a forum in which National Program managers can coordinate their support of international projects as required.
3.13 Review of Inspection Checklist A (Stations)
COMNAP made an active contribution to the work of the open-ended web-based Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) setup by ATCM XXXI (Kyiv, 2008) to review the Inspection Checklist A “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” contained in  Resolution 5 (1995), as the first step towards reviewing all the checklists contained in this Resolution.  
COMNAP continues to support and welcome the conduction of detailed, exhaustive inspections of stations and other National Antarctic Program facilities and activities, which can act as valuable, beneficial audits. COMNAP welcomed the opportunity, in participating in this review of the checklist, to help improve the checklist in a way that makes it easier for inspection teams to conduct detailed and exhaustive, audit-like inspections.
COMNAP agreed at ATCM XXV (Warsaw 2002) to compile information on Antarctic stations  in the format of the inspection checklists (Refer ATCM XXV final report, Paras 123-124). The development of the new COMNAP 'infoX' electronic information exchange system does take this into account as much as practicable and will work towards incorporating the revised checklist as early as possible. Ultimately, the COMNAP infoX should include information relevant to every question in the checklist, and be identified and accessible as such.
COMNAP therefore also welcomed the opportunity, in participating in the review, to contribute to the clarification of questions and the use of a clear, consistent terminology – which will facilitate the work of inspectors but also make possible the development of a sound and consistent repository of relevant information in the COMNAP infoX. 
The terminology for facilities used in the development of the COMNAP infoX was provided to the ICG and is included in its report to ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009), submitted as WP037. 
COMNAP's contribution to the ICG included a modified version of the checklist complying with that terminology, to try illustrate how the checklist could be adjusted and (hopefully) clarified and improved by the use of an agreed terminology.
For further information, see: ATCMXXXII-WP037 Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on the revision of List A “Permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations” appended to Resolution 5 (1995) (Baltimore, 2009)
3.14 Mechanisms for logistics collaboration and sharing of facilities 
As one of its 2008-2009 strategic projects, COMNAP is reviewing the mechanisms used for logistics collaboration and the sharing of facilities and exploring possible new options.
The results of this work are due to be presented and discussed at the next COMNAP Annual General Meeting in August 2009 in Punta Arenas, Chile.
3.15 Mechanisms for collaborative support to science
What National Antarctic Program managers have in common is their national responsibility to manage the support of scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area on behalf of their government and in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.  
Increased ambitions – in particular in relation to climate change research, different and more sophisticated science and more demanding environmental measures contribute to added pressure on National Antarctic Programs, and to an even greater need for international collaboration. 
COMNAP has recognised a greater need for collaborative support to science. As one of its 2008-2009 strategic projects, COMNAP is reviewing the mechanisms used for collaborative support to science and exploring possible new options. This work is done in close cooperation with the Executive Committee of the the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).
The results of this work are due to be presented and discussed at the next COMNAP Annual General Meeting in August 2009 in Punta Arenas, Chile.
3.16 Long Term Monitoring Activities (LTMA)
A system has been developed to collect simple yet useful information on all types of Long Term Monitoring Activities (LTMA) maintained in the Antarctic region. These are often handled directly by National Programs and in many cases sit outside the standard process of calls for proposals.  
A record of these activities will be very useful in improving coordination, reducing duplication and increasing the potential use of long term records. 
It is possible to indicate for each activity which SCAR Research Program(s) it is part of, if applicable. The indication of which parameters are recorded is done via a list of parameters that is a subset of the list of science keywords already used for cataloguing Antarctic data sets on the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD). This will make it easier to cross-reference or group monitoring activities and data sets.  
This is a component of possible new mechanisms for collaborative support to science considered in liaison with the SCAR Executive (see Section 3.15).
The LTMA system corresponds to a slightly modified version of the system designed last year for  Environmental Activities, which was and remains compatible with the information collected by COMNAP for a number of years on National Programs' environmental monitoring. 
For environmental monitoring activities, the LTMA includes the latest categorising and priorities agreed by the CEP. It will allow easy aggregation and categorisation of information, for example by region, by type of monitoring (Operational or State of the Environment) or by parameter measured. 
The system is running in test mode with past information on environmental monitoring already imported into it. This will be reviewed with SCAR then presented and discussed at the next COMNAP Annual General Meeting in August 2009 in Punta Arenas, Chile.
3.17 Review of ATCM operational recommendations
COMNAP has actively contributed to the initial review of ATCM operational recommendations undertaken in 2008-2009 by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and presented in ATCMXXXII-SP007  Measures on operational matters (Baltimore, 2009).  
Many recommendations that are still effective, and therefore have to be complied with by National Antarctic Programs, are no longer relevant or appropriate. This is in particular the case in the domains of telecommunications and meteorology. Some recommendations may need updating while some may need to be withdrawn. In some cases, the operative part of the recommendation explicitly incorporates the content of external documents that are not readily available, and it can be difficult to understand the full nature and extent of the recommendation. 
It must be noted that COMNAP has progressively assumed a number of practical tasks and functions that previously were, or would have been, undertaken by Treaty Parties directly or by other organisations. In some cases, these are still formally assigned to others through ATCM recommendations that are still effective. 
The initial review has also revealed the absence of a consistent and persistent terminology. A number of terms used regularly in recommendations over the last 50 years have never been clearly defined and do not seem to be always used with the same meaning.     
This initial review has highlighted the value of undertaking a complete review of these recommendations that would lead to clarifications, updates or withdrawals of recommendations, as appropriate.
COMNAP looks forward to contributing to future work on this matter.
3.18 Terminology for facilities
The development of a structured and meaningful repository of information, such as in the new ATS and COMNAP electronic information exchange systems, requires the use of a clear, consistent and persistent terminology. This is even more important when the system has to be used by a variety of persons of different native languages.
The recent reviews of operational recommendations in general and of Inspection Checklist A (stations) in particular have shown significant variations, and sometimes confusion, in the terminology used throughout  recommendations and other documents when referring to facilities/installations, their type and status. 
There is an opportunity, with the current developments of information systems and various reviews of Antarctic Treaty instruments, to develop a clear, consistent terminology that could be used throughout. 
As already indicated in section 3.13, the draft terminology for facilities used in the development of the COMNAP infoX was provided to the ICG on the review of Inspection Checklist A and is included in its report to ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009), submitted as WP037.   
3.19 Collaboration with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
The COMNAP and Antarctic Treaty secretariats have developed and maintained a close and constructive work relationship, and work closely on a number of practical matters as and when appropriate. 
The secretariats do in particular collaborate closely on the design and coordination of the two organisations' Information Exchange Systems, which is instrumental in developing an efficient and productive exchange of information within the Antarctic Treaty System.
3.20 Facilitating and promoting wide distribution and use of information and publications
COMNAP continues, as reported in previous years, to try facilitating and promoting the wide distribution and use of its information and publications. 
This includes:
    • developing web services that can deliver to third parties a range of reference information, for example up-to-date lists of facilities and information on these facilities; and 
    • releasing products such as maps under Creative Commons licenses under which you keep your copyright but allow people to copy and distribute your work provided they give you credit — and only on the conditions you specify. This promotes the distribution and re-use of work while protecting the rights of all contributors. For more details, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
4. 2008-2009 officers, topic-based information sharing and strategic projects
Officers 
Six elected officers, the COMNAP Chair and 5 Vice-Chairs, plus the Executive Secretary, compose the COMNAP Executive Committee as follows:
Position
Officer
Term expires
Chair
José Retamales (Chile) jretamales@inach.cl 
mid-2010
Vice-Chair
Christo Pimpirev (Bulgaria) polar@gea.uni-sofia.bg 
mid-2009

Kazuyuki Shiraishi (Japan) kshiraishi@nipr.ac.jp 
mid-2011

Lou Sanson (New Zealand) l.sanson@antarcticanz.govt.nz  
mid-2010

Rasik Ravindra (India) rasik@ncaor.org 
mid-2010

Virginia Mudie (Australia) virginia.mudie@aad.gov.au 
mid-2009
Executive Secretary
Antoine Guichard antoine.guichard@comnap.aq 
30 Sept 2009



An up-to-date version of this list is maintained at www.comnap.aq/officers The Chair and each Vice-Chair  oversees and supports a small number of topic-based information sharing channels and strategic projects.
Topic-based information sharing 
An important and valuable aspect of COMNAP is to allow exchange of information between National Antarctic Program staff on a range of relevant Topics.
Exchange of information on each Topic is coordinated and supported by a nominated “Principal Contact” and done through a dedicated mailing list and Workspace on the COMNAP web site. Each Principal Contact is overseen and supported by a designated EXCOM member.
Topic-based Information Sharing 2008-2009
Topic
Principal Contact
Oversight EXCOM member
Air
Giuseppe De Rossi
giuseppe.derossi@consorzio.pnra.it
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
kshiraishi@nipr.ac.jp 
Energy
David Blake
dmbl@bas.ac.uk 
Virginia Mudie
virginia.mudie@aad.gov.au 
Environment 
Rodolfo Sánchez
rsanchez@dna.gov.ar 
Rasik Ravindra
rasik@ncaor.org 
Health and Safety
Robert Culshaw
rocu@bas.ac.uk 
José Retamales
jretamales@inach.cl 
Medical
Iain Grant
iain.grant@phnt.swest.nhs.uk 
Lou Sanson
l.sanson@antarcticanz.govt.nz 
Outreach
Linda Capper
lmca@bas.ac.uk 
Lou Sanson
l.sanson@antarcticanz.govt.nz 
Shipping
Juan-José Dañobeitia
jjdanobeitia@cmima.csic.es 
Rasik Ravindra
rasik@ncaor.org 
Training
Albert Lluberas
alexllub@iau.gub.uy 
Christo Pimpirev
polar@gea.uni-sofia.bg 
An up-to-date version of this list is maintained at www.comnap.aq/topics 
Strategic projects
COMNAP Activity focuses on a small number of Strategic Projects, each managed by a Project Manager and overseen by a designated member of EXCOM, the COMNAP Executive Committee. 
A Strategic Project is normally restricted to one year, and its outcomes are presented at the COMNAP Annual General Meeting.
Strategic Projects 2008-2009
Project 
Project Manager
Oversight EXCOM member
Mechanisms for collaborative support to science
Heinrich (Heinz) Miller
heinrich.miller@awi.de 
Christo Pimpirev
polar@gea.uni-sofia.bg  
Mechanisms for logistic collaboration and sharing facilities
Juan-José Dañobeitia
jjdanobeitia@cmima.csic.es  
José Retamales
jretamales@inach.cl  
Online accident, incident and near-miss reporting system
Robert Culshaw
rocu@bas.ac.uk  
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
kshiraishi@nipr.ac.jp  
Develop specifications and guidelines for conducting hydrographic surveying using ships of opportunity
Albert Lluberas
alexllub@iau.gub.uy  
Rasik Ravindra
rasik@ncaor.org  
Search and Rescue coordination
John Hall
jhal@bas.ac.uk  
José Retamales
jretamales@inach.cl  
Review issue of introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and determine practical remedial actions
Yves Frenot
yves.frenot@ipev.fr  
Lou Sanson
l.sanson@antarcticanz.govt.nz  
Explore options for syndicate purchasing
Brian Stone
bstone@nsf.gov  
Virginia Mudie
virginia.mudie@aad.gov.au  
Review current status of medical support issues
Iain Grant
iain.grant@phnt.swest.nhs.uk  
Lou Sanson
l.sanson@antarcticanz.govt.nz  
Revise and update Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)
Giuseppe De Rossi
giuseppe.derossi@consorzio.pnra.it 
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
kshiraishi@nipr.ac.jp   
Upgrade COMNAP Fuel Manual
Richard Mulligan
richard.mulligan@aad.gov.au  
Virginia Mudie
virginia.mudie@aad.gov.au  
Implement COMNAP new way of working 
Antoine Guichard
antoine.guichard@comnap.aq  
Virginia Mudie
virginia.mudie@aad.gov.au  
An up-to-date version of this list is maintained at www.comnap.aq/projects 
5. Meetings
2008 COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XX) St Petersburg, Russia 
COMNAP XX, was held from Sunday 29 June to Friday 04 July 2008 in St Petersburg. The meeting was hosted by the COMNAP member for Russia, the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AARI). It  included a range of plenary sessions, meetings of working groups, topical sessions and workshops. 
The key outcome of COMNAP XX was the development and adoption of the new COMNAP constitution and a new way of working. These are detailed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 of this report, and in ATCMXXXII-IP078 COMNAP's 20 years: a New Constitution and a New Way of Working to Continue Supporting Science and the Antarctic Treaty System (Baltimore, 2009)
Oct 2008 COMNAP EXCOM, Bansko, Bulgaria
The COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) met on 01-03 October in Bansko, Bulgaria and worked on implementing the changes adopted at COMNAP XX. This included outlining  principles for new rules of procedure, confirming key topics for information sharing channels, formulating a number of strategic projects for 2008-2009, and allocating responsibilities.  
Next: 2009 COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XXI) Punta Arenas, Chile 
COMNAP XXI will be hosted by the COMNAP member for Chile, the Instituto Antarctico Chileno, from Sunday 02 to Thursday 06 August 2009 in Punta Arenas, Chile. Following the changes adopted at COMNAP XX, the meeting will adopt a new format with 3 days of keynote presentations and discussions in plenary, followed by one day made available for ad-hoc meetings between National Programs working on bilateral of multilateral collaboration projects.  
6. Secretariat
The COMNAP Secretariat operates from an office located in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. It is provided at no charge by the secretariat’s supporting organisation, the Tasmanian State Government through its office of Antarctic affairs ‘Antarctic Tasmania’. This invaluable support has now been provided since 1997 and the current support agreement runs until September 2009. The free support provided by Antarctic Tasmania includes a range of office equipment and administrative support, notably through accounting and auditing services.  Another extremely valuable support provided is the employment of the COMNAP Executive Secretary by the State of Tasmania on a cost recovery basis. While the COMNAP Executive Secretary still reports directly and exclusively to the COMNAP Chair, he his technically an employee of the Tasmanian State Service, with all the additional protection and support it does entail.
COMNAP remains very thankful to the Tasmanian State Government for its continued support, which allows the secretariat to operate very efficiently and in a quality, supportive environment.
7. Conclusion 
COMNAP remains committed to supporting the Antarctic Treaty System. 
COMNAP and its members continue to work together and help each other to place all National Antarctic Programs in the best possible position to undertake and support scientific and other work in Antarctica on behalf of their respective national governments – safely, efficiently and in the most environmentally responsible manner. 
________
For more information, please visit COMNAP's web site at www.comnap.aq or email us at info@comnap.aq.


Appendix 1: Shortcut links to COMNAP Information
Updated 11-March-2009. An up-to-date version of this list is maintained at www.comnap.aq/links 
Shortcut
Information
Address
accounts
COMNAP audited annual accounts
To be at /accounts. Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/accounts  
aeoi
Advance Exchange of Operational Information
www.comnap.aq/aeoi 
afim
Antarctic Flight Information Manual
www.comnap.aq/afim 
agm
Reports and Papers of past COMNAP Annual General Meetings
To be at /agm. Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/agm   
agr
COMNAP Annual General Reports
To be at /agr. Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/agr  
ainmr
Accident, Incident and Near Miss Reporting
to be implemented at /ainmr 
amen
List of members of the AMEN list
www.comnap.aq/amen 
atcm
ATCM meetings – dates, links and schedule for preparations
www.comnap.aq/atcm
atom
Antarctic Telecommunications Officers Manual
www.comnap.aq/atom 
budget
Current COMNAP Budget
To be at /budget. Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/budget  
calendar

Work calendar for the current year
to be implemented at /calendar

cep
CEP-relevant information
to be implemented at /cep
constitution
COMNAP Constitution
www.comnap.aq/constitution 
contacts
Current COMNAP Contacts, including contacts for operational emergencies
To be at /contacts.  Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/contacts 
countries
Countries involved in Antarctic affairs
www.comnap.aq/countries 
decisions
Recent COMNAP Decisions
to be implemented at /decisions
eirs
Environmental Incident Reporting System
to be implemented at /eirs
events
List of upcoming events
www.comnap.aq/events 
excom
EXCOM-relevant information and documents
to be implemented at /excom
facilities
List of Antarctic facilities
www.comnap.aq/facilities 
fees
Copies of membership fee invoices
To be at /fees. Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/fees  
forms
Forms and templates
www.comnap.aq/forms 
guidelines
Any documents classified as 'guidelines'
to be implemented at /guidelines
incidents
General reports on incidents in Antarctica
To be at /incidents. Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/incidents 
interoperability
Technical resources for interoperability
www.comnap.aq/interoperability 
links
Links and shortcuts to essential information
www.comnap.aq/links 
logos
COMNAP logos and other graphics
To be at /logos.  Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/logos    
manuals
Any documents classified as 'manuals'
to be implemented at /manuals
maps
COMNAP and other Antarctic maps
www.comnap.aq/maps 
meetings
List of meetings
www.comnap.aq/meetings 
messages
Archive of “COMNAP Messages”
to be implemented at /messages
news
News items 
www.comnap.aq/news 
notices
Archive of “COMNAP Notices”
to be implemented at /notices 
officers
List of COMNAP elected and appointed officers
www.comnap.aq/officers 
people
Details of people with a Personal User Account on the COMNAP web site
to be implemented at /people
procedures
COMNAP's current Rules of Procedure
www.comnap.aq/procedures 
proceedings
Any documents classified as 'proceedings'
to be implemented at /proceedings
projects
Current COMNAP Strategic Projects
www.comnap.aq/projects
protocol
Text of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol)
www.comnap.aq/protocol
recent
Information recently posted or updated on the COMNAP web site
To be at /recent. Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/recent    
representatives
List and contact details of current National Representatives
www.comnap.aq/representatives 
review
Documents for review
To be at /review. Currently at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/review 
sar
Search and Rescue in the Antarctic
www.comnap.aq/sar 
sprs
COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System
www.comnap.aq/sprs 
stations
List of Antarctic Stations
www.comnap.aq/stations 
symposium
COMNAP Symposium
www.comnap.aq/symposium 
terminology
Terminology used in COMNAP exchanges of information, in particular on the COMNAP web site.
www.comnap.aq/terminology
topics
Current topics with a dedicated mailing list
www.comnap.aq/topics
treaty
Text of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 (Treaty of Washington)
www.comnap.aq/treaty 


