





International cooperation in the Antarctic as an important argument for provision of safety of operations and investigations in the region




International cooperation in the Antarctic as an important argument for provision of safety of operations and investigations in the region


Half a century passing after the large-scale studies were carried out under the program of the International Geophysical Year (1957-1958) allowed us to describe and investigate the main geographical objects of Antarctica and the ambient seas, reveal main regularities of the state and variability of natural processes and phenomena of this region, create methodological bases and mathematical models for their forecasting. The obtained results have quite efficiently increased knowledge of the scientific community and different categories of the public on the sixth continent and allowed organizing and implementing unique transport operations and scientific studies related to application of advance technical achievements and engineering solutions. At the present time, expedition marine vessels of ice class operate in Antarctic waters, jet and prop-jet aircraft fly in the air and all Antarctic stations and bases and transport vehicles are equipped with satellite navigation and communication means. In the inner regions of Antarctica, powerful caterpillar transporters fulfill most complicated research and logistical tasks. Reorganization and upgrading of Antarctic stations and bases is carried out at a fast pace, advance medical, diagnostic, preventive and treatment facilities are widely introduced for maintaining health of polar explorers. Research is carried out using different digital measurement and analytical equipment and its results are processed on high-performance computer systems. Significant changes in this respect were demonstrated during the events related to holding the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008. 
At the same time the increased knowledge on the nature of the Antarctic has not changed the severity of climatic characteristics of this region and its isolation from the other Earth’s continents. Intercontinental marine and air operations are still conducted only during the period of the Antarctic summer and some inland stations (Amundsen-Scott, Vostok and Dome Concordia) are accessible to any transport facilities only during a short period November to the middle of February. In this respect, they can be considered even more autonomous human settlements with the purpose of implementing research programs than the international space station in the near-Earth orbit. The latter is accessible for space ships in all seasons of the year, which is not the case for inland Antarctic stations. 
These facts make all national Antarctic Programs to devote increased attention to the issues of safety of operations of Antarctic stations and bases and transport (marine, air and ground) operations for their logistical support and realization of scientific studies. For this purpose, reservation of additional capabilities, electrical power supply, communication means and facilities for living of personnel is provided at the stations. It is extremely desirable to provide necessary emergency support for transport vehicles operating in the Antarctic. However to solve this problem is difficult due to the need for significant additional funds. A specific feature of the financial support for activity of any national Antarctic program is the use of financial resources exclusively from the state budgets of the countries – organizers of such programs. Obviously, this significantly reduces the capacity for undertaking measures to provide safety of operations (including search and rescue), and life activity of personnel in the Antarctic.
In spite of a significant scientific and technical progress in support of the expedition activity in the South Polar Region, enhanced risks of possible ice drift of ships in the Southern Ocean, serious incidents and accidents with air and ground transport, occurrence of fires at the facilities of Antarctic stations, bases and transport, the need for rendering urgent medical aid and evacuation of patients or injured expedition participants from the Antarctic for emergency medical treatment under the stationary clinical conditions still remain at the beginning of the 21st century. It should be noted that the increased interest in the Antarctic studies during the IPY shown by the international scientific community resulted in a considerable increase of the expedition personnel and corresponding transport operations in the region. However regretful it may be to note but exactly during this period 2007-08, there was an increase of accidents of transportation means, fires at the facilities, number of urgent medical evacuations of people from the Antarctic continent and even their death in the Antarctic in different national Antarctic Programs compared to the period preceding the IPY. 
The Russian Antarctic Expedition is not unfortunately an exception. On 5 October 2008, as a result of the fire, a two-storey office-living building at Progress station was completely burned. One of the people at the station was killed and two were seriously injured. In the same month at Mirny station, a complex surgery was performed by the doctors on one of the people at the station, but the post-operation complications required additional surgery under the hospital conditions. The aforementioned incidents occurred during the period preceding the beginning of RAE seasonal operations in the Antarctic summer of 2007-08.  This has influenced to a great extent the possibility of rendering technical assistance to the stations and relieving the psychological stress on their personnel by RAE efforts. This help was operationally provided by personnel of the Chinese Antarctic Zhongshan station, which is located near Progress station, and by staff of the Australian Antarctic Program using the ship “Aurora Australis” and Australian helicopters. Using an opportunity to address the entire Antarctic community on behalf of the Russian Federation we want to express our deep appreciation and gratitude to the leadership and personnel of the national Antarctic Programs of Australia and China, who have rendered invaluable help in eliminating the consequences of critical emergency situations at the Russian Antarctic stations Progress and Mirny. Our Chinese colleagues supplied the people who have lost their personal belongings in the fire at Progress station with articles of prime necessity and bedding and provided a possibility to use different communication means available at Zhongshan station. The Australian partners of RAE have delivered to Progress station polar clothing, bedding and other accessories, hygiene items, some assortment of food products and other necessary things for the most rapid reconstruction of normal living conditions at the station. The Australian helicopter pilots have evacuated the Russian patient from Mirny station to the ship “Aurora Australis”, delivering him to one of the hospitals in port Hobart. In this hospital he was additionally operated and in several days was shipped to Russia. It is very important that all assistance in the Antarctic was selfless in full compliance with the spirit and letter of the Antarctic Treaty. On behalf of the Russian Antarctic Expedition we assure participants to ATCM XXXII that the Russian polar explorers are also always ready to give a helping hand to our foreign colleagues using all efforts and facilities available to us. 
The problem of ensuring safety of Antarctic operations and life activity of the stations and personnel remains one of the major objectives facing organizers of Antarctic research at the present time. On the one hand, its solution is connected with additional material means, and on the other hand, all these means cannot be provided with absolute backing-up and reserving. In our opinion, the way out can be found in establishing international thematic logistical programs by several national Antarctic operators, carried out on a cooperative basis. The aviation DROMLAN program can serve as an example, uniting 11 national Antarctic Programs (Belgium, Great Britain, Germany, India, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Finland, Sweden, South Africa and Japan), operating on the Queen Maud Land. During the IPY period, the logistical support of this program was required by the national expeditions of Argentina, Italy and China. The DROMLAN Program provides intercontinental flights of airplanes IL-76 TD and С-130 from Cape Town to the ice air fields of the Russian Novolazarevskaya station and Norwegian Troll station. The inland flights for delivering personnel and expedition equipment are made by airplanes BT-67 “Basler”. In the course of planned air operations under this program, the airplanes used by the program air operator, rendered repeatedly technical and medical help to the Russian Progress station, German Georg von Neumayer station, French-Italian Dome Concordia, Norwegian inland sledge-caterpillar traverse and to some non-governmental expeditions.
Several participants of this Program have created its ship version – DROMLAN–SHIP, the participants of which organize charter of transport ice class ships for supply of their Antarctic stations on a cooperative basis. The national expeditions of Belgium, Germany, Norway and some other take part in this program.
In the end of September 2008 in Shanghai (China), a meeting was held at the initiative of the Australian Antarctic Program, which was attended by the representatives of the national Programs of Australia, China, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russia, France and Japan. The aim of the meeting was to discuss the proposal of creating a cooperative Antarctic Program in East Antarctica between the aforementioned national programs. This approach not only reduces the transport costs of some Antarctic Programs, but also allows expanding the emergency search and rescue Antarctic network during summer operations. We think that this approach should be further developed and supported from the side of the different elements of the Antarctic Treaty System, primarily the COMNAP and SCAR.

