





Monitoring and assessment using Hierarchical Bayesian Modeling: An approach taken by the Antarctic site inventory






Monitoring and assessment using Hierarchical Bayesian Modeling: An approach taken by the Antarctic site inventory
by
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc., Co-Principal Investigator, Antarctic Site Inventory
Dr. Heather Lynch and Dr. William Fagan, University Of Maryland, Co-Principal Investigators,             Antarctic Site Inventory
Summary
This paper describes the monitoring and assessment approach now being taken by the Antarctic Site Inventory project, using hierarchical Bayesian modeling and other, cutting-edge statistical and global information system (GIS) techniques, to identify, analyze, and understand changes in penguin populations occurring in the Antarctic Peninsula.1 
This innovative approach has particular relevance to, and may greatly assist the discussion of, various issues and concerns of interest to the Parties and CEP, most particularly, a coordinated mechanism for long-term monitoring of environmental changes and, importantly, assessing a suite of biological and physical factors that, solely or in combination, may be the cause for any detected changes. 
Moreover, this approach has immediate and specific relevance to monitoring and assessing locations for which Parties, in a precautionary fashion, have adopted site visitation guidelines so that impacts at key visitor sites may potentially be avoided.2
Specifically, this approach is designed to integrate the complex spatiotemporal data generated by the Antarctic Site Inventory into models of broad-scale, Peninsula-wide population dynamics, which, in concert with a suite of environmental covariates, may be used to understand how Antarctic species are changing in abundance, relative abundance, and spatial distribution, and more importantly, identifying the factors specifically driving these long-term changes.
As described at previous ATCMs,3 the Antarctic Site Inventory began fieldwork in November 1994 using opportunistic ship visits in the Antarctic Peninsula to collect baseline information necessary to detect possible changes at a wide range of sites. Antarctic Site Inventory data collection continued through the 2008-09 field season and has demonstrated an ability to reach Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites frequently and cost-effectively, and to effectively characterize sites and collect relevant biological data (Naveen, 1997a; Naveen, et. al, 2001; Naveen, 2003). 
In 2006, Oceanites, Inc., under whose auspices the Antarctic Site Inventory is administered, began a collaboration with the Fagan Lab at the University of Maryland to begin utilizing hierarchical Bayesian modeling and other statistical and geographic information system (GIS) techniques to analyze the Antarctic Site Inventory database in the context of other extant, long-term Peninsula datasets. 
These models, as outlined in this paper, address several longstanding scientific and technical challenges inherent to using opportunistic and compiled data, and represent a key step toward an improved understanding of the Antarctic ecosystem. 
1. Introduction
Many of the most pressing challenges in environmental science and management today involve the monitoring of animal populations over large spatial scales, either because the animals themselves are broadly distributed, their movement patterns cover long distances, or they face large-scale environmental threats such as climate change. Bird populations, often presenting all three challenges, are particularly difficult to monitor. To address these concerns, ecologists have developed increasingly creative ways to monitor bird populations over large areas, many of which involve either opportunistic surveys or regularly-timed surveyed by diverse teams of people (e.g., the North American Breeding Bird Survey, Christmas Bird Counts, etc.). 
Such approaches, although absolutely necessary to track populations over large (often continental) scales, cannot be appropriately addressed by traditional analysis techniques and, in fact, require an entirely new suite of advanced modeling techniques.4 The challenges of large-scale population monitoring are compounded in the Antarctic by the obvious logistical and financial difficulties created by the polar continent’s physical isolation and climatic extremes. Under these circumstances, it is absolutely crucial that population models have the flexibility to incorporate all available data, including data that may be historical, opportunistically obtained, or compiled from multiple sources.
Notwithstanding these difficulties, substantial data from the Antarctic Peninsula are currently available via the Antarctic Site Inventory database and from other long-term research projects. Our analyses build upon long-term, multi-species datasets of population monitoring records from over 120 sampling sites throughout the Antarctic Peninsula, quantifying long-term changes in the populations of five penguin and seabird species at a nested series of spatial scales, ranging from individual colonies within sites to sub-Peninsular regions to the entire Antarctic Peninsula. Together with data on climate, ice conditions, krill, and tourism, this data will be used to understand how different drivers are contributing to biotic changes along the Peninsula. 
2. Research context
Scientists have proposed several alternative hypotheses to explain long-term changes in the sizes of particular penguin and seabird colonies. Antarctic researchers, and in particular penguin biologists, have been following changes in species’ population sizes over the past few decades, and have proposed several hypotheses to explain the observed trends and fluctuations in penguin/seabird demographics and population sizes. Some hypotheses identify human disturbance as the critical factor, focusing primarily on mechanisms affecting resource availability. These studies view bird population changes either as responses to direct human actions, such as the harvesting of fish and krill5 and ensuing intra- and interspecific competition for food,6 or they focus on long term changes in sea ice phenology with repercussions for penguin food supply.7
At present, one leading hypothesis is that decadal-scale changes in penguin and seabird population sizes may be driven by climate change.8 In particular, substantial shifts in the spatial extent and the temporal duration of Antarctic sea ice in response to regional warming appear linked to penguin and seabird population dynamics via changes in the relative availability of prey (krill, fish) and breeding habitats (floating ice, exposed rocks). In addition to the possible effects of climate change, as evidenced by discussions at previous ATCMs, concern is growing that human activities, particularly tourism, may have additional direct impacts on penguin and seabird population.9

3. Interconnected research activities, analyses
The work being undertaken by Oceanites and The Fagan Lab through the 2012-13 field season involves two interconnected research activities: continued, long-term monitoring and censusing by the Antarctic Site Inventory of penguin and seabird populations at > 120 sites throughout the Antarctic Peninsula using opportunistic ship-based data collection; and the synthesis and quantitative analyses by the Fagan Lab of numerous datasets detailing long-term changes in five penguin and seabird species from diverse sites throughout the Antarctic Peninsula.  
The data to be analyzed are extensive, including, for example, datasets from the Antarctic Site Inventory, CCAMLR, the US AMLR program, the LTER database from Palmer Station, data from British and Argentine researchers, site visitation data from the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), historic census data compiled by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), and, when possible, additional privately held datasets. Additional data for temperature change, sea ice coverage, human visitation, and other factors already have been gathered and will be analyzed together with population trajectories within a spatially explicit framework, thus allowing the chance to compare the relative empirical support that exists for competing hypotheses proposed to explain long-term changes in penguin and seabird populations. 
4. The utility of hierarchical Bayesian modeling
Clearly, ongoing monitoring is required to remain vigilant to ecosystem changes that may yet impact sensitive breeding bird populations on the Antarctic Peninsula. However, equally important is a simultaneous effort to effectively synthesize and analyze all of the data that is already available in the context of clear, salient, and testable hypotheses regarding the magnitude and drivers of population change. Such an effort will be most effective to the extent to which all available data is compiled and integrated into the analysis, including data from historical sources as well that made available from ongoing scientific programs. Indeed, a greater investment in data synthesis and modeling has been highlighted as a research priority for the Antarctic.10
Compiled datasets offer some clear advantages by broadening the types of questions that can be asked and the range of analyses that can be conducted, although their compilation and analysis often involves pitfalls different from those common to single-source dataset.11 In our efforts to quantify long-term changes in penguin and seabird populations, we face data issues falling in two broad categories: 1) observation errors and 2) data sparseness. Observation errors stem principally from two sources, census count errors and bias associated with “off-peak” censuses. Data sparseness arises because any spatially extensive database typically involves only a few censuses from each small-scale sampling unit (typically, a breeding colony site) and because any long-term database will typically have temporal sampling gaps. Recent advances in statistics, such as hierarchical Bayesian analysis, provide the flexibility to deal with such complex data and a mechanism for the integration of multiple sources of error.

Figure 1 illustrates a simple application of this approach to Adélie penguin data available for Petermann Island. 
Note that the data points have been color-coded by source; this illustrates the power of aggregating data across different sources to capture long-term changes not represented by any single monitoring effort. We find strong evidence for a true decline in breeding Adélies at Petermann Island since 1971. The dashed lines, which represent the 95% posterior credible interval, represent a convolution of ‘process’ error (i.e., true stochasticity in the number of breeding Adélies) and measurement error. 
In addition, posterior distributions (i.e., the distribution of probability for the parameter estimates) for process error and measurement error have been included in Figure 1 to illustrate that for these data, process error dominates measurement error in most years. Biologically speaking, stochasticity in the breeding population of Adélies on Petermann Island (driven by external effects to be modeled using covariates) is a more important source of uncertainty in overall trends than is the error in the surveys; this assures us that even though the data have been compiled from various sources, uncertainty in the counts is not having a major impact on our understanding of the population dynamics. 
Note that in 1971 and in 1988, the credible intervals (which reflect the 95% probability envelope for the true census counts) expand, meaning our estimates of the true population are less certain in those years. This reflects known patterns of higher measurement error in those years. Using this kind of hierarchical Bayesian analysis, we can incorporate greater measurement uncertainty in years which, for whatever reason, are known to have less certain estimates.
A complete analysis of the penguin population data includes the integration of chick count data by means of a model for reproductive productivity and a correction for the timing of census counts. Most importantly, we are simultaneously analyzing all the sites for which sufficient data is available at a nested series of spatial scales which allows us to use information from sites with many high quality counts to better understand trends at neighboring sites that may be less frequently censused. 
In sum, by creating a Peninsula-wide, multi-species, and spatially explicit model of penguin population trends, we are in a position to answer specific questions regarding the likely drivers of population shifts (both numerical and spatial) and to forecast Peninsula-wide changes in the relative balance between the three pygoscelid penguin species. This information represents an important link in understanding both management of the Antarctic Peninsula for its own sake, and it also provides information critical to the estimation and management of krill in the adjacent areas of the Southern Ocean. 
The Antarctic Site Inventory is the only project monitoring penguin and seabird populations throughout the Peninsula, and the only project regularly censusing the species-diverse, environmentally sensitive tourism sites now subject to site visitation guidelines adopted at the last three ATCMs. Because the number of visiting tour ships, the sizes of such ships, and the number of visitors ashore continues to rise, this new approach work uniquely assists Parties in determining whether any observed changes are Peninsula-wide trends, site-specific aberrations, and whether and how changes in penguin and seabird populations may relate to broader, global changes in this region. 

References
Ainley, D. G., Ribic, C. A., Ballard G., Heath S., Gaffney I., Karl B. J., Barton K. J. et al. 2004. Geographic structure of Adélie penguin populations: Overlap in colony-specific foraging areas. Ecological Monographs 74: 159-178.
Barlow, K. E., I. L. Boyd, J. P. Croxall, K. Reid, I. J. Staniland, and A. S. Brierley. 2002. Are penguins and seals in competition for Antarctic krill at South Georgia? Marine Biology 140: 205-213.
Battaglia, B., J. Valencia, and D.W.H. Walton. 1997. Postscript in B. Battaglia, J. Valencia, and D.W.H. Walton (eds.) Antarctic Communities: Species, Structure, and Survival. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Blackburn, T.M. and K.J. Gaston. 1998. Some methodological issues in macroecology. American Naturalist. 151: 68-83.
Cobley, N. D. and J. R. Shears. 1999. Breeding performance of gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua) at a colony exposed to high levels of human disturbance. Polar Biology 21: 355-360.
Clark, J.S. 2005. Why environmental scientists are becoming Bayesians. Ecology Letters 8: 2-14.
Clark, J.S. 2006. Models for Ecological Data. under contract with Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Croxall, J. P. and E.D. Kirkwood, 1979. The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, England.
Croxall, J. P., Trathan P. N., Murphy, E. J. 2002.  Environmental Change and Antarctic Seabird Populations. Science 297: 1510-1514 
Ellison, A.M. 1996. An Introduction to Bayesian Inference for Ecological Research and Environmental Decision-Making. Ecological Applications 6(4): 1036-1046.
Forcada, J., Trathan, P.N., Reid, K., Murphy, E.J., Croxall, J.P. 2006. Contrasting population changes in sympatric penguin species in association with climate warming. Global Change Biology 12: 411–423. 
Fraser, W.R., W.Z. Trivelpiece, D.G. Ainley, and S.G. Trivelpiece. 1992. Increases in Antarctic penguin populations: reduced competition with whales or a loss of sea ice due to environmental warming? Polar Biology 11: 525-531. 
Giese, M. 1996. Effects of human activity on Adélie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae breeding success. Biological Conservation 75:157-164.
Ichii, T., M. Naganobu, and T. Ogishima. 1996. Competition between the krill fishery and penguins in the South Shetland Islands. Polar Biology 16: 63-70.
Jenouvrier, S., C. Barbraud, and H. Weimerskirch. 2006. Sea ice affects the population dynamics of Adélie penguins in Terre Adelie. Polar Biology 29: 413-423.
Marin, V. H., and L. E. Delgado. 2001. A spatially explicit model of the Antarctic krill fishery off the South Shetland islands. Ecological Applications 11:1235-1248.
Naveen, R., 1996. Human Activity and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory, In R. Ross, E. Hofman, and L. Quetin (eds.) Foundations for Ecosystem Research in the Western Antarctic Peninsula Region. American Geophysical Union. Washington. pp. 389-400.
Naveen, R., 1997. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., 2000. Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334. 
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., 2001. Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132. 
Naveen, R., 2003. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites (2d edition): A Report to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, US Environmental Protection Agency. 
Rombola, E., E. Marschoff, and N. Coria. 2003. Comparative study of the effects of the late pack-ice break-off on chinstrap and Adelie penguins' diet and reproductive success at Laurie Island, South Orkney Islands, Antarctica. Polar Biology 26: 41-48.
Smith, R. C., Ainley, D., Baker, K., Domack, E., Emslie, S., Fraser, B., Kennett, J., Leventer, A., Mosley-Thompson, E., Stammerjohn, S., Vernet, M. 1999. Marine Ecosystem Sensitivity to Climate Change. Bioscience 49: 393-404.
Wilson, R. P., B. Culik, R. Danfeld, and D. Adelung. 1991. People in Antarctica - How Much Do Adelie Penguins Pygoscelis-Adeliae Care. Polar Biology 11: 363-370.
Woehler, E. J., 1993. The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England.


