





Possibilities for broad-scale management of the Vernadsky station area 




Possibilities for broad-scale management 
of the Vernadsky station area

Information Paper, submitted by Ukraine
Agenda Item – CEP 7e
Summary 
At CEP VIII (Stockholm, 2005) Ukraine introduced IP 098 containing draft proposal for discussion concerning potential ASMA for Petermann Island, Wilhelm Archipelago. Several National Antarctic programs and non-governmental organisations have strong scientific interests in this area.  Petermann Island is designated as extremely important site for a long-term environmental monitoring. The southernmost breeding colony of gentoo penguins is the most important value of this island. At that time, more than 12 thousands tourist visits during the summer season make the Petermann Island the most visited site in the Vernadsky station area. Several CEP Members supported Ukrainian proposal, and expressed their interest in this project.
At present a multiple-use is typical not only for Petermann Island but also for surrounding islands, where the scientific activity and subsidiary logistic support are widened for the last years and the continuing growth of tourist visits is also registered. This stipulates the necessity of elaboration of a broad-scale and comprehensive management system with regards not only to separate islands but to the whole area being under the influence of Vernadsky station. 
Research area extension and search for an adequate management mechanism 
The research area is extended from North to South from Booth Island and Girard Bay along the Graham Cost to Cape Perez including adjoining groups of small islands – Wilhelm, Argentine, Yalour, Barthelot and Darboux Island. Multiple and continuous human activities in the designated area tend to become even more intensive and diverse within the next decade.  
First scientific research has been started here as far back as the end of the century before last. Historical sites and monuments No. 27, 28 и 62 are the evidence of the heroic age of Antarctic exploration. Scientific station on Argentine Islands (from the point of view of functioning continuity) is one of the oldest in the Antarctic Peninsula area and possesses, in particular, valuable continuous meteorological data, which are collected beginning with 1947 till present. 
Ukrainian Akademik Vernadsky station (before 1996 – British Faraday station) consisting of dwelling and technical buildings is logistic center of the whole research area. Within the radius of 25-30 km from the station an emergency stores network determining external boundaries of the research area is located. Besides, two refuges have been erected here – Argentine base on Petermann Island and British Rasmussen-Hut in the Antarctic Peninsula. 
Geographic location, configuration and accessibility of nearby islands, as well as availability of emergency stores and huts allowed to start up in the area an extensive scientific-prospecting work and to set up a network of scientific fields in designated representative sites. Executing scientific programs include mainly geologic-geophysical, glaciological and complex biologic investigations.  
The rich moss turf is considered to be the most extensive examples of this vegetation feature in the west Antarctic Peninsula region. Moreover, the blue-eyed cormorant colony also was one of the largest along the Antarctic Peninsula. Tease values are the primary reasons for designation of Green Island as ASPA No. 108. Comparison of Green Island as a largely undisturbed ecosystem with other neighbouring sites causes the necessity of establishment of special protection regime for the biggest biogeographic field in this region located in the Galindez Island oasis. Designation of this scientific field together with relict ice cap as a possible ASPA will allow improve understanding of characteristics of elementary landscapes and communities of this island and will also provide with systematic gaining of complex data base on environmental changes. On the ground of these data tendencies of global climate changes impact at Antarctic ecosystems will be determined.
For last ten years the number of tourist visits on islands has grown. More than 60% of visitors of the area give preference to five islands – Petermann, Pleno, Booth, Argentine and Yalour. Diversification of seaborne tourism is exhibited in a wide activity spectrum: boating and kayaking, diving, climbing, camping and walks in the ice-free areas. Such activity, in particular during birds and seals breeding, leads to a potential conflict of interests between nature-conservative, scientific and non-governmental activities. Therefore Site Guidelines, just as it was adopted for Pleno and Petermann Islands, should be elaborated for other frequently visited islands and include separate Graham Cost dominating peaks, where tourists are actively climbing. This, in turn, actualizes investigation of avalanche hazardous zones and creation of safe routs for climbing. 
At the National Antarctic Scientific Center of Ukraine an action group was organized serving the purpose of data necessary to fully evaluate the role and structure of a possible broad-scale management system of Argentine islands and adjacent part of Graham Cost with a view to minimizing risk of cumulative impact on the environment. This group should also collect opinions from Parties concerning the general concept for the area and elaborate possible approaches to its management. 
To execute the assigned task the experience of creation of early adopted ASMAs and also results of the project on designation of possible ASMA “Filds Peninsula”, carried out by scientists from the Polar and Bird Ecology Group Institute of Ecology, Friedrich Schiller University Jena (Germany) will be studied.  Within the step-by-step approach, which is the most preferable for the presented volume of information, use of following management measures could be possible: 
    • development of practical tools, such as special guidelines for operations at the station, and in refugees, code of conduct for visitors;
    • development of zoning system including seasonal buffer zones on islands with the purpose of elaboration of additional management measures by restricting and reducing access to sensitive wildlife concentrations, support field research and facilitate logistic activities within the station area; 
    • development of new ASPAs in the area on the basis of existing research fields requiring special protection regime, first of all, on Galindez Island;
    • designation of Graham Cost, Argentine and adjacent islands having scientific, esthetic, historical and logistic values as  possible new ASMAs. 
Development of the integrated Management Plan of a possible ASMA is called to harmonize the existing and planning regimes of protection and management for the whole research area (Table 1). In particular, planning and coordination of existing and future human activity in this area will allow avoiding potential conflicts between different fields of scientific activity, logistic operations, protection activity and tourism. To facilitate determination of boundaries and navigation inside the possible ASMA, it would be reasonable to define the north boundary of the area along the south and partially south-east boundary of existing ASMA No.7 “South-west Anvers Island and Palmer Basin” (Map 1).  Such designation of the boundary will allow excluding the territories, which can be found beyond any of management regimes. The eastern boundary of the area could be defined as a line extending parallel to and approximately one km inland from the coastline.
Ukraine invites all the Parties having refugees or other scientific and historical interests in this area to take part in further discussion of the management system for this area. This will allow elaborating general position on reasonability of creation by CEP of an Intersession Contact Group for further formalization of the discussion process. 


Table 1. Management system of the research area
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA)
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA)
Sites and Monuments (HSM)
Special Guidelines and National Operator Management
Existing management regimes
–
ASPA No. 108 “Green Island”.
Original proposing Party: UK.
Parties undertaking management: UK.
Adopted by means of Recommendation IV-9 (1966); revised Management Plan adopted by means of Measure 1 (2002)
HSM No. 27 - Cairn with a replica of a lead plaque erected on Megalestris Hill,
Petermann Island (65°10'S, 64°09'W), in 1909 by the second French expedition led by Jean-Baptiste E. A. Charcot. The original plaque is in the reserves of the
Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle (Paris).
Original proposing Parties: Argentina/France/UK. 
Parties undertaking management: France /UK. 
Adopted by means of Recommendation VII-9 (1972). 

HSM No. 28 - Rock cairn at Port Charcot, Booth Island (64°18'S, 62°59'W), with wooden pillar and plaque inscribed with the names of the first French expedition led by Jean-Baptiste E. A. Charcot which wintered here in 1904 aboard Le Français.
Original proposing Parties: Argentina.
Parties undertaking management: Argentina/France.
Adopted by means of Recommendation VII-9 (1972).

HSM No. 62 - ‘Base F (Wordie House)’ on Winter Island, Argentine Islands (65°15'S, 64°16'W). Of historic importance as an example of an early British scientific base.
Original proposing Party: UK
Parties undertaking management: UK/Ukraine
Adopted by means of Measure 4 (1995)
Site Guidelines for Pleno I. and Petermann I.  
Adopted by means of Resolution 1 (2007).
Planning management regimes 
Possible ASMA No. X “Graham Cost, Argentine and adjacent islands”. Management plan could include  Code of Conduct for special zones: logistic operations, science and protection, historical, and tourist as well.
ASPA No. ХХХ “Ice Cap and oasis on Galindez Island”.

–
Site Guidelines for “Wordie House’, Booth I., Yalour Is.; Guidelines for climbing at Mt. Scott (882 m), Mt. Mill (735 m), Mt. Demaria (638м).
Special Guidelines for operations science activities at the Vernadsky station, and in refugees, include code of conduct for visitors. 
Руководство по обращению с аварийными складами и хижинами


Map 1. Vernadsky research area


Note: Site Guidelines for Wordie House is not adopted yet. 

