





Australia’s Antarctic Scientific Research Program 2008/09




Australia’s Antarctic Scientific Research Program 2008/09
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
This paper provides an overview of Australia’s major field research in 2008/09. Australia’s projects concentrated on international collaboration, including support for aerial geophysical surveys from Casey station for the project ‘Investigating the Cryospheric Evolution of the Central Antarctic Plate’ (ICECAP), deploying scientists to Concordia station to install a electric field mill as part of ‘Solar Linkages to Atmospheric Processes’ (SLAP) and providing logistic support for the ‘Antarctica’s Gamburtsev Province’ (AGAP) expedition. Other Australian field programs included investigation of the Aurora Basin region as a possible site for retrieval of a 1 000 000 year old ice core, an aerial whale survey from Casey station, a sampling program of nearshore marine benthic communities near Casey station and research on ocean acidification on coastal plankton at Davis station. Further details of Australian-led IPY projects are provided in a separate Information Paper.  
Major projects 2008/09
ICECAP, ‘Investigating the Cryospheric Evolution of the Central Antarctic Plate’ in collaboration with the US, UK, and Germany involved an airborne survey of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet, examining the internal features of the ice sheet and the bedrock below. The observations enabled scientists to study ice sheet formation and decay, sub-glacial lakes, sub-glacial geology, and changes in ice accumulation through time. The data collected will aid ice sheet modelling and an understanding of the role of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet in global climate and sea level rise. The survey extended from Casey station, inland across the Aurora Subglacial Basin, which holds some of the deepest and possibly oldest ice on the continent.  
SLAP, ‘Solar Linkages to Atmospheric Processes’ is an Australian-led IPY project  investigating the relationship of solar variability with the atmosphere, weather and climate (particularly via the global electric circuit and ozone variability associated with solar activity) in conjunction with the USA, UK and  Russia. During 2008/09 an Australian team successfully deployed an electric field mill at the French/Italian Concordia station via Casey station.
AGAP, ‘Antarctica’s Gamburtsev Province’ expedition was a multi-nation collaboration between USA, UK, Germany, Australia, China, Japan and Canada studying the evolutionary history of the Gamburtsev sub-glacial mountain range. A major component of the project was an aerial geophysical survey to study the mountains’ topography and take gravity and magnetic readings, to help explain how the mountains were formed. Seismic stations around the province provided information on the structure of the mantle and crust beneath the mountains, giving insights into why the mountains are so high and how old they are. 
Aurora Basin present and past climate: This project aimed to recover a 2000 year old ice core from the Aurora Basin, some 500 km inland from Casey. However, conditions at Aurora Basin were unsuitable and the team relocated to Law Dome and the Totten Glacier for alternative ice core research. 
Whale Survey: An aerial survey program to study minke whales in the pack ice was undertaken using CASA 212-400 aircraft . High-definition video cameras, a high-resolution digital stills camera and an infrared camera were installed in the base of the aircraft to detect whales, including those hidden from view, and to collect data on pack-ice habitat. The survey was conducted over Vincennes Bay near Casey station in eastern Antarctica (66º 17′ S 110º 32′ E).
Nearshore Marine Benthic Communities: Field work was conducted around the Windmill Islands region near Casey Station ranging from Browning Peninsula in the south to Honkala Island in the north between January and late February 2009. The field work supported 10 environmental research projects. Highlights included sampling fish (mainly Trematomus newnesi) and a large range of invertebrates from across a gradient of sea ice cover, for studies of food webs, climate change, disease, local human impacts and population genetics. The invertebrates sampled included sea urchins, starfish, gastropods, bivalves, brittle stars, sea anemones, gammarid amphipods and other crustaceans, polychaetes and a range of micro- and macroalgae. A large range of marine invertebrates were successfully captured alive and transported back to Australia on Australia’s A319 aircraft in specially prepared cool containers. These are used in experiments in the cold aquarium facility at the Australian Antarctic Division for a range of projects, particularly experiments designed to assist in the development of water and sediment quality guidelines specific to the Antarctic environment.
Ocean Acidification: A team of scientists based at Davis station conducted large-scale aquarium mesocosm experiments at Davis Station to determine how ocean acidification will impact on coastal plankton communities. This research is investigating CO2-induced changes in the structure and function of marine microbial communities in Antarctic waters.


