





Protected Area Management Plan: Five year review of Beaufort Island - ASPA 105





Protected Area Management Plan: Five year review of Beaufort Island – ASPA 105

Information Paper Submitted by New Zealand


Abstract

New Zealand has initiated a review of the management plan for ASPA 105, Beaufort Island.  The revised management plan is anticipated to be available for submission to CEP XIII.

Introduction

Article 6 (3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection provides for a review of protected and managed area management plans to be initiated at least every five years, and for the plans to be updated as necessary.

Beaufort Island was originally designated in Recommendation IV-5 (1966, as Specially Protected Area No. 5) after a proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that it “contains substantial and varied avifauna, that it is one of the most important breeding grounds in the region, and that it should be protected to preserve the natural ecological system as a reference area”. The Area has been set aside primarily to protect the site’s ecological values and these reasons for long-term protection are considered to still apply.

The current version of the management plan for Beaufort Island was adopted by means of Measure 2 (2003).  A review of this management plan was therefore initiated during 2008.  Key aspects of the review have been:

    • Verification of the size and location of the penguin colonies (Adelie and Emperor penguins);
    • Assessment of vegetation cover within the Area;
    • Reassessment of the appropriateness of the current boundary.

To facilitate the review it had been planned to undertake a site visit during the 2008 / 09 season to gather information for at least the first two of these aspects.  Unfortunately a site visit was not possible during this last Antarctic season.  A further attempt to visit the site will be made later in 2009.

Consultation with scientists that are familiar with the island has also raised issues related to the current Area boundary that merit further consideration.  These relate in particular to the need to ensure that the ASPA boundary adequately accounts for the peripatetic nature of the Emperor penguin colony.

For these reasons, New Zealand has been unable to complete the review of this management plan in time for CEP XII.  However, the review will continue during 2009 with the intention of submitting a revised management plan to CEP XIII in 2010.

