





Educational initiatives of the Chilean Antarctic Institute: Promoting Antarctic science among youth 




Educational initiatives of the Chilean Antarctic Institute:
Promoting Antarctic science among youth 
Introduction
With a view to promoting knowledge of the Antarctic amongst Chilean citizens, the Chilean Antarctic Institute (Instituto Antártico Chileno - INACH) launched the Antarctic High School Fair in 2004, a programme intended to advance the use of the scientific method in high school pupils (aged 13 to 17) and promote a culture of awareness of the Antarctic.
In addition, having recognised the need to contribute to the creation of a critical mass of Antarctic professionals, in 2006, the INACH started to develop a Call for Applications for Postgraduate Study Grants for Antarctic Research, which to date has offered support for research contributing to both doctoral (4) and master’s (1) theses.
This paper will describe these two initiatives.

ANTARCTIC HIGH SCHOOL FAIR
The INACH considers it to be of utmost importance that the Chilean educational system be integrated into the general debate on Antarctic science and scientific thought, and so in 2004, it launched the educational initiative known as the Antarctic High School Fair, aimed at encouraging high school pupils (aged 13 to 17) to carry out science projects. This initiative encourages pupils’ contact with science and technology, the use of the scientific method and awareness of the Antarctic. This annual event is organised jointly by the INACH and the Chilean Air Force, and receives support from the “Explora” Programme of the National Science and Technology Commission (Comisión Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología - CONICYT) (http://www.explora.cl/).  
In 2004, only pupils from the Punta Arenas region were invited to participate in the Antarctic High School Fair, whereas the latest edition included participants from the region of Valparaíso (central Chile; 33º 01’ S; 71º 38’ W) all the way to Magallanes (53º 08’ S; 70º 53’ W). The objective for 2010 is to have pupils from all regions of Chile participate (from Arica (18º 18’ S; 70º 18’ W) to Magallanes). To achieve this, the event is being promoted together with the Explora Programme, which runs informal educational activities in primary and secondary schools across the country with a view to promoting science as a way of improving quality of life. The INACH has also disseminated information on the Antarctic High School Fair through other national organisations working in the fields of science promotion, heritage protection, cultural activities or environmental education. 
Applicants are asked to present a research project in one of two categories: experimental or bibliographical research. The project is then evaluated by national researchers who are experts in each of the fields covered by the Fair. The best projects are selected for participation in the Fair, which takes place in the city of Punta Arenas. A jury composed of researchers from both the INACH and universities and regional research institutes then selects the winning groups in each of the two categories.
The best groups win a trip to Antarctica to participate in the High School Antarctic Expedition, where they take part in a number of activities, including visits to international Antarctic bases, meetings with scientists and tours of sites of scientific interest on King George Island. 
To date, activities promoting the event have been held in 12 different regions, and have involved the participation of some 2500 pupils, 300 teachers, 60 scientists and 7 universities. 388 pupils responded to the call for applications for participation in the Antarctic High School Fair, from eight different regions of Chile, from Valparaíso to Punta Arenas. 
In the knowledge society, networks act as multipliers, maximizing efforts and intentions. That is why the Antarctic High School Fair has developed a network bringing together teachers from all over the country, with special support from the Explora Programme in the different regions. 
Information on the Antarctic High School Fair is available online, on the INACH’s homepage: www.inach.gob.cl.

PROGRAMME OF POSTGRADUATE STUDY GRANTS
One of the main objectives of the INACH is to contribute to the training of new Antarctic scientists in Chile, and so since 2006, it has invited students currently enrolled in master’s or doctoral programmes at Chilean universities that are accredited by the Chilean National Postgraduate Accreditation Commission (Comisión Nacional de Acreditación de Postgrados - CNA) to apply for study grants to complete their postgraduate theses. These grants are to be used to fund thesis work for a period of up to two years.
To receive funding, the students’ theses must address a subject of scientific research related to the Antarctic, as defined by the INACH’s different fields of research: Links between South America and Antarctica; Global warming and climate evolution; Abundance and diversity of Antarctic organisms; and the Antarctic environment and bioresources.
Students are also encouraged to consider developing their theses within the framework of the five main programmes of scientific research and activities fostered by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (www.scar.org).
The research funded through this grant programme must be carried out in Chilean universities or research institutes; students may be either Chilean nationals or foreign nationals resident in Chile. It may be possible for students to travel to the Antarctic to gather data or samples, if this is considered necessary to meet research objectives.
To date, five students from the Universities of Chile, Santiago, Concepción and La Frontera (Temuco) have received these study grants for studies in the fields of the Antarctic environment and bioresources and Links between South America and Antarctica. The projects receiving funding are:
    1. Reconstruction of the evolutionary and demographic history of genus Nacella, throughout its distribution in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic regions.
    2. Photoprotective mechanisms in Colobanthus quitensis under cold-induced photoinhibition conditions.
    3. Deschampsia antarctica: Hydrolytic and metabolic enzymes for use in biotechnology.
    4. Effects of saline stress on the composition of phenolic compounds and in genetic regulation through the phenylpropanoid pathway in Deschampsia antarctica.
    5. Origin of metasedimentary complexes in the north of the Antarctic peninsula and Patagonia: Tectonic implications.
Detailed information on the projects can be accessed online: go to the INACH’s homepage, www.inach.gob.cl, click on Scientific Programme, then on Information on the Call for Applications for Postgraduate Study Grants, or follow the link http://www.inach.gob.cl/inachWebNeo/
index.aspx?channel=6192.




