





Antarctic scientific research projects developed in Argentina in 2008




Antarctic scientific research projects developed in Argentina in 2008

The Argentine Antarctic Program through the Instituto Antártico Argentino develops scientific and technological activities in the Antarctica under two main modalities: research projects and institutional scientific-technological activities. The first ones are selected from periodic calls to submit triennial research projects which are evaluated as regards their scientific quality and the background of the research team through the system set by the National Agency for Scientific and Technological Promotion  (Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica) depending from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Productive Innovation. The second ones involve scientific activities, scientific data collection, long-term monitoring and technological developments of high priority for our country, which are convened by the Instituto Antártico Argentino in line with the provisions of the National Antarctic Policy. Within the framework of these programs the Argentine Republic is at present developing a strong cooperation with various Countries that are Parties of the Antarctic Treaty. 

The subjects of top priority and the scientific strategy are presented as permanent information at the institutional web site (www.antartida.gov.ar) as well as the list of projects, researchers responsible for them, and a summary that is periodically updated. Information about these projects is also sent to the database of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).

For the 2008-2011 period the following projects are under way:

Global, spectral solar radiations and biological actions in continental Argentina and Antarctica. Dr. Rubén Piacentini (CONICET)

Impact of glacier melting on the plankton in the western Antarctic Peninsula. Dra. Irene Schloss (IAA-CONICET)

Impact of glacier regression induced by global warming on the distribution of the benthonic macroalgae in an Antarctic coastal ecosystem (Potter Cove, 25 de Mayo Island, South Shetland Islands). Dra. Liliana Quartino (IAA).

Development and optimization of bioremediation technologies to reclaim soils exposed to contamination by hydrocarbons in Antarctic zones. Dr. Walter Mac Cormack (IAA)

Benthonic communities in Antarctica: An inter-disciplinary approach to analyze the possible impact of global warming. Dr. Ricardo Sahade (Universidad Nacional de Córdoba)

Determination of the antioxidant status in Antarctic marine organisms.  Impact of xenobiotics over key species of trophic chains. Dr. Martín Ansaldo (IAA)

Marine microbial community and organic matter of the southern Patagonia ecosystem in the water column and bottom sediments: its usefulness as environmental indicators for water quality and productivity monitoring. Dra. Viviana Alder (IAA-CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires)

Study of the reproductive and alimentary aspects of cormorants in the Antarctica and Georgias. Dr. Ricardo Casaux (IAA)

Monitoring and Ecology of Antarctic Fish for their conservation. Dr. Esteban Barrear Oro (IAA-CONICET)

Reproductive and feeding ecology in Antarctic pinnipeds. Lic. Alejandro Carlini (IAA)

Predator-pray interaction models between Antarctic birds and crustacean fish in the Antarctic Peninsula and the Scotia Arc. Dr. Néstor Coria (IAA)

Ice-climate interaction in the Antarctic Peninsula and Southern Patagonia. Ing. Pedro Skvarca (IAA)

Permafrost and climate changes in Antarctica. Dr. Eugenio Yermolin (IAA).

Vertebrates in the Upper Cretaceous – Paleogene period of time of the James Ross basin, Antarctic Peninsula. Dr. Marcelo Reguero (Museo La Plata-CONICET)

Holocene landscape and climate change along the Patagonia – Antarctic Peninsula transect. Lic. Jorge Strelin (IAA)

Volcanism in the Trinity Peninsula Group. Dr. Rodolfo del Valle (IAA)

Antarctic Peninsula-Patagonia: keys of a lost connection. Dr. Silvio Casadía (CONICET-Univ. Nac. de La Pampa)

Cretaceous-Paleogene of southern Patagonia: major biostratigraphic events. Dra. Silvia Cesari (CONICET)

Study and follow-up of active volcanoes: Deception Island. Dr. Alberto Caselli (Universidad de Buenos Aires)

Paleobiogeographic study of the microbiotas of the Upper Cretaceous and Cenozoic Era in the Antarctic Peninsula and adjacent regions. Modifications in their distribution due to climate change. Dra. Andrea Concheyro (IAA-CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires)

Geophysical study of the magmatic arc in northwestern Antarctic Peninsula and its tectonic development. Dr. Juan Vilas (CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires)

Biostratigraphy and sedimentology of the Santonian-Maastrichtian of the James Ross basin, Antarctica. Paleobiological and paleoenvironmental events. Dr. Eduardo Olivero (CONICET)




