





International Polar Year 2007- 08 / BRAZILIAN Scientific Activities





International Polar Year 2007-08 / Brazilian
Scientific Activities

The Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology (MCT), through its National Committee on Antarctic Research (CONAPA) was responsible for the organization and implementation of the national IPY scientific program in   Antarctica, as part  of the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR). A special budget for the activities was obtained by MCT from the federal government to support projects preliminarily recommended by IPY Joint Committee and reviewed by the MCT agency National Council of Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq).  
Over 200 scientists from 30 public and private universities are engaged in  the development of 10 large scale, multidisciplinary  research projects in the Antarctic, during 2007-2009.  A summary of the activities on course and some of the results obtained so far are presented in this IP. The IPY program implemented by MCT in PROANTAR provided an important support for the effective participation of Brazil in the IPY initiative, which involved the participation of over 200 scientists in 10 large scale multidisciplinary projects and the collaboration between scientists and Antarctic programs of a great number of countries. This effort represented for Brazil an unique opportunity for the generation of quality data to address questions in a broader (bipolar or global) scale, the development of new technology, and optimization of  logistic and scientific resources between nations. In addition, Antarctica, its connection to Brazil and South America, and the activities of Brazil in the region were thoroughly disseminated to the general public and decision makers through the production of educational and outreach material, and communication in general media. Most field work of IPY projects was concluded in summer 2009, but some complementary work is predicted to be carried out in the next 2009/2010 expedition. A summary of the activities and some of the results obtained so far are presented in this IP.   
1. Life Sciences
Marine Antarctic Biodiversity in Relation to Environmental Heterogeneity in Admiralty Bay, King George Island, and adjacent areas of  the Bransfield Strait (MABIREH)
Coordinator: Dr Lúcia de Siqueira Campos (Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro – UFRJ)
Admiralty Bay in King George Island, the main component of the firstly established Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA no.1) has been studied for over 30 years by scientists from several countries, including Poland and Brazil. It is the area with the longest  record of environmental and marine biological data in the whole Antarctic Peninsula, as a result of the multinational efforts.  In spite of that, knowledge of  relationships between geodiversity and biodiversity,  key elements to understand ecosystems’ functioning and how biological communities are structured and  may be affected by factors such as currents, nutrients, sediment chemistry and others are yet not well understood. The main aim of the MABIREH is, therefore, to study the biodiversity, from microbes to top predators, in relation to the complexity of the marine environment in Admiralty Bay  and adjacent areas. This project extends previous  investigations on signals of global and regional changes in Antarctica and integrates the Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML – activity #53) and the Antarctic Marine Biodiversity Information System (SCARMarBIN – activity #83). MABIREH includes 12 subprojects and the participation of 12 national institutions (including 23 doctors, their trainees and technicians). An important product of the project was the development of a small, remotely operated vehicle (ROV LUMA) that is being used to explore the deepest parts of the bay (~500m). Activities related to IPY Educational and Outreach program performed by the project,  involving production of teaching and  general communication materials, have been  successfully  used in raising public awareness of the significance of Antarctica to South America and Brazil. 
Infrastructure implementation for molecular biodiversity studies in EACF and integration of knowledge on Microbial Ecology and biocomplexity in Antarctic environment 
Coordinator: Dr Vivian Helena Pellizari (Universidade de São Paulo – USP)
This project was approved as IPY activity no.403, entitled  “Microbial Diversity of Terrestrial and Maritime ecosystems in Antarctic Peninsula and is under the  umbrella projects: “Microbiological and Ecological Responses to Global Environmental Changes in Polar Regions” - MERGE proposal (IPY no.55) and “Census of Antarctic Marine Life” (IPY 53). 
This study considers a broad range group of microorganisms, as bacteria, archaea, virus, yeast and filamentous fungi. Data generated by the project during IPY will be made accessible in  a database displaying information on project activities performed, isolated strains, gene sequences, location in culture collections, and publications related to microbial studies in the Antarctic Peninsula. This database will cover the biodiversity and biogeography of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems of the Antarctic Peninsula, including soils, permafrost, ice, lakes, marine waters and sediments. Integration of these data with information from the Arctic will  help building a broader view of microbial diversity in the polar regions. Improvement of laboratory infrastructure contemplated by the project will allow development of experiments on molecular biodiversity in the Brazilian Antarctic Station.

Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic: a response of life to change
Coordinator: Dr Lucélia Donatti (Universidade Federal do Paraná – UFPR) 
This project is a component of the IPY - AMES (131), Integrated circumpolar studies of Antarctic marine ecosystems to the conservation of living resources through collections of Krill and fishes.
The project is accessing the biochemical and physiological mechanisms of Antarctic fish as an adaptation to changes in temperature, salinity, and pH; as well as fluoride bioaccumulation in the Antarctic ecosystem. Knowledge about adaptive mechanisms of these Antarctic species (including reflexes in behavior, morphology and physiology) according to different environmental conditions is important to evaluate their response according to global climate changes. 
Marine Mammal Exploration Of The Oceans Pole To Pole (MEOP-BR)
Coordinator: Dr Mônica M. C. Muelbert (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande – FURG) 
MEOP-BR is the Brazilian counter part of  Marine Mammal Exploration of the Oceans Pole to Pole (MEOP – IPY 153), a project that is deploying state-of-the-art animal-borne CTD tags on strategically chosen, deep-diving marine mammal species to explore their movement patterns, behavior and habitat utilization in Polar Regions. Concomitant with the ecological data regarding these top predators, a vast, high-precision oceanographic data set is being collected covering logistically difficult areas of ocean in Polar Seas at the fringes of the North and South Atlantic and the South Pacific that are strategically important to climate and ocean modelling. The cross-disciplinary merging of classical oceanography and marine mammal ecology will significantly advance our understanding of the world’s oceans and top predators that live in them.
CTD-tags are being deployed on beluga whales (Delphinapterus leucas), hooded seals (Cystophora cristata), Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii), crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) and southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina). These species forage in oceanic “hot-spots” where productivity is high, areas which also coincide with human fisheries efforts and areas of high oceanographic interest. IPY affords a unique opportunity to collect novel data sets from relatively little-known polar marine mammal species simultaneously with dedicated oceanographic cruises sampling along systematic grids using traditional ship-based CTD technology. Co-operation between biological and oceanographic programmes within IPY is providing MEOP with comprehensive, synoptic oceanographic coverage and a unique opportunity to quantify factors determining habitat selection and use by key polar marine mammal species. The oceanographic data collected in MEOP, in turn, is providing otherwise unobtainable oceanographic data sets collected at natural hot-spots of productivity, as input data to physically-oriented modelling projects (e.g. the Bipolar Atlantic Thermohaline Circulation Programme, Transport through gaps across the Kerguelen Plateau andinter-basin exchange, and databanks such as GTS and the Metoffice-UK). This study is especially timely given the predictions for ecosystem changes in both Arctic and Antarctic systems within the coming decades due to climate change, in addition to increasing fisheries and tourism activities in both the Arctic and Antarctic.
2. Physical Sciences
Study of the Mesosphere, Stratosphere and Troposphere Antarctica and its links South America (MST-ASA) 
Coordinator: Dr Neusa Paes Leme (Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais – INPE)
The study involves 10 countries, with participants from South America ( Chile, Argentina, Peru and Bolivia.) During the year 2007/2008 and summer of 2009, measurements of concentration of the ozone layer, and of UV radiation were performed in Antarctica Station Comandante Ferraz, in southern Chile and Argentina (only in 2008), La Paz, Bolivia and Brazil. Meteorological data were also collected during each year at the Brazilian Antarctic Station. Measurements of the dynamics of the OH and the upper atmosphere (mesosphere) were conducted during the winter of 2007 and 2008. In the summer of 2008 and 2009 the project started to collect some greenhouse gases (CO, O3,CH4). Possible effects of UV radiation on marine organisms were analyzed on the basis of evaluation of the degree of lesions in the DNA (Comet Assay) of the amphipod Gondogeneia antarctica in shallow coastal regions of  Admiralty Bay, exposed to natural and artificial ultraviolet radiation UVA and UVB. These data confirm the impact of radiation effects, especially in synergism with other pollutants. The study pointed out G. antarctica as a bioindicator for  environmental studies in Antarctica.

Southern Ocean Studies for Understanding Global Climate Issues (SOS- Climate)
Coordinator: Dr Carlos Garcia – (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande – FURG)
This research initiative was created with the objective to conduct long-term process studies in the Southern Ocean (SO) associated with global climate-change issues, in order to increase our understanding on (i) the formation of deep-water in the Northwestern Weddell Sea; (ii) the processes related with the SO carbon cycle; (iii) the importance of icebergs to the enrichment of the SO surface waters; (iv) the role played by   frontal thermal structures in the Malvinas-Brazil Confluence for air-sea property exchange; and (v) the variability of sea ice around the Antarctica and its impact on the Southwestern Ocean circulation and regional climate. 
Space Weather Impact in the Polar Atmosphere - SWIMPA
Coordinator: Dr Emília Correia (Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais – INPE)
The main goal is to define the space weather impacts in the upper atmosphere from the proximities of Antarctic Peninsula through the South America, especially over the Brazilian territory where is located the South Atlantic Magnetic Anomaly. This study is necessary to quantify the space weather impacts in our atmosphere, and to define its importance in the climate conditions (cloud cover and rain/snow fall) and atmospheric currents. 
3. GeoSciences
Brazilian National Multidisciplinary Expedition to the Antarctic Ice Sheet: investigating the cryospheric response to global changes
Coordinator: Dr Jefferson Cardia Simões (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul – UFRGS)
This project carried out the first national expedition to the interior of the Antarctic ice sheet to investigate glaciological responses to global climate changes. Shallow ice core drilling for paleoclimatic studies, geophysical surveys, and atmospheric sampling were the main goal during two International Polar Year field seasons. 
In the summer of 2007/08, a joint Brazilian-Chilean-USA expedition (UFRGS – INACH – Climate Change Institute/Maine University) carried out ice drilling operations, superficial snow sampling for microbiological studies and a Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) installation at the Detroit Plateau (64°05'S, 59°39W", 1935m altitude). A 133-m ice core was recovered and an automatic weather station (AWS) was left at the Plateau Detroit.	
In the summer of 2008/2009, from a base camp at Patriot Hills (80°18'S, 81°22'W), the expedition team performed several surface snow and atmospheric sampling and also studies on glacial geomorphology. In an advanced campsite, at Mount Johns ((79°55'S, 94°23'W; 2125m altitude) in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, our team recovered a 95-m core for paleoclimatic studies.	
The project has finished all fieldwork and is carrying out chemical analysis and data interpretation in Brazil and USA. It is associated to the following API actions: Antarctic Surface Accumulation and Ice Discharge (ASAID), IPY in the Antarctic Peninsula – Ice and Climate (IPY-AP). Furthermore, it is a Brazilian contribution to the following international programs: International Partnership in Ice Core Sciences (IPICS - http://www.pages.unibe.ch/ipics/), and the International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE - http://www2.umaine.edu/itase/).
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic Permafrost, Periglacial and Soil Environments
Coordinator: Dr Carlos Ernesto Schaefer (Universidade Federal de Viçosa – UFV).
The present project represents the Brazilian contribution to IPY project “Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic Permafrost, Soils and Periglacial Environments” (ANTPAS, http://erth.waikato.ac.nz/antpas/) and involves characterization, mapping and monitoring of the Antarctic active soil stratum and the frozen-soils (permafrost).
Study of Separation between Antarctica and South America: Biological and Geological implications
Coordinator: Dr Arthur Ayres (Universidade Federal Fluminense – UFF)
The final separation between Antarctica and South America  during the break up of Gondwana led to  the creation of the Drake Passage, a gateway connecting the southern Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. This event had enormous implications on Antarctic and global climate and environment changes, as well as on evolution, dispersion and paleogeographic distribution of marine organisms. Geodynamical, paleoceanographical  and sedimentary processes that took place in the region in association with the separation are, however, not entirely understood. The project main objective is to contribute to the reconstruction of the geological evolution of the region on the basis of acquisition of  high resolution  marine seismic data, and micropaleontological and sedimentological studies of marine sediments. The role of deep currents along the southern Brazilian Margin  using multichannel data from Brazil are being analyzed with the objective of investigating  the beginning of the AABW circulation and its relation to the  onset of continental glaciation in Antarctica some 30 Ma ago. Results will be compared with those obtained by the Spanish Program in the Scotia Sea. Seismic data and sedimentary cores will be obtained in the Bransfield Strait in the last summer for the study of high frequency climatic variations in the Antarctic Peninsula.

