





Japan’s Antarctic Research Program and Its Future





Japan’s Antarctic Research Program and Its Future

1. Introduction
The Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) was organized by headquarters established in the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture (now the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, or MEXT) in 1955, when Japan decided to participate in the International Geophysical Year (IGY). The headquarters comprises Ministries and governmental agencies. The headquarters determines Japan’s national Antarctic research program through the deliberations of a research projects evaluation committee. The current research plan will end in the next fiscal year (2009–2010), and the next six-year, eighth-term JARE plan for fiscal years 2010–2015 (JARE 52–57) is now under consideration.
This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from Japan’s national Antarctic programs carried out by JARE in the Syowa Station area during the 2008–2009 season along with the main points of the JARE plan for the next term.

2. Selected highlights for 2008–2009
2.1. Special cooperation with the Australian Antarctic Division
As the Japanese icebreaker R/V Shirase was decommissioned in 2008 and its successor was under construction, JARE asked the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) to transport expedition personnel and cargo to Syowa Station for the most recent season, 2008–2009, under a framework of cooperative MOU between MEXT and the AAD. The 50th JARE members, 46 expedition personnel and one observer, embarked on the Australian icebreaker R/V Aurora Australis in Fremantle and carried out cooperative oceanographic observations on board.
A total of about 90 tons of cargo was transported to Syowa by three helicopters chartered in Australia. Overwintered personnel of JARE 49 arrived in Hobart with the summer members of JARE 50 aboard the Aurora Australis on 21 February 2009. 
The new Japanese icebreaker R/V Shirase is scheduled to be commissioned in May this year and will depart Tokyo to transport JARE 51 personnel and cargo to Antarctica in November 2009.

2.2. Year-round observations on atmospheric aerosols and greenhouse gases
JARE 49 carried out new measurements of aerosols with X-ray fluorescence analysis to reveal seasonal contributions of elements to aerosols in coastal atmosphere. The expedition also started precise continuous measurement of oxygen concentration, which closely relates to CO2 concentration through biological activities and combustion of fossil fuels, as well as long-term monitoring of aerosols and greenhouse gases (CO2, methane) at Syowa Station. Preliminary analysis revealed that sulfuric aerosols varied in ways different from those containing chlorine, calcium, and sodium, with a tendency to decrease in concentration in winter and to increase in summer. Syowa is currently the only site in the Antarctic that continuously observes atmospheric oxygen concentration.

2.3. Experimental airborne observation
Experimental long-distance airborne meteorological observation using an autonomous small unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was carried out successfully near Syowa Station for the first time in Antarctica in December 2008 (Figure 1). The UAV, with a wingspan of 3 meters, was radio-controlled for take-off and landing and measured meteorological parameters from the surface up to 1,000 meters in altitude during autonomous flight controlled by a microcomputer. The flight lasted 60 minutes and covered 110 km in total.
Fixed-wing aircraft had been used for research observations and logistics support for JARE, overwintering at Syowa Station for many years. However, the decision was made to stop operation of the aircraft because of maintenance costs required due to the lack of a hangar, and the aircraft were finally removed from Syowa in January 2005. The Ant-Plane Project started in 2002 at NIPR to develop a small autonomous aircraft to fulfill the need for airborne observation in Antarctica. The UAV was developed and succeeded in flying autonomously with an onboard magnetometer for 500 km in Western Australia in March 2006. It is expected that the UAV, cost-effective and easy to operate with a small number of expedition personnel, can contribute as a platform for a wide variety of research and logistics operations in Antarctica.


Figure 1 - An autonomous small unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV, left) successfully flew 110 km in total up to 1,000 meters in altitude for experimental airborne observation near Syowa station in December 2008. The time series by altitude of the aircraft (right).


3. JARE’s future plan 
The next-term, six-year JARE plan for fiscal years 2010–2015 (JARE 52–57) is now under consideration. With the commissioning of a new icebreaker in May 2009, development of air networks in Antarctica like the Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN), the introduction of an INTELSAT satellite communication system at Syowa Station, and multiship oceanographic observation, new types of scientific research could be planned and implemented. Some of the main points for the research programs will be briefly introduced here.
There will be two categories of scientific observations, namely, project-oriented research observations and basic observations. Applications for the former were invited in three categories: prioritized, ordinary, and exploratory research observations. “Global warming explored from Antarctica” has been designated a prioritized research project, which will tackle issues of high social demand and important scientific meaning. The latter category, basic observations, will comprise monitoring and routine observations, including meteorological synoptic observations, continuous measurement of geomagnetism, tide observations, etc., which should contribute to the Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS).
Other main points include that there should be more capability to support international collaborative researches using the icebreaker as platform for efficient observations, as there are more beds aboard the new icebreaker. The facility at Syowa Station is also to be utilized as an observation platform for international collaborative research projects. It is also planned that new technologies be introduced to reduce the footprint of human activity in the Antarctic environment with an emphasis on safety.

