Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-ое Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/WP1
April, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 9

Liability - Report
of the Group
of Legal Experts

Submitted by
The Group of Legal Experts on the work undertaken to elaborate an annex or
annexes on liability for environmental damage in Antarctica
(   ,
(   ,
Contents:

                                                      Page

Report of the Group of Legal Experts on the work undertaken to elaborate
an annex or annexes on liability for environmental damage in Antarctica              1

Appendix 1 - Chairman's Eight Offering - Annex on Environmental Liability          19

Appendix 2 - Proposal of the United States Delegation (April 1996)                 36
( )
( )
21 NOVEMBER 1997

REPORT OF THE GROUP OF LEGAL EXPERTS ON THE WORK UNDERTAKEN
TO  ELABORATE  AN  ANNEX  OR  ANNEXES ON  LIABILITY  FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE IN ANTARCTICA

I.    INTRODUCTION

1.    The XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting asked the Group of Legal Experts to
"prepare a written report on the work undertaken to elaborate an annex or annexes on
environmental liability and [to] outline the results achieved, identifying the major
outstanding problems and different alternatives and approaches." This Report is
structured as follows: Part II describes the mandate of the Group and the procedure it
has followed; Part III outlines the results achieved and identifies the major
outstanding problems and alternatives; Part IV outlines further alternative approaches,
Part V lists several key issues for consideration by the XXII Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting.

II.   MANDATE OF THE GROUP OF LEGAL EXPERTS AND PROCEDURE
FOLLOWED

2.    The Group of Legal Experts was established by the XVII Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting in Venice (paras 37 to 40 of the Final Report):

      "(37) The meeting discussed the question of future action with respect to the
undertaking in Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for
damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and
covered by the Protocol, with a view to their inclusion in one or more
Annexes. Written contributions to this discussion were received from the
Delegations of the Netherlands (XVII ATCM/WP 8) and Chile (XVII
ATCM/WP 11).

      (38) The Meeting reiterated the wish expressed in the Final Act of the XI
Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting that work on the elaboration of
such rules and procedures could begin at an early stage and acknowledged the
importance of developing a liability regime as being significant for the
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and
associated ecosystems.

1
(39) The Meeting, therefore, agreed to convene a meeting of legal experts in accordance with Recommendation IV-24 to undertake to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability as called for under Article 16 of the Protocol.

(40) It was further agreed that prior to the convening of that meeting and in order to ensure adequate preparation of its work, proposals should be prepared and exchanged through the normal means of diplomatic communication. On the basis of agreement reached through diplomatic channels a first meeting of experts will be convened, under German Chairmanship, before the XVIII Consultative Meeting."

3.    Since the ATCM in Venice the Group has met during the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and inter-sessionally. The first inter-sessional meeting took place from 18 to 20 November 1993 in Heidelberg (Germany). To prepare for the first meeting, and in accordance with the mandate of the Group, the Chairman circulated a questionnaire to which most ATCPs responded. The following meetings were also held: from 11 to 15 April 1994 in Kyoto (Japan); from 7 to 9 November 1994 in The Hague (Netherlands); from 8 to 12 May 1995 in Seoul (Korea); from 27 to 30 November 1995 in Brussels (Belgium); from 29 April to 3 May 1996 in Utrecht (Netherlands); from 7 to 11 October 1996 in Cambridge (UK); from 19 to 23 May 1997 in Christchurch (New Zealand); from 17 to 22 November 1997 in Cape Town (South Africa). Valuable contributions were made by the scientific and technical community at several of the meetings. At Christchurch, in particular, the Group received the views of TEWG, SCAR and COMNAP on the implications of a liability regime for scientific and associated logistic programmes.

4.    The deliberations of the Group took place on the basis of "Offerings" prepared by the Chairman and circulated in advance of the meetings. At the beginning the Offerings were prepared by the Chairman alone. Starting with the meeting in Utrecht, drafting suggestions of delegations were included in the Offerings, and ad hoc drafting groups were established which produced suggestions that were also incorporated into or reflected in the Offerings. At present, the Group of Legal Experts is working on the basis of the Chairman's Offering which is presently in the form of an Eighth Offering (see Appendix 1 to this Report). The Group also has before it a proposal tabled by the United States delegation at Utrecht (see below Part IV and Appendix 2 to this Report).

2
III. RESULTS ACHIEVED, MAJOR OUTSTANDING PROBLEMS AND 
ALTERNATIVES

5. The Report identifies the major outstanding problems and alternatives using the 
numbering system of articles in the Eighth Offering as a matter of convenience.

6. Whatever approach is followed, an annex or annexes on liability for damages to the 
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems may need to cover 
issues such as: scope of application, definition of the notion of damage, response 
measures or remedial measures, standard of liability, exemptions and limits, rules 
concerning the quantum of damage, State responsibility, insurance, as well as 
implementation of the annex or annexes, including dispute settlement. The Group 
came to an understanding on some of these issues; on others it was only possible to 
identify alternatives. In this connection, the Group noted that the subject of 
emergency response action is under active consideration by the ATCM (see 
Resolution 1 of the XXI ATCM). Finally, an alternative approach to that of the 
Offerings has been suggested by the United States.

Scope of Application

7. There is agreement that the aim of an annex or annexes is a liability regime which 
would cover all categories of activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area and 
which are covered by the Protocol. It, however, remains an open question whether this 
aim should be achieved in one comprehensive annex or in more than one annex.

8. Those delegations favouring the former have emphasised that the approach of a single 
comprehensive annex was the appropriate one. Article 2 of the Eighth Offering is 
related to article 16 of the Protocol which covers "damage arising from activities 
taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by this Protocol."

9. The alternative approach (US draft) focuses on the obligation arising from article 15 
of the Protocol to provide for response action to environmental emergencies, and 
emphasises the relation between articles 15 and 16 of the Protocol and the fact that 
article 16 of the Protocol provides for the possibility of elaborating more than one 
annex. In view of some delegations, emergencies represent the most likely source 

3
of significant adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment. However, some 
delegations also noted that activities which do not amount to an emergency could 
result in damage as well.

10. Whichever approach to liability is taken, it is the common view of the Group that the 
scope of any regime must be clearly defined. In that respect reference is made to the 
Final Act of the XI Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting which indicates 
that the Protocol does not cover, for example, fishing or whaling. However, the Group 
felt that damage arising from acts or events taking place in connection with, for 
example, fishing or whaling, and not covered by their respective regimes are 
nevertheless covered by the Protocol. An example would be pollution by a fishing 
vessel. As far as its substance is concerned, article 2 of the Eighth Offering is not 
controversial, however, there is still a certain disagreement about its drafting. The 
Eighth Offering contains two alternatives in this respect. Although both are meant to 
cover the same point, the extent of the liability for damage caused in connection with 
acts or events covered by the respective regimes, as well as the relationship to other 
instruments, deserves further consideration.

11. The Eighth Offering has not precluded the possibility of dealing with liability for loss 
or impairment of an established use, or loss or damage to property of a third party, 
arising directly out of damage to the Antarctic environment and dependent and 
associated ecosystems. Nevertheless, the Group has taken the view that, for the time 
being, it would concentrate on damage to the Antarctic environment and dependent 
and associated ecosystems.

Damage

12. The Group has discussed the definition of “damage” in some depth. According to 
article 3 of the Eighth Offering, damage means any harmful impact on the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems caused by an activity in the 
Antarctic Treaty area. It was the common view that an impact must meet certain 
conditions to constitute damage. Several suggestions were made. According to article 
3 of the Eighth Offering the impact has to be “of a more than minor and more than 
transitory nature” or, alternatively, it has to be “significant and lasting”. The first 
alternative draws upon the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedure. In the
                                                  4
other alternative the term "significant" is more in line with standard treaties 
concerning the protection of the environment. Other suggestions were to consider all 
impacts that were "more than minor or transitory" (which also draws upon the EIA 
procedure) or which were "significant in terms and/or duration", as damage. It was 
also suggested to apply the criteria of article 3, paragraph 2 (b) of the Protocol with 
regard to the definition of damage.

13.  There has been a considerable amount of discussion about excluding from the 
definition of damage impacts that have been assessed in environmental impact 
assessments and found acceptable by national authorities. Furthermore, there remains 
a difference whether such an exclusion should be limited to impacts assessed in 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEE) or should also cover those assessed 
by Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEE).

14.  Several delegations pointed out that State Parties may reasonably differ over the 
appropriate level of necessary EIA documentation and that there are mechanisms 
within the Protocol itself to address a State Party's failure to fulfill its assessment 
obligation (e.g. the ATCM and/or the dispute settlement mechanism of the Protocol). 
Those in favour of excluding only impacts assessed in CEEs argue that a CEE will be 
circulated for comments by other State Parties and that this gives all the States Parties 
an opportunity to let their views be known at an early stage. Others held that it was 
imperative to exclude impacts assessed in all environmental documentation - both 
IEEs and CEEs - because the Protocol recognizes the validity of each State Party's 
national procedures; excluding impacts that had been evaluated in either form of 
environmental documentation in their view had the merit of protecting scientific 
activities, since most scientific activities proceeded on the basis of an IEE. In their 
view it should not be necessary for national science programmes to have to carry out 
CEEs for routine science just in order to avoid liability.

15.  It was also discussed whether impacts previously not covered by, or not subject to, an 
IEE or CEE could automatically be treated as damage, or if it would be necessary to 
examine after the impact whether they would have been accepted prior to the activity. 
Furthermore the question was raised whether damage would include impacts which,
5
because of the state of scientific knowledge at the time the IEE or CEE was prepared 
and when the activity giving rise to the impact began, could not reasonably have been 
predicted or were unknown. Some delegations emphasized that the precautionary 
principle should be taken into account in this context. Some delegations felt 
otherwise.

16. Other delegations object to using any environmental impact assessment procedure as a 
means to exclude harmful impacts from the concept of damage. They state that 
according to national law, such procedures did not have such an objective. Moreover 
they are concerned that any form of EIA would be used to avoid liability.

17. It was further suggested to define damage without referring to EIAs and to consider 
EIAs in connection with exemption from liability under article 6 of the Eighth 
Offering (extent of liability). This proposal and its consequences have not been 
discussed in detail.

18. Some delegations would limit the exclusion from the definition of damage to 
"unavoidable" impacts identified in the assessment. Others strongly opposed this 
limitation because it would force operators to always select the alternative with the 
least impact, something which in their view was inconsistent with the requirements of 
the Protocol. This approach would not allow operators to take into account scientific 
value, cost effectiveness or safety considerations in determining which impacts were 
acceptable.

19. A different approach would endeavour to avoid some of the complex issues by 
imposing liability only for activities which violate the Protocol. It was maintained that 
by adopting this approach there would then be no need to exclude assessed activities 
from the notion of damage. Others, however, wondered whether such an approach 
would affect the notion of strict liability. It was further argued that the concept of 
violation of the Protocol was too vague for imposing liabilityespecially given that the 
annex or annexes would have to be implemented in domestic law.

Standard of Liability

20. Concerning the standard of liability, all delegations favoured strict liability as the 
appropriate standard in general, strict liability being understood as meaning that it was 
unnecessary to prove fault on the part of the operator. Some, however, questioned 
                                                                                 6
whether it might be appropriate to distinguish between activities of States and non-
State entities or types of damage. Others doubted whether such distinctions could be 
justified. The same activity could be carried out by both State and non-State operators 
and it would be undesirable to discriminate in favour of State operators. Further, some 
delegations wanted to apply different rules to scientific research and related logistic 
activities in comparison to other activities taking place in Antarctica Treaty area, in 
view of the priority accorded to scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty area. Others 
suggested that because scientific research is the main activity in Antarctic Treaty area 
it would not be appropriate to place a lower standard of liability on it.

21.  The question of how liability should be shared among operators is addressed in article 
3 ter of the Eighth Offering. That article is still under active consideration by the 
Group. The article provides for joint liability. There is the possibility that it could 
provide for “joint and several liability”, the effect of which would be that each 
operator would be exposed to liability for the full amount. Some delegations felt that 
this might place an undue burden on the operator which is sued. Others were 
concerned that such a provision could create a barrier to traditional cooperation by 
State Parties through scientific activities and pointed to the complexities it would 
introduce in joint Antarctic programmes taking place simultaneously in different parts 
of the Antarctic Treaty area. However, others argued that joint and several liability as 
implemented in domestic legal systems has not prevented scientists from cooperating 
and agreeing to share the costs of compensation. Some delegations pointed out that 
joint and several liability was incompatible with some national legal systems. Other 
delegations observed that it could be found in several multilateral treaties.

Imposing Liability on Operators

22.  Article 3 quater of the Eighth Offering is concerned with, inter alia, how legal 
obligations might be imposed on operators. It provides for two alternatives each being 
designed to ensure that liability can be imposed on non-State operators in appropriate 
circumstances. The article raises several complex legal issues and deserves further 
discussion.

23.  A controversial issue is whether operators of one State Party should be subject to 
jurisdiction of other States Parties from which expeditions depart directly for 
7
Antarctica (Departure States) and if so whether Departure States should be subject to residual liability if they fail to enforce the Protocol with respect to any operator who uses the port facilities of a port State before finally departing for Antarctica. The applicability of a Departure State jurisdiction is a controversial issue in the Group. Even if the application of any form of Departure State jurisdiction were to be accepted, it was the prevailing view that this should not entail liability of the Departure State concerned.

Response Action and Remedial Measures

24.  Article 4 of the Eighth Offering describes the action to be undertaken by the operator. First it would require operators to take reasonable precautionary measures to prevent the occurrence of incidents. Although all delegations agreed that such measures should be encouraged, and are the most effective means of avoiding damage in Antarctica, it has been pointed out that the language of this provision might be read as creating a new obligation not found in the Protocol. Further, according to article 4 of the Eighth Offering, if an incident occurs, an operator has to undertake immediate response action, i.e. any reasonable measure to contain or minimize any harm after the incident. The Group has discussed whether the concept of liability includes a duty to take reasonable response action (or even reasonable remedial measures). Those who were in favour took the view that restoration to the status quo ante (as in CRAMRA) is a means of reparation. Monetary compensation was only a substitute for restoration to the status quo ante; response action and remedial measures were the primary obligation, not the exception. Hence the references to precautionary measures, duty to take reasonable response action, compensation for reasonable response action taken by others etc. were necessary elements. Others, however, took a different view.

25.  In the Eighth Offering, remedial measures have been incorporated in the definition of a further response action and an operator is required to undertake reasonable remedial measures or pay compensation. Some delegations took the view that the Protocol does not require remedial measures to be taken and that the inclusion of such a requirement in a liability annex would create a new obligation upon the States Parties not presently contained in the Protocol. Apart from that, several delegations have expressed concern

8
that it may not be feasible to undertake remediation in the vast majority of cases in 
Antarctica. Other delegates took a different position.

26.  According to the Eighth Offering, the operator, which has caused the damage or 
which caused the incident, may take response action by itself or may also authorize 
another suitable entity or person to take such action on its behalf. It was stated in this 
context that a definition of the notion of "operator" is essential. There is also the 
question whether any other State Party or private entity may take immediate response 
action in cases where an operator did not take the required response action. Although 
all experts took the view that a State Party should be able to take immediate response 
action if the operator did not take a response action it is still an open question whether 
other entities should also be permitted to take such actions. Further, some delegations 
felt that there should be a requirement to coordinate and consult with the operator, 
which has caused the damage or which has caused the incident and to have the prior 
authorisation of the State Party responsible for implementing the EIA procedure. 
Another point which has still to be resolved is whether advance permission should be 
required if a third party wished to enter a base operated by a State Party to take 
response action. The view was also expressed that an annex on liability should not 
envisage the creation of rights directly and effectively in favour of private entities.

27.  The Group has also discussed whether a State Party or another entity or person having 
undertaken response action on its own initiative - if that will be permissible at all - 
will be compensated for the costs involved (see article 4 of the Eighth Offering, 
alternatives A and B). As far as this aspect is concerned the divergence of views is 
now quite limited. A related issue is the extent to which a third party should incur 
liability if it intervenes with or without the permission of the operator, which caused 
the original damage, and causes damage above and beyond that which was caused by 
that operator.

28.  There has also been a divergence of views as to whether third parties should be able to 
undertake remedial measures without the prior authorisation of the operator 
concerned. This issue is also tied to the question of whether an annex should contain 
an obligation to undertake remedial measures at all.

9
Liability

29. As far as liability is concerned article 5 of the Eighth Offering states the basic 
principle that the operator who is liable for damage shall reimburse the reasonable 
costs incurred by a State Party, entity or person in taking response action. In general 
this principle is accepted by the Group.

30. A problem, however, is a provision obliging the operator to provide for reasonable 
compensation for “unrepaired damage” or “irreparable harm”. Unrepaired damage is 
defined in article 5 bis, paragraph 1 of the Eighth Offering as being damage in respect 
of which neither the operator nor a third party has undertaken immediate response 
action or further response action (remedial measures) or where response action is not 
possible, not feasible or for environmental or other reasons not desirable. Those in 
favour of including a provision in this respect believe that an operator which has 
caused such damage should not be in a better position than an operator which has 
caused damage, which has been repaired or has been the subject of response action. 
Whether to include compensation for these types of damage is a matter of 
controversy. Relevant questions include which factors should be taken into account 
when assessing the appropriate amount and how to evaluate that amount (e.g. only 
estimated costs of a reasonable response action or additional criteria for the 
assessment of damage, including loss or impairment of present or potential uses, 
aesthetic and other non-use values of the ecological systems, and further equitable 
considerations).

31. Another issue is the method that should be adopted to determine the amount of 
compensation of such damage, and how to come to an agreement with the operator 
involved. This includes the questions : who should be entitled to initiate the 
compensation process and what should be the role of the ATCM and the 
Environmental Protection Fund, if established. The Eighth Offering provides for two 
alternatives. The difference between them is significant, although primarily of a 
technical nature. This issue deserves further consideration.

State Liability

32. There is general agreement within the Group that the liability of the State not acting as 
operator should only be invoked in narrowly defined circumstances. Accordingly,
 
10
delegations are in agreement that a liability annex or annexes should not create a new 
basis of liability for States merely for the reason that damage has been caused by an 
operator within its jurisdiction. According to article 7 of the Eighth Offering a State 
Party could be liable for damage caused by an operator only if damage would not 
have occurred or continued if a State Party had carried out its obligations under the 
Protocol and the annexes, but only to the extent that liability was not satisfied by the 
operator or otherwise. This provision was inspired by CRAMRA. However, it has 
also been pointed out that this provision was not clear enough. Further, some 
delegations - referring to provisions contained in the UN Convention on the Law of 
the Sea - favoured a wording which would exempt a State Party from liability if such 
State Party had adopted laws and regulations and taken the necessary administrative 
measures, including enforcement, for securing compliance of operators with the 
Protocol and its Annexes. One delegation noted that an important issue to be decided 
was whether, consistent with the Protocol, a State Party could be held liable for the 
failure of a non-State operator to take response action where the State Party had 
promulgated appropriate laws and regulations covering non-State operators and it 
effectively implements those laws. There is agreement that State liability under a 
liability annex or annexes should not go beyond State responsibility under general 
international law.

Exemptions from liability

33.    All delegations favoured including exemptions from liability for natural catastrophes 
and armed conflicts, and terrorist acts.

34.    The Protocol contains a number of exemptions for certain activities, including 
emergency exemptions - e.g. safety of human life -, and express authorisation for 
certain discharges from vessels. It is a matter of discussion whether to exclude from 
liability damage caused by these exempted activities. Some delegations considered it 
objectionable that activities that are lawful under the Protocol might still attract 
liability. They held the view that activities permitted by the Protocol, such as vessel 
discharges expressly authorized in Annex IV, and activities which fall within the 
scope of the Protocol's emergency provisions should be exempt from liability. They
11
contend that imposing liability for activities authorized by the Protocol would involve 
a renegotiation of issues decided under the Protocol. Other delegations argued that 
even if such activities were not regarded as illegal, the operator should nevertheless be 
placed under an obligation to repair and compensate for resulting damage.

35.	There was support for including a clause providing that, without prejudice to the 
liability of States and their obligations under the Antarctic Treaty, vessels to which 
sovereign immunity applies would be exempt from seizure, boarding and other 
interference with their operations.

Insurance

36.	Article 8 of the Eighth Offering reflects the practice of States that require compulsory 
insurance or other financial security for activities involving a risk to the environment. 
Bearing in mind that the activities under consideration may take place in vulnerable 
areas, a consensus exists on the need for a requirement of this sort. In drafting the 
respective provision due consideration has been given to the fact that, according to 
many legal systems, the State or its entities cannot be compelled to be insured. The 
issue of insurance generally deserves further study, drawing from the experience of 
insurance institutions, whose advice may be necessary for the purpose of fixing the 
limits of the insurance required.

Limits to Liability

37.	The question of limiting liability has been discussed in depth. Certain delegations 
consider limits to be necessary to enable operators to acquire affordable insurance and 
to ensure that national Antarctic programmes are not jeopardised by a liability regime. 
Other delegations, however, do not consider them to be necessary or do not consider 
them to be necessary in all situations, (e.g. for reimbursement of costs of reasonable 
immediate or further response action or for unrepaired damage where response action 
could have been taken). The question has also been raised whether limits should be 
applicable where the damage has been caused deliberately. According to article 9 of 
the Eighth Offering, the reimbursement of costs in accordance with article 5 of the 
Eighth Offering, as well as the payment for unrepaired damage shall not exceed a 
certain limit. It seems to be advisable to keep any limitation provision flexible, and to 
allow the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to revise such limits. Some 

12
delegations were in favour of leaving the specification of the amounts of limits to a later stage when the deliberations are undertaken on a political level.

Environmental Protection Fund

38. Article 10 of the Eighth Offering provides for the establishment of an Environmental Protection Fund. A Fund is quite common in other multilateral treaties on the protection of the environment. However, their situation cannot easily be compared with the one concerning the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In Antarctica, there is no industry which is in a position to provide the necessary financial resources for a Fund and all ATCPs have made it quite clear that they will not provide a Fund with money. The only money a Fund could receive, if created, besides voluntary contributions, would be compensation for unrepaired damage, if any. On the other hand some delegations hold the view, that the Fund would play a vital role in relation to unrepaired damage, if such damage is provided for in an annex. The proposed functions of the Fund are identified in article 10, paragraph 1 (a) of the Eighth Offering. The Fund would provide compensation if, because of an exemption, no liability arose under the Protocol and its Annexes, if the identity of the liable operator cannot be established, or if the costs exceed the limit set out in an annex. It would provide for compensation on an interim basis. Some of the still outstanding questions concerning the Fund include whether it should have legal personality, how much it would cost to administer and by whom it should be administered, and whether it should act as the plaintiff against ATCPs or non-State operators, and the extent of its other responsibilities. It was suggested that some of these questions, e.g. legal personality, administrative aspects, and the extent of its other responsibilities, may be easier to resolve once an Antarctic Secretariat has been established.

Dispute settlement

39. The Group had in depth discussions on the question of resolving disputes which might arise in relation to an annex or annexes on liability for environmental damage. Some progress was made, although several issues are still being discussed. It is the general view within the Group that the establishment of a dispute settlement mechanism presents very complex and controversial issues such as whether and to what extent
13
State operators are to be subject to dispute settlement. Some delegations were of the 
view that some use should be made of the dispute settlement system as provided by 
the Protocol. Article 11 of the Eighth Offering, the content of which is under 
discussion, makes use of this system for disputes concerning, for example, the 
reimbursement of costs. However, this provision also gives a role to national courts. 
Whereas some delegations hold that disputes involving private entities should only be 
decided by national courts, others consider it more appropriate to involve means such 
as international arbitration.

40.   Several delegations have expressed the view that national courts should not have 
      jurisdiction over States acting as operators. Others envisage a role for the ATCM in 
      dispute settlement and further emphasize Antarctic Treaty practices such as 
      consultations, negotiations, and other means of dispute avoidance and settlement. The 
      Eighth Offering contains two alternatives. Whereas alternative A is focussing more on 
      national courts, alternative B emphasises the possibility of international arbitration.

IV.   ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES.

      United States Draft

41.   At the Utrecht meeting the United States submitted a draft liability annex which is 
      based upon a less comprehensive approach (see Appendix 2 to this Report) which 
      could be followed by further annexes on aspects of liability. It covers “environmental 
      emergencies”, defined as “all unplanned and accidental events, whether or not 
      assessed in accordance with Annex I to the Protocol, that result in, or imminently 
      threaten to result in, any significant and harmful impact on the Antarctic environment 
      or associated and dependent ecosystems”. It has been pointed out that it was necessary 
      to tackle the most pressing problems first and accidents were considered to be the 
      most likely source of significant adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment. Apart 
      from that it was necessary to provide for an incentive so that States Parties would live 
      up to their obligations under article 15 of the Protocol. A State Party which had 
      fulfilled its obligation under article 15 of the Protocol could not be held liable. All 
      other aspects of liability for environmental damage should be dealt with in a further 
      annex or annexes.

14
42. Article 3 of the US draft obliges States Parties to ensure that operators of non-
governmental activities are financially accountable to take prompt and effective 
response action, to establish contingency plans, to cooperate in the formulation of 
contingency plans and to establish procedures for immediate notification of, and a 
cooperative response to environmental emergencies.

43. The US draft is based upon the principle of strict liability as is the Eighth Offering 
(see article 4 of the US draft). In particular, States Parties which fail to provide for 
prompt and effective response action are liable and must pay compensation to the 
party or parties which provided for response action, or to a Fund if response action 
should have been taken but was not. The draft also provides that, in accordance with 
article 15 of the Protocol, States Parties to the Annex agree to provide for prompt and 
effective response action to environmental emergencies with respect to both 
governmental and non-governmental activities. The draft also addresses the question 
of whether other States Parties may undertake a response action which the liable 
operator should have undertaken but did not. According to article 5 of the US draft 
such possibility exists but does not constitute a legal obligation. The amount of the 
compensation is calculated on the basis of the costs of the response action taken by 
other States Parties (see article 6, paragraph 1 of the US draft). The draft provides for 
exemptions (article 7 of the US draft ) and limits (article 8 of the US draft) and the 
establishment of a Fund.

44. According to the US delegation, this approach is designed to retain the carefully 
negotiated balance achieved in the Protocol which promotes the availability of 
Antarctica for scientific research in a manner which protects the environment. An 
argument for proceeding in a step-by-step manner is that response action is an existing 
obligation under the Protocol, and using as the measure of damages the cost of 
response action that should have been undertaken, but was not, was relatively 
uncontroversial. Although such an approach did not preclude addressing damages 
other than those related to environmental emergencies, the discussion in the Group so 
far had indicated that these other elements presented novel and difficult legal issues 
(especially to the extent that they measure damage other than in relation to response 
action) which could take years to negotiate.

15
45. Other delegations, however, were of the view that the US draft does not meet the obligations of States Parties under article 16 of the Protocol to elaborate rules and procedures for liability for damage in one or more annexes. They further argued that it would take longer to negotiate multiple annexes than a single comprehensive one. It may not be possible to define the concept of “emergencies” with the precision necessary for the purpose of establishing legal liability. It was also pointed out that after negotiating an annex on liability based on emergencies it might then be very difficult to maintain the momentum necessary for the rest of the task required under article 16 of the Protocol. Other delegations considered the US step-by-step approach acceptable in principle; some of them believed it should be addressed within the broader framework of the Chairman’s Offerings; and some voiced reservations about the workability of a fund, pointing to the many outstanding questions on this matter.

Other Options

46. So far the delegations have largely concentrated on the two distinct approaches already outlined in this Report, namely a comprehensive one, as in the Eighth Offering, and one based upon response action obligations, as in the US draft liability annex.

The Group recognises, however, that there might be a range of possible ways of addressing liability pursuant to the Protocol.

The options for addressing liability which have been mentioned so far, but not all of which have been discussed in depth, include in particular:

    a single annex covering all aspects of liability under the Protocol;
    a set of separate but linked annexes concluded simultaneously and together covering all aspects of liability under the Protocol;
    a single annex dealing with a limited number of issues which have been identified as requiring attention. Other annexes could be negotiated as the need arises;
    a series of annexes planned to be concluded in stages according to their priority. These might have an inbuilt treaty obligation to continue negotiations towards completing the set of instruments;

16
two or more annexes including an annex or annexes on matters indirectly related to liability (e.g. response action).

V.    KEY ISSUES

47.  Although there are various issues under consideration by the Group, currently the key issues on which the views of the ATCM would be useful are :

1.   Whether work on an annex on liability should follow a comprehensive 
     approach covering all categories of harmful impacts, or whether one should 
     follow initially an approach concentrating on response action in the event of 
     environmental emergencies in accordance with article 15 of the Protocol, or 
     whether other approaches should be considered, including whether liability 
     should be addressed by one annex or a number of annexes.

2.   Whether an annex on liability should contain obligations for the 
     operator to take (i) precautionary measures, (ii) response action, or (iii) 
     remedial measures. (In this respect it should be noted that some delegations 
     considered that obligations to take precautionary measures, to restore the 
     environment, to clean up damage or to take remedial measures are not covered 
     by the Protocol).

3.   Whether all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area should be addressed by an 
     annex on liability in a uniform way, or whether scientific and associated 
     logistic activities should be given preferential treatment and, if so, to what 
     extent. In addition, what consideration should be given to any effects of a 
     liability regime on cooperation among States Parties and/or their national 
     programmes.

4.   Whether it would be appropriate to require compensation for 
     environmental damage when either (i) nothing has been done to repair the 
     damage or (ii) the damage could not have been repaired; and on what basis the 
     amount of compensation for such unrepaired damage should be determined.

5.   Whether an annex on liability should provide for the establishment of 
     an Environmental Protection Fund and, if so, how it should be administered.

17
6. Whether environmental impacts resulting from activities found 
acceptable by national authorities following EIA procedures should be 
excluded from a liability regime and, if so, whether the exclusion should apply 
to both IEE and CEE.

7. Whether the harmful impact of activities which are lawful under the Protocol 
should nevertheless attract liability. (Such activities include marine discharges 
as permitted under Annex IV to the Protocol and cases of emergency related to 
safety of human life).

48. Apart from these issues the ATCM will wish to consider how the deliberations on the 
annex or annexes on environmental liability should proceed.

18
Chairman's Eighth Offering

Annex on Environmental Liability

    [Article 1] or [Preamble]
    Purpose

The purpose of this Annex is, consistent with the objective and environmental principles of the Protocol, to promote the prevention, minimization and containment of damage to the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, and to provide for adequate compensation for damage. This Annex does not preclude the possibility of developing an annex on liability for loss of or impairment of an established use or loss of or damage to property of a third party arising directly out of damage to the Antarctic environment or dependent and associated ecosystems.1

    Article 2
    Scope of Application

(1) This Annex shall apply to liability for damage arising from activities in the Antarctic Treaty area which have been undertaken after the date of entry into force of this Annex2 and which are covered by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol).

              Alternative A

(2) No liability is incurred under the present Annex for damage arising from acts or events3 covered by the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, including its conservation measures,4 or the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, or the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. This does not, however, preclude the application of this Annex to damage caused in connection with acts or events covered by those Conventions, but which are not subject to regulation by those Conventions.5

(3) Nothing in this Annex shall derogate from rights and obligations [of Parties] under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals and the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling or other international instruments concerning environmental protection (including liability) applicable in the Antarctic Treaty area.6

              Alternative B

(2) This Annex shall not apply to activities [regulated by or]7 conducted in accordance with the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, and the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973/88.8

(3) Nothing in this Annex shall derogate from the rights and obligations of the Parties to this Annex under the other international instruments in force within the Antarctic Treaty System.9

(4) Deleted.10

19
Article 3
Definition

For the purpose of this Annex:

(1)(a) "Damage" means any harmful effect of an impact on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, caused by an activity in the Antarctic Treaty area which [is of a more than minor and more than transitory nature] [is significant and lasting];

(b) "Damage" does not include an impact (or the [harmful] effect of it) which [It does not include the harmful effect of an impact which]:

(aa) (i) has been assessed [as an unavoidable impact of an activity] in an [Initial or] Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation in accordance with article 8 of the Protocol and Annex I to the Protocol; and

(ii) has been judged acceptable [by the competent authorities of the State Party concerned] in accordance with such procedure[s]; or

(bb) because of the state of [scientific] knowledge at the time that the [IEE or] CEE was prepared and when the activity giving rise to the incident began [,and taking due account of the precautionary principle] the impact or its [harmful] effect [the harmful effect of the impact] could not reasonably have been predicted, provided the impact did not arise from an activity prohibited by the Protocol.

(1 bis) "Incident" means any occurrence or series of occurrences having the same origin, which cause damage or create a grave and imminent threat of causing damage.

(c) Deleted.

(d) Damage does not include consequential impacts which result from a remote causality.

(2) "Unrepaired damage" means any damage as referred to in article 5 bis.

(3) Deleted.

(4) "Reasonable" as referred to in the definition of "response action" means objective factors of the type referred to in article 4, para. 2 (d).

(5) "Response action" means any measure as referred to in article 4, para. (b) and (c).

(6) Deleted.

(7) "Operator" is an entity or person referred to in article 3 quater.

20
Article 3 bis
Strict Liability

Unless otherwise indicated in this Annex, liability shall be strict, that is to say it shall not be necessary to establish fault.23


      Article 3 ter
Joint and Several Liability

When damage was [directly caused]24 by two or more operators, all such operators,25 unless exonerated under Article 6, shall be jointly [and severally] liable in compensation for all such damage [which is not reasonably separable].26


      Article 3 quater
Alternative A

Obligation to Impose Liability on Operators

Each State Party shall take appropriate measures within its competence, including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures to establish jurisdiction with respect to liability arising in accordance with this Annex on:

(a) any natural or juridical person27 (private or public and of whatever nationality) who organizes an [activity] [expedition] in the Antarctic treaty area in the territory of the State Party or for which the final place of departure of the expedition for Antarctica is in the territory of the State Party; and

(b) insofar as the laws of the State Party so provide, a national of it who organizes outside its territory an expedition to Antarctica.28 29


      Alternative B30

Liability of Operators

An operator which is not a State Party, that is to say any natural or juridical person, public or private and of whatever nationality,31 who organizes an activity or expedition in the Antarctic Treaty area, shall be liable under this Annex if:

(a) this activity or expedition is organized within the territory of a State Party;

(b) in case para. (a) does not apply, if the said operator is under the jurisdiction of a State Party;

or

[(c) in case paras. (a) and (b) do not apply, if the said operator departs to the Antarctic Treaty area from the territory of a State Party.]

21
Article 432
Preparedness and Response Action

(1) An operator shall take, [to the extent practicable,]33 34 reasonable precautionary measures to prevent, to the extent possible, the occurrence of incidents and shall prepare contingency plans which identify measures to minimize the impact of incidents.

(2)(a) If an incident occurs the operator [responsible for causing it] [to whom the incident is attributable] shall take immediate response action and to the extent the damage35 resulting therefrom can be repaired, take further response action.

(b) Immediate36 response action means any appropriate, timely and reasonable measure to contain or minimize any [impact] [damage] [harm] and taken [immediately] after the incident causing the [damage][harm] or [imminently] threatening to cause [damage] [harm].

(c) Further response action means any appropriate and reasonable measure to clean up or otherwise remedy any [damage] [harm].37

(d) In determining what would be reasonable measures factors such as the risk to the environment, the rate of natural recovery of the environment, the risk to human life and safety, technological or economic feasibility38 of the measures and their costs relative to the amount of damage shall be taken into account.

(e) An operator may also authorize another suitable entity or person to take immediate or further response action on its behalf.

(3) If an operator does not take or authorize response action in accordance with para. 2 (a) or (b) above or indicates that it will not do either:39

(a) any other State Party may take immediate response action. In addition any other entity or person may do so if in the particular circumstances a reasonable operator should have taken or authorized immediate response action;

        Alternative A

(b) any other State Party or any other entity or person may take further response action if so authorized by the State Party responsible for implementing the procedure in Annex I to the Protocol for the activity which [resulted in damage][caused the incident].40

        Alternative B41

(b) except in those instances where a State Party has determined through procedures under Annex I to the Protocol that no further response action is necessary, nothing in this Annex or in the Protocol shall be construed to prevent an entity from taking response action to environmental emergencies where the operator which caused the damage is unknown or cannot be contacted through reasonable means [or where time does not permit identification of or contact with the responsible operator] or where an operator which caused the damage indicates that it will not take response action, provided that the entity cooperates with all relevant parties to examine the nature of the emergency and the appropriate steps which should be taken in

22
response to it.42

(4) Any response action referred to in para. 2 (b) or 3 (b) above shall be undertaken with due 
regard to the procedure under Annex I to the Protocol.

(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the obligations of States Parties under article 15 of the 
Protocol.

Alternative C43

(1) An operator shall take reasonable precautionary measures to prevent, to the extent possible, 
the occurrence of incidents and shall prepare contingency plans which identify measures to 
minimize the impact of incidents.

(2)If an incident occurs the operator responsible for causing it shall take response action or 
authorize a suitable and willing person or entity to take response action on its behalf.44 In 
determining whether it would be reasonable to take response action or to authorize it, the 
operator shall take into account factors such as the risk to the environment, the rate of natural 
recovery of the environment, the risk to human life and safety, technological feasibility, 
economic feasibility and whether the cost would be disproportionate to the harm done.

(3) If an operator does not take response action or authorize it in accordance with para. (2), or 
indicates that it will not do either, any State Party may take response action. In addition, another 
person or entity may take response action:

       (a) if it is so authorized by the State Party responsible for implementing the procedures in 
           Annex I to the Protocol in respect of the activity which caused the incident, or

       (b) if in the particular circumstances a reasonable operator would have taken or authorized 
           response action.

(4) Nothing in this article shall affect the obligations of States Parties under article 15 of the 
Protocol.

Article 5
Liability for Reimbursement

Alternative A

(1) An operator who is liable for damage under this Annex shall reimburse the reasonable costs 
incurred by a State Party, entity or person in taking response action in accordance with article 4, 
para. 3.45

(2) Where an operator is liable for damage under this Annex, and other parties are also 
responsible for part of the damage, the operator is entitled to seek corresponding contribution 
from those other parties or to request that a claim is made against them jointly.46 47

[(3) Disputes whether damage has occurred and whether the operator from whom 
reimbursements of costs has been claimed is liable shall be decided in accordance with the 
      
23
procedure established in article 11].48

                                                                 Alternative B49

(1) An operator who is liable for damage shall reimburse the reasonable costs of taking response 
action incurred by a State Party, or by an entity or person acting in accordance with Article 4
(3).

(2) Where an operator is liable for damage, and other parties are responsible for part of the 
damage, the operator is entitled to seek contribution from those other parties.

(3) Disputes whether damage has occurred and whether the operator from whom reimbursement 
of costs has been claimed is liable shall be decided in accordance with the procedure established 
in article 11 (3).

                                                              Article 5 bis
                                                        Unrepaired Damage

(1) Without prejudice to the obligations set forth in article 4 with regard to response action, 
where an operator has caused damage, but neither it nor a third party has undertaken response 
action or where response action is not possible, feasible or for environmental [or other] reasons 
desirable (hereafter referred to as "unrepaired damage") that operator shall be under an 
obligation to provide compensation to the Fund established by article 10 in such a manner 
Antarctic Treaty Parties shall determine.

                                                              Alternative A

(2) An operator [...] shall within [three] months after liability has been formally admitted by him 
or on his behalf or determined in accordance with article 11, para. 4 propose to the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties an amount to be contributed to the Fund. The amount for such con-
tribution shall reflect the estimated costs of the response action which should have been taken 
or, if it is not reasonably possible to estimate such costs, reflect the nature and significance of 
the damage including the loss of or impairment to potential future uses and the circumstances 
which gave rise to it,50 [and take into account the intrinsic value of the ecological systems 
involved, including their aesthetic value and in particular the potential loss of value entailed in 
the destruction of a species or a subspicies or flora or fauna].51

(3) After having received a proposal for a contribution to the Fund in accordance with para. 2 
above or after the expiry of the said [three] months period, whicheven occurs first, the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties shall consider the matter and decide either:

       (a) that the proposed contribution is acceptable, in which case the operator shall make the 
payment to the Fund; or

       (b) that the contribution proposed is not acceptable.

(4)(a) If no proposal for a contribution has been made or the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Parties decide that a proposal is not acceptable they shall decide the appropriate amount of the 
contribution to be paid. [Such decision is binding and the respective Antarctic Treaty

24
Consultative Parties undertake to implement such decision. ^{52}

(b) With a view to facilitating such decision the [Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting] 
[Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties] may, guided by the factors referred to in para. 2 above, 
adopt [guidelines] to assist [it][them] in considering the amount to be contributed. In developing 
such guidelines the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may seek the advice of the 
Committee for Environmental Protection.

(5) If the [Antartic Treaty Consultative Meeting][Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties], within 
one year after liability was established in accordance with para. 2, [has][have] been unable to 
decide the amount of the contribution the matter may be referred to the dispute settlement 
procedure in article 11 para. 4 by the [Fund][Secretariat] or by two or more Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties.

                                                                             Alternative B ^{53}

(2) Any Consultative Party may notify an operator that it regards that operator as having caused 
unrepaired damage and request that the operator makes a proposal for a contribution to the Fund 
in respect of the damage within [six] months. The amount of such contribution shall be 
equivalent to the cost of a response action if resonse action had been undertaken pursuant to 
article 4 or, if such costs cannot be specified it shall be based upon an assessment [that reflects 
the nature and significance of the damage, including the loss of or impairment to potential 
future uses and the circumstances which gave rise to it] that takes into account the intrinsic 
value of the ecological systems involved, including their aesthetic value and in particular the 
potential loss of value entailed in the destruction of a species or a subsoecies of flora or fauna.]

(3) The Consultative Party referred to in para. 2 shall forward a copy of the notification and of 
any proposal from the operator for the consideration of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting.

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall consider the matter with a view to securing a 
friendly settlement that may facilitate the payment of a contribution to the Fund and to this 
effect the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may reach a conclusion:

       (a) that the proposed contribution is acceptable, in which case the operator shall make the 
           payment;

       (b) that the contribution proposed is not acceptable; or

       (c) that no contribution was proposed.

(5) Where no proposal for a contribution has been made, or where the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting decides that the proposal is not acceptable, it shall consider the 
circumstances and formulate its own proposal for the appropriate amount to be contributed. 
With the view to facilitating the formulation of such proposal, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting may, guided by the factors referred to in para. 2 above, adopt guidelines concerning the 
calculation of the amount to be contributed by operators. In providing such guidelines the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may seek the advice of the Committee for 
Environmental Protection.

                                                                             25
(6) If the operator is a State Party which is a Consultative Party, the consensus decision of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will be binding.

(7) If the operator is not a Consultative Party, the determination of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall be considered a proposal for a friendly settlement. If the operator chooses to acceptz the proposal, this must be done within the period of [one year] from the time when the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Mereting made its proposal.

(8) If after the exhaustion of the procedures provided for in the above paragraphs, a friendly settlement securing an appropriate contribution to the Fund has not been reached within [one year] from the conclusion of the relevant Anatarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, the question of the [non-state] operator's liability may be referred to dispute settlement in accordance with the relevant provisions of article 11. In such dispute settlement proceedings, any determination of fact made by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall be a factor to be given due consideration bey the relevant dispute settlement body.

Article 5 ter

Deleted.

Article 6
Extent of Liability

Alternative A for para. 1

(1) An operator shall not incur liability if he proves that the activity having caused damage was covered by Annex III, article 12 or Annex IV, article 3, para. 2, article 5, para. 3, article 7.

Alternative B for para. 1

(1) For the avoidance of doubt it is declared that an operator does not incur liability where the damage was caused by an activity to which the Protocol or its other Annexes do not apply, whether because it is not covered by the Protocol or its other Annexes or because of an exemption or exception provided for in the Protocol or the Annexes.

(2) An operator shall not incur liability if he proves that the damage was caused directly by, and to the extent that it was caused directly by:

(a) an event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either generally or in the particular case, provided that all reasonable safety measures were taken by the operator to prevent damage;

(b) an armed conflict, should it occur notwithstanding the Antarctic Treaty, or an act of terrorism against which no reasonable measures could have been effective.

(3) The provisions of para. 1 shall not apply if the emergency giving rise to the exemption was caused by the operator.54
26
(4) Deleted.

(5) Para. 1 is not to be interpreted to detract from the obligation under article 4 para. 2 [as far as technically or financially feasible].55

(6) Without prejudice to the liability of a State Party for its failure to provide for prompt and effective response action or remedial measures to environmental damage caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships owned or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on governmental non-commercial service, those vessels of States Parties shall be immune as they are under the provisions of article 11 paras. 1 to 3 of Annex IV of the Protocol.56

             Article 7
Liability of States Parties

(1) A State Party shall not be liable merely for the reason that damage has been caused by an operator falling within its jurisdiction.57

(2) Damage which would not have occurred or continued if a State Party had carried out its obligation [as a State Party] under the Protocol and its Annexes shall, in accordance with international law, entail liability of that State Party. Such liability shall be limited to that portion of liability not satisfied by the operator under its jurisdiction, or otherwise.

(3) Nothing in para. 2 shall affect the application of existing rules of international law concerning State responsibility and the development, in accordance with international law, of further such rules.

             Article 8
Compulsory Insurance or Other Financial Security

Each State Party shall ensure, taking due account of the nature and the risks of the activities undertaken, that non-State operators conducting activities in the Antarctic Treaty area be required to have and maintain insurance or an equivalent [up to a limit to cover the liability under this Annex] [with a minimum of the limits as specified in article 9 of this Annex] [not less than the limit specified in article 9]. For the purpose of fixing the limit the costs of undertaking response action should be the guiding factor.

             Article 9
             Limits

(1) Deleted.

(2) Reimbursement for costs in accordance with article 5 shall not exceed....58

(3) Payment for unrepaired damage shall not exceed .... .

(4) The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may modify the limits set out in paras. 2 and 3 above by a measure adopted under article IX, para. 1 of the Antarctic Treaty.59

27
Article 10 ^{60 61}

Environmental Protection Fund

(1) An Environmental Protection Fund [having legal personality] ^{62} [administered by the Secretariat] is hereby established [in order to represent the State Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in matters concerning liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol.] ^{63} In its operation the Fund shall observe the following order of priorities:

       (a) ^{64} to provide for [compensation][reimbursement] for reasonable costs incurred by a State Party, entity or person in taking response action in accordance with article 4, in particular:

              (aa) if because of an exemption no liability arises under the Protocol and its Annexes;

              (bb) if the identity of the liable operator cannot be established;

              (cc) if the costs exceed the limits set out in article 9;

              (dd) to provide for compensation, on an interim basis, in case a liable operator does not reimburse the costs within reasonable time;

       (b) The Fund shall provide for the necessary financial means expeditiously with a view to enabling timely action under article 15 of the Protocol.

(2) Contributions to the Fund shall be made:

       (a) in accordance with article 5 bis;

       (b) Deleted.

(3) The Fund is authorized to receive voluntary contributions.

[(4) In order to appropriately fulfill the functions imposed in para. 1 of this article the Fund shall be empowered to take such actions in furtherance of the Protocol as decided by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.] ^{65}

Article 11 ^{66}
Dispute Settlement

(1) Disputes between States Parties concerning the interpretation and application of this Annex shall be resolved in accordance with article 18, 19 and 20 of the Protocol.

(2) Disputes concerning the liability of a State Party in accordance with article 7, para. 2, shall be resolved in accordance with article 18, 19 and 20 of the Protocol [...]

       Alternative A for para. 3 ^{67}

(3) (a) Disputes concerning the reimbursement of costs in accordance with article 5, para. 1, or concerning redress in accordance with article 5, para. 2, shall be decided, if at least one of
28
the parties to the dispute is a State Party, by the Arbitral Tribunal as referred to in the
Schedule to the Protocol. For this purpose, the Schedule shall apply to an operator which is
not a State Party as if it were a State Party. The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be
binding and enforceable in the territory of each State Party as if it were a final judgement of
its highest court.

(b) Other disputes concerning the reimbursement of costs in accordance with article 5,
paragrap 1, or concerning redress in accordance with article 5, para. 2, shall be decided by the
national courts of the State Party where the [defendant] [plaintiff] party to the dispute has its
habitual residence or where its business is located.

(c) Each State Party shall ensure that effective recourse is available in its national courts for
adjudicating disputes as referred to in subpara. b above. Any money judgment of a national
court shall, if it is enforceable in the State of origin, be recognized in any State Party and shall
be enforceable without review of the merits of the case.68

Alternative B for para.369

(3)(a) Where the parties to a dispute concerning the interpretation or application of this
Annex are not all State Parties, it may be submitted, at the discretion of the plaintiff, to either
international arbitration or national jurisdiction.

(b) Arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the Schedule to the Protocol. For this
purpose, the Schedule shall apply to an operator which is not a State party as if it were a State
Party. The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be binding and enforceable in the territory
of each State Party as if it were a final judgement by its highest court.70

(c) […] Each State Party shall ensure that its domestic courts have jurisdiction to adjudicate
on disputes submitted to them in accordance with subpara. (a). A plaintiff may not, however,
bring proceedings in more than one jurisdiction at the same time. If a plaintiff or defendant is
a State Party it shall be deemed to have waived any immunity to which it might be entitled.

(d) Any money judgement of a national court shall be recognized by the law of the other State
Parties and shall be enforceable in such law without review of the merits of the case.

(4) The Arbitral Tribunal provided for by the Schedule to the Protocol shall have jurisdiction
to decide on the amount of a contribution to the Fund for unrepaired damage which is referred
to in accordance with article 5bis, para. 5. For this purpose the Schedule shall apply to an
operator which is not a State Party, or to the [Fund][Secretariat], as if it were a State Party.
Any money decision of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be binding and enforceable in the territory
of each State Party as if it were a judgement of its highest court.

Article 12
Amendment or Modification

(1) This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with article
IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or
modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year
after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless
                  29
one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that 
period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

(2) Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance 
with para. 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of 
approval by it has been received by the Depositary.

 
                                                                                  30
Notes:

1. It was understood that this article shall be reconsidered after full agreement on the content of 
the Annex has been reached. In this context it has been emphasized that the Annex should 
concentrate on the implementation of article 15 of the Protocol. Reference is to be made in this 
context to the draft submitted by the U.S. delegation (XX ATCM/INF. 43). However, it has 
equally been pointed out that the scope of this Annex was determined by article 16. 
France has, as on previous occasions, indicated that it prefers the deletion of this article, in 
particular the second sentence. So does Germany.

2. Based upon article 12 of the U.S. draft (XX ATCM/INF. 43) It is understood that the 
reference is to activities rather than damage. France found this clarification clause to be un-
necessary.

3. Norway suggested to start this sentence as follows: "This Annex shall not apply to acts or 
events ...".
The U.K. was doubtful whether the word "events" should or could be used in this context. 
Germany suggested to retain the word "activities" instead of "acts and events". So did the 
U.K.. The Netherlands suggested to replace the word "covered by" in the first sentence by 
"regulated and conducted in accordance with ...".

4. The insertion of these words has been questioned by Norway and the U.K.

5. France recommends that no further changes be made with respect to this para..

6. Chile suggests not to introduce further changes and to remove the brackets, the Netherlands 
believe this sentence to be necessary.

7. Brackets suggested by Australia.

8. Objected to by the Netherland[s].

9. Suggested by the U.S. Delegation after Christchurch; the Netherlands object - they regard 
the reference to "rights and obligations" as limiting and they are in favour of introducing the 
phrase "concerning environmental protection (including liability)" after "other international 
instruments".

10. Chile wishes to retain para. 4 as in the 6th Offering.

11. It has been pointed out that the notion of damage should also include loss of or 
impairment to an established use and loss or or damage to property of a third party or loss of 
life or personal injury arising directly out of damage to the Antarctic environment. At the 
meeting in Brussels there was no objection to the recommendation of the Chair to postpone 
consideration of this aspect until an agreement on a regime on liability for environmental 
damage has been reached.

12. The U.K. suggestion in writing.

13. Sweden would like to clarify that it would like to see the alternative "more than minor or 
31
transitory" within brackets in article 3(1)(a) along with the other formulations.

14. U.K. suggestion.

15. According to Finnland and Sweden there is a gap between "not identified" and "identified as
an unavoidable impact."

16. U.K. suggestion.

17. The wording of para. 1 is based on Drafting Paper 11 ter of Cambridge. I was reminded
that the wording in the Draft Seventh Offering was based upon a previous version and that the
latest one at least reflected the various positions most completely. Several delegations are
against including IEEs (France, Finland, Netherlands, Sweden) others are in favour (U.K.,
USA, China).

18. Finland suggested in Christchurch to transfer subpara. (b) to article 6. This would have
consequences in respect of the reimbursement obligations of the Fund if the respective
provisions remain unchanged.

19. Art. II para. 8, Protocol of 1992 to amend the International Convention on Civil Liability for
Oil Pollution Damage, 1996; the Netherlands suggest to replace "damage" by "impact".

20. Germany preferred to retain this subparagraph.

21. See article 4 bis.

22. The concept of remedial measures has been integrated in article 5.

23. The wording is based upon paper No. 8/Rev. 1 (Australia, Brazil, U.K., Utrecht). It has
been pointed out that articles 3 bis and ter do not deal with definitions. This will be reflected
in the numbering of the Offering which is renumbering the present text.

24. Brackets suggested by Australia.

25. In Christchurch it has been pointed out that the wording as suggested in the 7th Offering
would disencourage cooperation and assistance in Antarctica. The present wording represents
the first attempt to remedy this misgiving.

26. Germany suggests the deletion of the brackets; according to the U.K. one should revert to
article 8 (11) CRAMRA or the 6th Offering. The whole concept of joint and several
responsibility requires - as has been pointed out, amongst others, by France - further
consideration from the point of view as to whether and to what extent the respective law
provides for joint and several liability.

27. The Netherlands raise the question whether one should also refer to the State as operator.

28. According to Germany the article should contain a definition of the term "operator".

32
29. It is suggested to cover operators of vessels and aircrafts in a subpara. c.

30. Based upon drafting paper 7, Christchurch (Germany/France).

31. On other occasions the Offering refers to "entity or person". This formula State Party, entity 
or person needs further consideration.

32. Based upon drafting papers No. 1; 2; 2/Rev. 1; 5; 6 and of the Chair in Christchurch and a 
paper submitted by the U.K. after Christchurch.

33. Australia suggests deletion.

34. Sweden would like to see "to the extent practicable" in article 4(1) deleted or, as a second 
best alternative, changed to "to the extent possible".

35. The Netherlands would prefer to speak of "impact" or "harm".

36. In referring to "immediate" response action the attempt is made to react to the criticism of 
several scientists. France has, however, pointed out that it would be essential to define more 
clearly what falls under "immediate" and what under "further" response action. France has 
emphasized in this context that the text should provide more clearly that also "immediate 
response action" is designed to remove the cause of the damage.

37. France has pointed out that "further response action" was designed to allow nature 
recreate (recréer les conditions de nature à permettre à l'écosystème de recouvrer son 
autonomie".

38. Sweden would like to see the term "economic feasibility" in article 4(2)(d) deleted.

39. The drafting paper of Sweden (2/rev.1, Christchurch) contained two further alternatives.

40. France has emphasized that such activities require an environmental impact assessment 
procedure in accordance with Annex I.

41. As to article 4(3), Sweden definitely prefers option B,and endorses the bracketed text. In 
Sweden's opinion, a positive formulation would be stronger, but it may be convinced to retain 
the present formula if there are good reasons therefor.

42. Article 5 would not allow for compensation with respect to response action under 4 (3) 
(bis), but could provide for compensation if the ATCM so decided (Working Paper New 
Zealand and United States).

43. U.K. proposal, objected to by France.

44. Response action means any appropriate, timely and reasonable measure to contain, 
minimize, clean up, prevent further harm [or otherwise remedy] any [impact] [damage]

33
[harm] and taken [immediately] after the incident causing the [damage] [harm] or 
[imminently] threatening to cause [damage] [harm]. The U.K. has suggested incorporating 
this definition into the text of article 4.

45. Sweden endorses article 5(1) under the assumption that the term "reasonable" does not 
introduce a further restriction on liability in addition to that restriction which follows from the 
use of the same term "reasonable" in article 4(2)(d).

46. Based upon Drafting Paper 3, Christchurch (United States); Australia sees the proposed 
version as alternative to the previous version one of the 7th Offering.

47. Sweden further sympathizes with the intention of article 5(2), but has questions 
concerning the formulation. According to Sweden it would be more appropriate to state that 
the operator is entitled to "receive" such contribution, and refer back to article 3ter.

48. Based upon drafting paper 4, Christchurch (France). This paper indicates that the question 
whether the entity should have been authorized was also a matter which should be scrutinized 
under the procedure established by article 11. The Netherlands would prefer this paragraph to be 
included in article 11.

49. U.K. proposal.

50. France has some reservation to the extent para. 1 introduces the concept of fault.

51. France suggests to speak about "toute forme d'atteinte à la biodiversité".

52. This was discussed quite controversially in Christchurch. If one does not accept that the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may come up with a binding decision, it would be 
difficult for it to help in providing a solution without resorting to adjudication. The proposal 
does not foresee that the decision of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting can be 
challenged by the Tribunal.

53. Based upon drafting paper 9 Christchurch (Argentina, Australia, Italy and Norway); 
unacceptable to U.K. and France.

54. The Netherlands suggested that such a subparagraph should be deleted since they believe 
that the Protocol also covers emergency situations. 
Finland has submitted a drafting paper (No. 8) in Christchurch on articles 3 and 6, para. 3 
which, however, was not discussed.

55. Deletion suggested by the U.K.

56. Already discussed in Utrecht. The inclusion of such a paragraph was suggested by the 
United States. Its text was modified in comparison to the original version so as to fit it into the 
Offering.

57. Germany suggested to add the following words: "if that State Party has adopted laws and
regulations and taken the necessary administrative measures, including enforcement for 
securing compliance of operators with the Protocol and its Annexes."

58. The discussion in Christchurch has indicated that this needs further specification.

59. France has stressed that such limits cannot apply to damage caused intentionally.

60. Based also upon the U.S. draft (XX ATCM/INF. 43).

61. Sweden endorses the new formulation of article 10(1)(a). There should be an explicit 
provision which provides that the Fund should be able to recover from the liable operator or 
State Party any reimbursement it has made to an entity which has taken response action.

62. Suggested by Sweden and Chile.

63. It has to be decided whether the Fund shall have legal personality and represent States 
Parties or the Secretariat.

64. Based drafting paper No. 10, Christchurch (Sweden); France suggests also to refer to the 
recompensation of advances made.

65. Germany suggests to delete para. 4.

66. Sweden has already made known its concern about the potential for proliferation of fora, 
and feels that the practical considerations outweigh principled worries related to state 
sovereignty.
Sweden has no objections concerning paras. 1, 2 and 4, but does not yet have a position 
concerning para. 3.

France emphasized that article 11 required further clarification at least in respect to the 
following points: It should be made clearer that the arbitration procedure will be retained. 
Further France considers it impossible that a State may be summoned before the national 
courts of another State.

67. Based upon the drafting paper of the Chair at Christchurch.

68. Australia suggests to also address a situation of multiple plaintiffs.

69. Based upon a U.K. paper submitted after Christchurch.

70. Australia has drawn attention to the 1958 New York Convention on the Recognition and 
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.
April 1996

PROPOSAL OF THE UNITED STATES DELEGATION

Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty

Liability for Emergency Response Action

Article 1
Purpose

The purpose of this Annex is to promote the prevention, minimization and
containment of damage to the Antarctic environment or dependent and
associated ecosystems and to provide for compensation for costs arising out
of a Party's failure to fulfill its obligations under Article 15 of the Protocol
to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental
emergencies. This Annex does not preclude the possibility of developing
additional Annexes on liability for damage as the Parties deem appropriate,
nor does it preclude liability that might otherwise arise under international
law.

Article 2
Definitions

For the purpose of this Annex only, the following terms have the following
meanings:

1. "Response action" means reasonable measures to prevent, minimize or
contain damage caused by environmental emergencies, including
determining the extent of the emergency.

2. "Reasonable" includes objective criteria such as risk to the
environment, the rate of natural recovery of the environment, risk to human
life and safety, technological and economic feasibility, practicability and
proportionality.

3. "Environmental emergencies" includes all unplanned or accidental
events, whether or not assessed in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol,
that result in, or imminently threaten to result in, any significant and harmful
36
impact on the Antarctic environment or associated and dependent 
ecosystems.

Article 3

Obligations of Parties

1.	In accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol, Parties to this Annex agree to:
	a.	provide for prompt and effective response action to 
	environmental emergencies which might arise in the performance of 
	scientific research programs, tourism and all other governmental and 
	non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which 
	advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic 
	Treaty, including associated logistic support activities, by, inter alia:
		i.	with respect to non-governmental activities, 
		implementing measures that will ensure that those undertaking 
		such activities are financially accountable for failing to take 
		prompt and effective response action in order to allow the 
		Party which provided for such response action or, if no 
		response action was taken, the Environmental Fund described 
		in Article 11, to be compensated; and
		ii.	with respect to governmental activities, ensuring that 
		prompt and effective response action is taken;
	b.	establish contingency plans for response to incidents with 
	potential adverse effects on the Antarctic environment or dependent 
	and associated ecosystems;
	c.	co-operate in the formulation and implementation of such 
	contingency plans; and
	d.	establish procedures for immediate notification of, and co-
	operative response to environmental emergencies.

2.	Parties shall take appropriate measures within their competence, as set 
forth in Article 13 of the Protocol to ensure compliance with the obligations 
set forth in paragraph 1. Parties shall also take into account relevant guidance 
provided by expert groups established under the Antarctic Treaty system, 
such as SCALOP and COMNAP.

Article 4

Liability

1.	Except as provided in Article 7, failure of a Party to fulfill its obligations 
in Article 3 (1) (a) shall entail strict liability and compensation in 
accordance with Article 6.

2.	Without prejudice to the liability of a Party under Paragraph 1 for its 
failure to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental 
37
emergencies caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships owned 
or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on government non-
commercial service, those vessels of the Parties shall be immune in 
accordance with the provisions of Article 11(1) to (3) of Annex IV to the 
Protocol.

Article 5

Response Action

1. If response action as described in Article 3 (1) (a) does not occur, other 
Parties are encouraged, while not obligated, to provide for response action.

2. In all cases in which a Party provides for response action, that Party shall 
endeavor to consult and to coordinate its action with all affected Parties to 
the extent feasible.

Article 6

Measurement of Damages and Compensation

In the event of liability pursuant to Article 4:

1. The liable Party shall be responsible for paying the costs of response 
action provided for by other Parties and undertaken pursuant to Article 5 (1). 
Such payment shall be made to the Party or Parties providing for the 
response action.

2. The liable Party shall be responsible for paying the costs of response 
action that should have been undertaken, but was not. Such payment shall be 
made to the Environmental Fund described in Article 11.

Article 7

Exemptions from Liability

A Party shall not be liable pursuant to Article 4 if the failure to fulfill its 
obligations under Article 3 (1) (a) was caused by:

1.  An act necessary to protect human life or safety; or

2.  An event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural 
disaster that would make fulfilling such obligations unreasonable.

Article 8

Limitation on Compensation

The amount of compensation for which Parties are responsible pursuant to 
Article 6 shall be limited to (FIXED DOLLAR AMOUNT).

38
Article 9

Insurance

Parties shall maintain adequate insurance (including, as appropriate, self-
insurance) or post adequate bonds for the governmental activities they 
undertake in Antarctica or dependent and associated ecosystems.

Article 10

Disputes

Disputes arising under this Annex shall be resolved in accordance with 
Articles 18, 19 and 20 of the Protocol.

Article 11

The Environmental Fund

1. There shall be established an Environmental Fund which shall be used to 
pay Parties for the following, in order of priority:

      a. activitites in furtherance of the fulfillment of Parties' 
         obligations under Article 3 of this Annex, including the costs of 
         response actions undertaken pursuant to Article 5 (1) for which a 
         Party has   been unable to obtain compensation under Article 6; or

      b. environmental clean-up in Antarctica or dependent and associated 
         ecosystems; or

      c. other purpose in furtherance of the Protocol.

2. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (the "ATCP's") shall administer 
   the Fund by consensus in accordance with terms of reference to be 
   developed and adopted.

3. With respect to Article 11 (1) (b) and (c), any Party to the Annex may 
   make proposals to the ATCP's for projects to be paid for by proceeds from 
   the Fund. The ATCP's shall call on the Committee for Environmental 
   Protection to provide advice on these proposals.

4. Any State or person may make voluntary contributions to the Fund.

Article 12

Effective Date of Operation

This Annex shall apply to environmental emergencies taking place after the 
date of entry into force of this Annex.

39
(
