 
 
 
 
PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT 
DECLARATION OF THE  XXII ATCM 
 
 
 
 
 
Last January 14, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty entered into force, a significant event that should be disseminated to 
the international community. 
 
 
 
After the Eleventh Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, held 
in Vina del Mar, Chile, an in Madrid, Spain, the Protocol adopted established a 
comprehensive regime for the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent 
and associate ecosystems, designating the Antarctic Continent and the surrounding 
ocean as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science. 
 
 
 
The said Protocol and its five Annexes form the most complete and 
adequate system within any continent for protection purposes. 
 
 
 
Mankind had never before so clearly and responsible stated its strong 
willingness to preserve, for the sake of each and every person in the world, the 
cleanliness of a vast surface of ice, lands and oceans equivalent to one tenth of the 
Earth, as well as the relevant air space. 
 
 
 
However, it should be recalled that already in 1959, ecological 
concerns were stated in the Antarctic Treaty, Article IX, paragraph (f), which 
identified “protection and conservation or Antarctic living resources” as an important 
issue to be addresses at Consultative Meetings. 
 
 
 
Likewise, the Agreed Measures adopted in 1964 for the protection of 
fauna and flora designated, for the first time, Antarctica as a “Special Conservation 
Area”. 
 
 
 
Nevertheless, after the first years of implementation of the Antarctic 
Treaty, a need has been felt to widen protective measures and to include them in a 
special body - the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
signed in Madrid on October 4th, 1991, fully implemented by now. 
 
 
 
This is the story of a great effort exerted at a continental and global 
level. To achieve this goal, nations involved showed their co-operation and highly 
responsible resolutions were adopted, meaningful interests common to mankind 
prevailing over other considerations. 
 
 
 
This Protocol, which  established an indefinite prohibition of any kind 
of activity related to the exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources, unless for 
research purposes, is a step of the Antarctic System towards its maturity, marked by 
thoughtful decision to preserve the last of the continent to the service of men, as a 
clean reservoir  and an area that privileges research, including those essential to the 
understanding of the global environment. 
 
 
 
The Committee for Environmental Protection established by the 
Protocol shall assist Consultative Meetings in improving compliance with its 
provisions. 
 
 
 
The Antarctic System, drawn upon the 1959 Washington Treaty, has 
been the first and strongest guarantee for world peace and large-scale scientific co-
operation and for the benefit of mankind in general. The implementation of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty will further the global 
struggle for a cleaner world and a better quality of life. 
 
