 
 
REPORT OF THE ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS WORKSHOP 
Tromsø, Norway 
23 May 1998 
1. Background 
At ATCM XVII a report (XVII ATCM/WP4) was tabled by SCAR and IUCN, containing 
the recommendations of a 1992 SCAR/IUCN workshop which had examined the 
Antarctic protected area system. Based on a number of these recommendations, the UK 
presented a paper to ATCM XXI (XXI ATCM/WP10) containing a number of proposals 
for improving the protected areas system, including a proposal for a further workshop on 
this topic. 
It was agreed at ATCM XXI that a workshop should be convened, and that its Terms of 
Reference should be: 
i. compare the protected areas currently designated against the categories of areas 
set out in Article 3 (2) of Annex V in order to identify gaps in the existing system; 
ii. examine the SCAR ecosystem classification matrix for protected areas to identify 
the changes that are needed so that the matrix better incorporates the categories of 
areas set out in Article 3 (2) of Annex V; 
iii. identify, where possible, areas which might be designated to fill any gaps found in 
the existing system; and 
iv. examine, and where possible identify ways to improve, the procedures for 
developing and reviewing proposals for ASPAs 
It was also agreed at ATCM XXI that participants attending the workshop should have 
appropriate expertise and include representatives from Treaty Parties, and interested 
Observers and Experts (e.g. SCAR, IUCN). 
The workshop was organised by a small Steering Committee chaired by the UK, and 
comprising representatives from Australia, Chile, Norway, SCAR and IUCN. 
Norway offered to host the workshop which was held on Saturday 23 May 1998 in 
Tromsø. The workshop was attended by 50 people from 18 Treaty Parties and 3 non-
governmental organisations. This Working Paper provides and executive summary of the 
meeting and a list of the principal recommendations. 
2. A workshop - a new way of looking at protected areas at an ATCM 
This was the first time that a protected areas workshop involving Treaty Parties and non-
governmental organisations had been organised immediately before an ATCM. The 
majority of participants at the workshop are now delegates at ATCM XXII. The 
workshop involved talks by experts followed by discussion groups and a general plenary 
discussion. This new way of working was highly productive. It provided: 
• delegates with updated information concerning the problems and opportunities 
associated with the protected area system; 
• wide participation with many people getting involved during the day as speakers, 
leaders of discussion groups or as discussion group rapporteurs; 
• an excellent way of achieving rapid, widespread agreement on the 
recommendations coming out from the workshop. 
3. Major issues 
The workshop noted the following issues: 
• There is an urgent need for Annex V to be ratified by all the ATCPs. 
• That there is no Antarctic protected areas strategy to develop a network of 
protected areas in accordance with the requirements of Annex V. 
• There is a pressing need for management plans for existing SPAs and SSSIs to be 
developed and updated in accordance with Annex V, Article 5. 
• That the status and successes of the Antarctic protected area system had not been 
communicated adequately by the ATCPs. This had led to a lack of recognition of 
what has been achieved. 
4. Recommendations 
The principal recommendations of the workshop were: 
Comparison of protected areas against categories identified in Article 3(2) of Annex V 
It was apparent to the workshop that there are gaps in the system with some protected 
areas categories as set out in Article 3(2) of Annex V very poorly represented or not 
represented at all. It was noted that designation of a site as an ASPA is only one of the 
possible ways of providing environmental protection. 
Recommendation 1 
That the ATCPs, the CEP, SCAR, and if appropriate CCAMLR, take urgent 
steps to identify possible new protected areas in the following categories: 
areas kept inviolate from human interference (Annex V, Article 3(2a)); 
representative examples of ecosystems (Annex V, Article 3(2b)). 
Consideration of the SCAR ecosystem classification matrix 
The workshop agreed that the SCAR ecosystem classification matrix is useful in some 
instance in evaluating protected area proposals. However, a revised classification system 
is now required which takes into account all the categories of areas that can now be 
designated under Article 3(2) of Annex V. There is considerable experience outside of 
Antarctica in developing systems for the classification of protected areas. 
Recommendation 2 
That the CEP, in collaboration with SCAR and IUCN, should develop new 
systems for classifying protected areas in Antarctica making good use of 
existing knowledge and methods. 
Identification of possible new areas 
Given the limited time available at the workshop a list of possible new protected areas 
was not developed. Instead, the workshop concentrated on defining the processes that 
should be undertaken to identify new areas. Such processes could include the 
establishment of a database of protected areas, compiling information on a range of 
values to be used in identifying new areas, establishing criteria and undertaking a gap 
analysis. 
Recommendation 3 
That the ATCPs, through the CEP, examine ways of establishing and 
maintaining a database on Antarctic protected areas, which could be made 
accessible electronically. 
Recommendation 4 
That the ATCPs, through the CEP, undertake a gap analysis based on the 
values for site protection identified in Article 3 of Annex V, in order to make 
recommendations for new protected areas. 
Developing and reviewing proposals 
The workshop examined ways of improving the process for the production of protected 
area management plans. Better guidance is needed for those preparing management 
plans, and those engaged in all stages of the review process. Adequate consultation prior 
to the submission of the plan is important in reducing delays. It was noted that as part of 
he 5 year review of management plans it was desirable to inspect the site under review 
and use any data gathered. 
Recommendation 5 
That the ATCPs, the CEP, SCAR and COMNAP should consider means by 
which adopted management plans and the Guidelines on the Preparation of 
Management Plans can be made as widely available as possible. 
Recommendation 6 
That the CEP should develop criteria for the 5 year review of management 
plans as required by Article 6 (3) of Annex V, and establish a standardised 
reporting system for the exchange of information as required by Article 10 
(1c) of Annex V. 
Recommendation 7 
That the CEP should consider how it can best review plans for ASPAs 
proposed because of their wilderness, aesthetic or historic values given that 
consideration of such values lie outside the relevant competence of SCAR 
and CCAMLR. 
ASPAs - the role of the CEP 
Given Article 12 (g) of the Protocol, there was agreement at the workshop that the CEP 
has a clear mandate to advise the ATCM on elements related to protected areas. The 
workshop was of the opinion that because: (a) some issues relating to protected areas 
could be readily identified at present, and (b) required specific expertise. that the CEP 
should consider the establishment of some form of sub-group(s), tasked to address 
specific issues. 
No precise recommendation was made on the composition, or functions of such a sub-
group though there was support that the group should: 
i. be open-ended, but composed only of relevant experts;  
ii. work intersessionally, by appropriate means;  
iii. report to the CEP on its findings, to enable the Committee to then provide advice 
to the ATCM.  
Terms of Reference for such a group would need to be established by the CEP, but could 
include the task of reviewing plans for consistency and clarity. 
Recommendation 8 
That the CEP consider establishing a sub-group(s) to address elements of the 
protected areas system, and select appropriate convenors for such sub-
groups. 
Recommendation 9 
That the Terms of Reference of any sub-groups be determined by the CEP. 
Recommendation 10 
That the CEP should examine the timelines for the submission and 
processing of proposed management plans with a view to improving the 
process, where possible. 
 
 
