Antarctic Treaty                                                    
XXII Consultative Meeting                                            
Traité sur L’Antarctique                                             
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                                        
Tratado Antartico                                                    
XXII Reunión Consultiva                                              
Договор об Антарктике                                                
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание                                   

                                                                     
                             XXII ATCM/WP6                       
                             April, 1998                         
                             Original: English                   
                                                                     
                             Agenda item 16                      

                                                        
                    Antarctic Treaty                         
                    Introductory Booklet                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                             Submitted by                        
                             Australia                           

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Working Paper submitted by Australia

AGENDA ITEM 16: EDUCATION ISSUES

ANTARCTIC TREATY INTRODUCTORY BOOKLET

Delegations will recall that at the XXI ATCM it was agreed that information on 
Antarctica should be more widely available to the public and to visitors to the region. 
The meeting agreed that there would be considerable value in developing a short 
document which would explain the nature, operation and achievements of the Antarctic 
Treaty system. Such a document could be included with the information provided by 
each Party to its nationals.

Australia offered to draft such a document during the intersessional period, in 
consultation via e-mail with interested Parties, and to bring forward to XXII ATCM a 
draft for consideration. In developing the text for the proposed booklet, helpful advice 
was received from Japan and New Zealand. Australia is grateful for their input to its 
development and their comments on initial drafts.

The attached draft document contains an appendix with information specific to 
Australia. We envisage that each Party would prepare a separate appendix covering 
similar information for their nationals for insertion in copies of the booklet that they 
distribute.

Parties may wish to use the attached draft document as a basis for further discussions 
on the proposed introductory booklet.
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY — AN OVERVIEW FOR VISITORS

Introduction

There are few places in the world where there has never been war, where the 
environment is fully protected, and where scientific research has priority. But there is a 
whole continent like this — it is the land the Antarctic Treaty parties call ‘... a natural 
reserve, devoted to peace and science’.

At the southern end of our world, those who share the challenges of distance and cold 
to visit the ice-bound continent have developed a tradition of warm cooperation. Such 
cooperation, unique on this scale, is cemented by the Antarctic Treaty.

As a visitor to Antarctica, you will be privileged to enter this world. This booklet will 
tell you a little about the Antarctic Treaty, and why it is a unique agreement — for a 
unique place.

Background

Antarctica is vast. It embraces the South Pole with permanent ice and snow. It is 
encircled by floating barriers of ice, stormy seas and appalling weather. Its great 
altitude chills the air to extremes, and its decent to sea level across a moving ice cap 
generates the world’s strongest winds. The cycling seasons reveal the spectacular 
natural forces of our planet. The surrounding seas teem with wildlife. And just a small 
fraction of this continent is free of ice, allowing a small toe-hold for human settlement to 
study these phenomena.

The weather and isolation dominate all who visit. The discovery and exploration of 
Antarctica was shaped by the continent’s remoteness and its extraordinarily 
inhospitable environment. These factors combined for centuries to keep mankind away 
from all but the subantarctic islands and parts of the Southern Ocean where whaling 
and sealing took place. In human historic terms, the land exploration of Antarctica is 
recent, most of it being accomplished in the twentieth century.

The improved technology and knowledge of the last 100 years allowed greater access to 
the continent, encouraging detailed surveying and research, and the gradual occupation 
of Antarctica by scientific stations. By mid-century permanent stations were being 
established and planning was underway for the International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 
1957-58. By mid-century, territorial positions had also been asserted — but not agreed.

The IGY was recognised as pivotal to the scientific understanding of Antarctica. The 
twelve nations active in Antarctica, nine of which made territorial claims or reserved 
the right to do so, agreed that their political and legal differences should not interfere 
with the research program. The outstanding success of the IGY led these nations to
agree that peaceful scientific cooperation in the Antarctic should continue indefinitely.
Negotiation of such an agreement, the Antarctic Treaty, commenced immediately.

The Antarctic Treaty

The Antarctic Treaty was signed in Washington on 1 December 1959 by the twelve
nations that had been active during the IGY (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile,
France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, United Kingdom, United States
and USSR). The Treaty, which applies to the area south of 60° South, is surprisingly
short — but remarkably effective. Through this agreement, the countries active in
Antarctica consult on the uses of a whole continent, with a commitment that it should
not become the object of international discord. In its fourteen articles the Treaty:

• stipulates that Antarctica should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes —
military activities, such as the establishment of military bases or weapons testing, are
specifically prohibited

• guarantees continued freedom to conduct scientific research, as enjoyed during the
IGY

• promotes international scientific cooperation including the exchange of research
plans and personnel, and requires that results of research be made freely available

• removes the potential for sovereignty disputes between Treaty parties by providing
that no activities will enhance or diminish previously asserted positions with respect
to territorial claims, providing that no new or enlarged claims can be made, and
making rules relating to jurisdiction

• prohibits nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste

• provides for inspection by foreign observers of ships, stations and equipment in
Antarctica to ensure the observance of the Treaty

• requires parties to give advance notice of their expeditions

• provides for the parties to meet to discuss measures to further the objectives of the
Treaty

• puts in place a dispute settlement procedure and a mechanism by which the Treaty
can be modified.

The Treaty also provides that any member of the United Nations can accede to it. The
Treaty now has 43 signatories — 26 are Consultative Parties on the basis of being
original signatories or by conducting substantial research there. Membership continues
to grow. A full list of the current parties to the Treaty appears at the end of this booklet.

Since entering into force on 23 June 1961, the Treaty has been recognised as one of the
most successful international agreements. Problematic differences over territorial
claims have been effectively set aside and as a disarmament regime it has been
outstandingly successful. The Treaty parties remain firmly committed to a system that
is still effective in protecting their essential Antarctic interests. Science is proceeding
unhindered.

Since the first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in 1961, the parties have
met frequently to discuss issues as diverse as scientific cooperation, measures to protect
the environment, and operational issues — and they are committed to taking decisions
by consensus. This process has allowed the Antarctic Treaty to evolve into a regime
with a number of components that meet the special needs of managing the Antarctic,
while protecting national interests. This regime is now known by the broader title of
the Antarctic Treaty System, which operates under the umbrella of the annual ATCM.

The Antarctic Treaty System

The Antarctic Treaty System comprises the Treaty itself as well as a number of
subordinate agreements. It also includes a range of organisations that contribute to the
work of the decision making forums.

The separate and related agreements include the recommendations, measures, decisions
and resolutions of the Consultative Meetings relating to matters such as:

• scientific cooperation

• protection of the Antarctic environment

• conservation of plants and animals

• preservation of historic sites

• designation and management of protected areas

• management of tourism

• information exchange

• meteorological data

• hydrographic charting

• logistic cooperation

• transport, communications and safety.

In addition, the Treaty Parties have put in place separate legal instruments providing
rules relating to specific issues. The development of these agreements has allowed the
implementation, with greater precision, of legally binding provisions relating to the
management of Antarctica.
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora 1964

The Agreed Measures were adopted in 1964 to protect native wildlife and plants. The provisions include a requirement for permits for interference with birds and seals, and rules to prevent the uncontrolled introduction of non-indigenous organisms. In addition, the measures provide for areas of outstanding ecological interest to be set aside as a Specially Protected Area. Sites of Special Scientific Interest were later added to protect significant scientific values.

Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals

The Seals Convention was developed to provide a means to regulate commercial sealing, should such an industry ever be resumed. Although there is no indication of any interest in sealing, the Convention provides for such activities to be undertaken sustainably. Four species of seals are totally protected and catch limits are set for others.

Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources

CCAMLR was adopted in 1980 in response to fears that unregulated fishing for krill, the centre of the antarctic food chain, might threaten the marine ecosystem. The Convention adopts an 'ecosystem approach' — it ensures that krill and all the other living resources of the Southern Ocean are treated as an integrated system where effects on predator, prey and related species are considered and decisions on sustainable harvesting levels are made on the basis of sound scientific advice. Conservation Measures under CCAMLR identify protected species, set catch limits, identify fishing regions, regulate when fishing may occur and what fishing methods must be used, and establish fisheries inspection procedures.

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

The Madrid Protocol was adopted in 1991 in response to proposals that the wide range of provisions relating to protection of the Antarctic environment should be harmonised in a comprehensive and legally binding form. It draws on and updates the Agreed Measures as well as subsequent Treaty meeting recommendations relating to protection of the environment.

The Protocol:

• designates Antarctica as a 'natural reserve, devoted to peace and science'

• establishes environmental principles for the conduct of all activities

• prohibits mining

• subjects all activities to prior assessment of their environmental impacts
- provides for the establishment of a Committee for Environmental Protection, to 
advise the ATCM

- requires the development of contingency plans to respond to environmental 
emergencies

- provides for the elaboration of rules relating to liability for environmental damage.

The Protocol is also accompanied by Annexes that detail specific measures and 
procedures relating to:

I   Environmental impact assessment — activities are assessed on whether they have 
a minor or transitory impact on the environment. At the highest level of impact a 
Comprehensive Environment Evaluation must be prepared and opportunity 
provided for the Committee for Environmental Protection and other Consultative 
Parties to comment on the proposal.

II  Conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora — Annex II updates the existing rules 
relating to protection of animals and plants (requiring a permit for interference 
with them) and relating to the introduction of non-indigenous organisms.

III Waste disposal and waste management — this Annex specifies wastes that may be 
disposed of within Antarctica and wastes that must be removed. It also provides 
rules relating to the disposal of human waste and the use of incinerators. The 
Annex requires the development of waste management plans. Particularly 
harmful products such as PCBs, polystyrene packaging beads and pesticides are 
prohibited in the Antarctic.

IV  Prevention of marine pollution — the discharge of substances from ships, 
including oily mixtures and garbage is regulated, as is the disposal of ship-
generated sewage. The Annex adopts practices broadly consistent with those 
applying in the relevant annexes of MARPOL. Disposal at sea of any plastics is 
prohibited.

V   Management of protected areas — Annex V establishes a revised protected area 
system that integrates the previous categories of protected areas into Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas (entry to which requires a permit) and Antarctic 
Specially Managed Areas. Management plans apply to both categories. The 
protected area system also provides for the designation of historic sites and 
monuments, which must not be damaged or removed.

Other components of the Treaty system

Apart from the legal instruments and agreements outlined above, the Antarctic Treaty 
System is also considered to include a number of specialised bodies that assist the 
Treaty parties in the conduct of their work. Specific tasks may be directed to these 
bodies, or they may be invited to provide observers to participate in Treaty forums.
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research coordinates Antarctic research 
programs and encourages scientific cooperation. Through its various subordinate 
groups it is able to provide expert information on a range of scientific disciplines and on 
the implications of operational proposals of the Treaty meetings.

The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs comprises the heads of each 
of the national Antarctic operating agencies. COMNAP meets annually to exchange 
logistic information, encourage cooperation and develop advice to the Treaty parties on 
a range of practical matters.

The International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators is an industry body 
representing the interests of the growing tourist trade in Antarctica. Many tour 
operators are affiliated with IAATO, which provides experts to the annual Treaty 
meetings.

The Antarctic Treaty parties have also developed a close relationship with 
environmental inter-governmental and non-government organisations that represent 
the broader community interests in conservation. Organisations such as the 
International Union for the Conservation of Nature, the United Nations Environment 
Program and the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition are also invited to the Treaty 
meetings as experts.

Bodies with technical expertise relevant to the Treaty discussions also participate. They 
include the International Hydrographic Organisation, the World Meteorological 
Organisation and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission.

Conclusion

The Treaty provided that any party could call for a review conference after the 
expiration of 30 years. No party has done so. In 1991, on the thirtieth anniversary of 
the Treaty, the parties recognised the continuing strength and relevance of the Treaty 
system by adopting a declaration recording their determination to maintain and 
strengthen the Treaty and to protect Antarctica’s environmental and scientific values.

Under the Treaty, each party has enjoyed peaceful cooperation and freedom of scientific 
research. That research has contributed significantly to knowledge of the earth and is 
contributing to the protection of the global environment. Environmental monitoring in 
Antarctica has, for example, led to the discovery of depletion of atmospheric ozone.

As the Antarctic Treaty System matures it has become recognised as one of the most 
successful international agreements, setting an example of peaceful cooperation for the 
rest of the world.

As an environmental regime it is unique — an entire continent, which is essentially 
undisturbed, will remain protected because of the commitment and cooperation of the 
Treaty parties.
ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE PARTIES (26)

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
China
Ecuador
Finland
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Korea, Republic of
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Peru
Poland
Russian Federation
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay

ACCEDING STATES (17)

Austria
Bulgaria
Canada
Colombia
Cuba
Czech Republic
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Denmark
Greece
Guatemala
Hungary
Papua New Guinea
Romania
Slovak Republic
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
INFORMATION FOR VISITORS TO ANTARCTICA

Many visitors to Antarctica will go there under the auspices of national scientific 
programs. The national programs are conducted in accordance with the requirements 
of the Antarctic Treaty, and the Madrid Protocol in particular — your operating agency 
will ensure that you are properly prepared for your activities and will advise you of 
your obligations.

Other visitors to Antarctica will be under the auspices of commercial tour operators or 
may make their own arrangements. Most tour operators are members of IAATO and 
accordingly their activities are planned to meet the requirements of the Antarctic 
Treaty. The Treaty parties accept visitors to Antarctica if they comply with the relevant 
environmental and other obligations — such as thorough planning of the expeditions 
(including prior environmental assessment) and complete self-sufficiency.

The Antarctic Treaty parties have agreed to guidelines for visitors to the Antarctic. 
These guidelines summarise the measures for ensuring the wildlife and vegetation are 
not disturbed, protected areas and research programs are respected, and activities are 
conducted with a high regard for safety. The guidelines also request operators to 
provide advance notification of their activities, confirm visits to scientific stations, 
ensure that their passengers are properly supervised and to report on their expeditions.

A small number of people make their own arrangements to visit the Antarctic. The 
guidelines also apply to such activities. The Treaty parties will consult with each other 
to ensure that such private activities are appropriately managed within the 
requirements of the Madrid Protocol.

While the obligations of the Treaty System and the requirements of the Madrid Protocol 
have been agreed internationally, they are implemented by each Treaty party in its own 
laws, according to its legal system. Visitors to the Antarctic should ensure that they are 
familiar with the legal requirements that apply to them — for example, the applicable 
laws may be those of the country where the expedition is being planned, or the country 
from which the expedition departs. The most important legal requirements relate to 
prior environmental assessment of the proposed activities and the need for permits if 
visits to protected areas are contemplated — completion of special forms may be 
required.

If intending a visit to Antarctica, early contact should be made with the relevant 
national operating agency for advice on the legal requirements. National operating 
agencies will also be able to provide further information on the Madrid Protocol and 
Treaty system requirements, copies of the guidelines for visitors to the Antarctic, and 
information on the national Antarctic programs and the availability of maps.

Further information

For visitors to the Antarctic this booklet should be read in conjunction with:

·  A visitor's introduction to the Antarctic and its environment
- Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
- Recommendation XVIII-1 — Tourism and non-Governmental activities
Information for Australia

In Australia, intending visitors should contact:

Australian Antarctic Division
Channel Highway
Kingston
Tasmania 7050
Australia

ph: 03 6232 3209 (International +61 3 6232 3209)
fax: 03 6232 3288 (International +61 3 6232 3288)
e-mail: info@antdiv.gov.au
www: http://antdiv.gov.au

The Australian Antarctic Division can assist with advice on Australia's legal requirements, including documentation required relating to environmental impact assessment and applications for permits.

Legislation applying to Australians anywhere in Antarctica, and expeditions organised in Australia includes:

• Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980 and subordinate regulations relating to environmental impact assessment, waste disposal, and seals conservation

• Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981

• Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Act 1984

Subantarctic islands

Separate legislation relates to persons intending to visit the Territory of Heard Island and McDonald Islands — contact the Australian Antarctic Division.

For visits to Macquarie Island, contact:

Tasmanian Parks and Wildlife Service
134 Macquarie Street
Hobart
Tasmania 7000
Australia

ph: 03 6233 8011 (International +61 3 6233 8011)
: 
. 
. 
: 
( 
)
