Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXII-ое Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/WP17
April, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 10

The International Code
of Safety for Ships in
Polar Waters (Polar
Code)

Submitted by
Norway
1
The International Code of Safety for Ships in Polar Waters
(Polar Code)

Introduction

An International Code of Safety for Ships in Polar Waters (Polar Code) is being developed under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization (IMO).

The development of the Polar Code was undertaken by an Outside Working Group (OWG), i.e. a working group operating outside the permanent IMO framework. The working group was lead by Canada. The membership was drawn from mostly northern states and classification societies, but was open to all IMO members.

The Polar Code aims to define a framework for ships operating in Arctic and Antarctic waters, which are areas that often pose unique challenges to operators. The Polar Code proposes to harmonize standards for the design, construction and operation of ships operating in these waters. The Polar Code further intends to harmonize the standards for existing polar vessel classification systems.

The OWG recently submitted a draft of the Polar Code to IMO, and the draft was subsequently considered at the 41^(st) meeting of the IMO Design and Equipment Sub-Committee in March 1998.

The most current draft version of the Polar Code is attached to this information paper as an appendix.

The need for a Polar Code

Ships operating in polar waters are exposed to a number of unique risks. Difficult weather and ice conditions pose challenges for mariners. The remoteness of the areas makes rescue or clean-up operations difficult and costly.

The need to apply safety standards specific to polar operations has been recognized by several national authorities, by a number of the leading classification societies, by international organizations concerned with the polar environment, and by the United Nations itself.

The Polar Code is intended to provide that all ship operations in polar waters meet internationally acceptable standards of ship safety and pollution prevention.

The Polar Code framework

The Polar Code is intended to apply to both Arctic and Antarctic waters on a voluntary basis. In considering whether the Polar Code should apply to both the northern and southern polar waters, it has been evident to the IMO Working Group

ATCM XXII WP 17                                                  1
that the traffic patterns differ, the legal regimes are different, and the history of economic development is different.  It also recognized, however, important similarities which favor a bi-polar approach to the Polar Code.

The requirements that the Polar Code sets out are therefore designed to meet the additional risks posed by operating vessels in ice, in remote areas, in both polar regions. The requirements go beyond existing requirements already applicable to operation of ships of various types and sizes.

The Polar Code's area of operation is "polar waters". In this context designated polar waters are in the south, waters south of 60° S, and in the north, the greater part of the waters north of 60° N.

It is not the intention that the Polar Code shall replace all domestic (or other regional) ship traffic management systems in the internal and coastal waters of the northern polar nations. Local systems will continue to exist there; these will remain as important supplements to the provisions of the Polar Code. The existing systems will, however, likely benefit from the simplification and consistency that is expected achieved through the Polar Code.

The Polar Code approach

The Polar Code aims to ensure the safety of navigation and to minimize the risk of accidental pollution from ship operations in polar waters.

The Polar Code takes into account that polar conditions can represent a serious structural hazard to all ships. The Polar Code address the need to ensure that all ship systems are capable of functioning effectively under anticipated operating conditions and that there exist adequate levels of safety in accident and emergency situations. In addition, the Polar Code recognizes that safe operation in polar conditions requires specific attention to human factors including training and operational procedures.

In drafting the Code, the working group has sought to improve the environmental acceptability of ships by introducing new requirements to design, construction and operation of polar vessels, e.g.:

→ reduction of cargo spills through requiring such measures as:
  • a double skin between polluting substances on board the ship and the environment
  • double hulls
  • hull stress indicators
  • intact stability requirements
  • emergency response training
  • effective damage control, minor hull repair capacity

The draft code has a short environmental chapter, but this is neither deemed adequate nor sufficient. Chapter 17 could however form a base for an environmental chapter of the code at a future stage.

ATCM XXII WP 17                                                          2
With the Polar Code in force, any new ship intended to operate in polar waters would be designed and constructed to meet requirements for the Polar Class appropriate to its planned operational areas. Polar Classes range from the highest, Polar Class 1, intended for year-round operation in all Polar waters, down to Polar Class 7, intended for summer/autumn operation in thin first-year ice with old ice inclusions.

The Polar Code aims to define harmonized standards for new ships intended for polar shipping. Exceptions will, however, be granted for existing ships. Such exceptions would apply in localized areas of easier ice conditions or adequate support or escort, but only if agreed between Flag States and affected Coastal States. The applicability and implementation of such exceptions in Antarctica is unclear in the current draft of the Code.

Further development of the Polar Code

The further processing of the Polar Code within IMO will now follow two paths:

i) Various technical chapters of the Polar Code have been disseminated to relevant technical sub-Committees and committees of IMO for review and revision.

ii) In addition, an intersessional correspondence group (lead by Canada) will further develop the non-technical elements of the code. This includes seeking the views of States which are Parties to the Antarctic Treaty regarding questions related to incorporation of Antarctic issues in the Polar Code.

Following this process the Polar Code as a whole will be considered within the IMO system, with the aim to finally adopt it as an official IMO Code . The Code is being developed as a non-mandatory document within IMO. The adoption of a final version of the Code is being attempted for the IMO Assembly meeting in 2001.

Antarctic Treaty Parties and the Polar Code

The Polar Code, whether adopted as a mandatory or a non-mandatory document within IMO, will have great bearings for future shipping regulations in Antarctica. Consequently, Antarctic Treaty Parties who are also members of IMO should be actively involved in the process in order to ensure that Antarctic issues are properly handled in the Polar Code.

Antarctic Treaty Parties that also are members of IMO should therefore consider the following actions:

- ensure that proper national authorities are aware of the proposed Polar Code and the process it is currently undergoing

ATCM XXII WP 17                                                                                                                   3
- ensure that appropriate authorities study the draft Polar Code carefully,
considering the Polar Code requirements in light of Antarctic issues and
challenges (cf. e.g. ATCM XXII WP 18 submitted by Norway and
ATCM XXII WP 13 submitted by COMNAP)

- through their national maritime authorities the ATCPs should provide
information and comments to IMO with the aim to ensure that the Polar
Code will be a practical and appropriate Code both for Arctic and for
Antarctic shipping.

ATCM XXII WP 17                                                             4
