Antarctic Treaty 
XXII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur L’Antarctique 
XXIIème Réunion Consultative
Tratado Antartico 
XXII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике 
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                                          XXII ATCM/WP10
                                          April, 1998
                                          Original: English

                                          Agenda item 7f

Historic Sites 
Management Plans 
(Sites No. 15, 18, 22)

Submitted by 
New Zealand
]
Draft Management Plan for Specially Protected Area (SPA No XX)
for Historic Site No. 18
(containing the historic "Discovery" hut of Captain R F Scott)

HUT POINT, ROSS ISLAND
(Lat. 77° 50' 50"S, Long. 166° 38'E).

1     Description of Values to be Protected

This hut was originally listed as historic site No.18 in ATCM recommendation VII-9 proposed
by New Zealand.

The hut was built in February 1902 during the National Antarctic (Discovery) Expedition of
1901-1904, led by Captain Robert Falcon Scott who later found it a valuable advance staging
point for journeys on the "Barrier" during his 1910-1913 expedition. It was also used by Sir
Ernest Shackleton during the 1907-1909 British Antarctic Expedition and later by his stranded
Ross Sea Party during the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1914-1917. This building
was prefabricated in Australia to an 'outback' design with verandahs on three sides.

The Hut Point site is one of the principal sites of early human activity in Antarctica. It is an
important symbol of the Heroic Age of Antarctic exploration and, as such, has considerable
historical and cultural significance. Some of the earliest advances in the study of earth sciences,
meteorology, flora and fauna in Antarctica are associated with the Discovery Expedition based
at this site. The history of these activities and the contribution they have made to the
understanding and awareness of Antarctica give this Area significant scientific, technical,
architectural, aesthetic and social values.

2     Aims and Objectives

The aim of the management plan is to provide protection for the Area and its features so that its
values can be preserved. The objectives of the Plan are to :

·     avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;

·     maintain the historic values of the Area through planned restoration and conservation
work which may include:
      a. an annual 'on-site' maintenance programme,
      b. a programme of monitoring the condition of artefacts and structures, and the factors
      which affect them,
      c. a programme of conservation of artefacts conducted on and off site;

·     allow management activities which support the protection of the values and features of
the Area including recording of any relevant historic data;

·     prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area, its features and artefacts through
managed access to the Discovery hut.
3    Management Activities

·    A regular programme of restoration and preservation work shall be undertaken on the 
     Discovery hut and associated artefacts in the Area;

·    Visits shall be made as necessary for management purposes;

·    Control of the number of visitors.

·    National Antarctic Programmes operating in, or those with an interest in, the region 
     shall consult together with a view to ensuring the above provisions are implemented;

4    Period of Designation

Designated under Measure X(1998) for an indefinite period.

5    Maps

Map A: Hut Point regional map. This map shows the wider environs of the Area with 
significant topographic features and the adjacent US McMurdo Station. Inset: shows the 
position of the site in relation to other protected sites on Ross Island.

Map B: Hut Point site map. This map shows the location of the historic hut, Vince's cross and 
other detail of the immediate environs.

6    Description of the Area

6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Hut Point is small ice free area protruding south west from the Hut Point Peninsula and situated 
to the west of the United States McMurdo Station.

The designated Area consists solely of the structure of the hut which is situated near the south 
western extremity of Hut Point.

6(ii)  Restricted zones within the Area
None.

6(iii)  Structures within the Area
The designated Area consists solely of the structure of the historic Discovery hut.

6(iv)  Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity
SSSI No 1 Cape Royds, is 32 kilometres north of Hut Point. SSSI No 2 Arrival Heights, is 2 
kilometres north of Hut Point on Hut Point Peninsula. SPA No 25 Cape Evans, is 22 
kilometres to the north of Hut Point. All sites are located on Ross Island.
7     Permit Conditions

Entry to the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit.

Permits shall be issued only by appropriate national authorities and may contain both general 
and specific conditions. A Permit may be issued by a national authority to cover a number of 
visits in a season. Parties operating in the Ross Sea area shall consult together and with groups 
and organisations interested in visiting the Area to ensure that visitor numbers are not exceeded.

General conditions for issuing a permit may include:

    •  activities related to preservation, maintenance, research and/or monitoring purposes;
    •  management activities in support of the objectives of this plan;
    •  activities related to tourism, educational or recreational activities providing they do not 
       conflict with the objectives of this plan;
    •  the Permit should be valid for a stated period;
    •  a copy of the permit must be carried within the Area.

7(i)  Access to and movement within the hut

Control of numbers within the hut is necessary to prevent damage caused by crowding around 
the many vulnerable features within the hut. The maximum number within the hut at any time 
(including guides) is:
                                                                   8 people

Avoidance of cumulative impacts on the interior of the hut require an annual limit on visitor 
numbers. The effects of current visitor levels (approximately 1,000 per calendar year) suggest 
that an increase of more than 100% could cause significant adverse impacts. The annual 
maximum number of visitors is:
                                                                   2000 people

These limits have been based on current visitor levels and on the best advice available from 
conservation advisory agencies (which include conservators, archaeologists, historians, 
museologists and other heritage protection professionals). The limits are based on the 
proposition that any significant increase in the current level of visitors would be detrimental to 
the values to be protected. An ongoing monitoring programme of the effect of visitors is in 
place. This will provide the basis for future reviews.

There are no designated helicopter landings sites in the vicinity of the hut as helicopters have the 
potential to damage the hut by blowing scoria and ice particles and to accelerate the abrasion of 
the hut and surrounding artefacts. Landings from the sea by boat may be made to the north of 
the hut. Vehicles may approach the hut along the road leading from the United States McMurdo 
Station.
7(ii) Activities which may be conducted within the Area
Activities which may be conducted within the Area include:
    • visits for restoration, preservation and/or protection;
    • educational and/or recreational visits including tourism;
    • scientific activity which does not detract from the values of the Area.

7(iii) Installation, modification and removal of structures
No alteration to the structure shall be made except for conservation purposes or scientific activities that do not detract from the values of the Area as specified in 1. No historic relic or artefact shall be removed from the Area, except for the purposes of restoration and/or preservation and then only in accordance with a Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Use of the historic hut for living purposes is not permitted.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area
No living animals or plant material shall be introduced to the Area.

No food products shall be taken into the Area.

Chemicals which may be introduced for management purposes shall be removed at or before the conclusion of the activity for which they are required.

Fuel or other materials are not to be left in depots in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the preservation and conservation of the historic structure or the associated relics. All such materials are to be removed when no longer required.

Use of combustion type lanterns is not permitted in the hut under any circumstances.

Smoking in the Area is not permitted.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
There are no native flora or fauna within the designated Area.

7(vii) Collection of anything not introduced by a visitor
Material may be collected and removed from the Area only for restoration, preservation or protection purposes, or scientific reasons consistent with the objectives of this plan, and only in accordance with a separate permit issued by the appropriate national authority specifically for that purpose.

Visitors must remove objects, substances and waste introduced by them during their time in the Area.
7(viii) Disposal of waste
All waste generated by work parties or visitors shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix)  Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the plan continue to be met.
The provision of information for visitors.

The development of skills and resources, particularly those related to conservation and preservation techniques, to assist with the protection of the Area's values.

7(x)  Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report Form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan. Parties should wherever possible deposit originals or copies of such reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both for review of the Management Plan and in organising the use of the site.
Map A - Hut Point, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: regional topographic map

                                 166°38'00"E         166°40'00"E         166°41'00"E         166°42'00"E
                                 
77°50'40"S




                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                              Hut Point                                                                              
                              Discovery Hut                                                             
                              Historic Monument 18                                                        
                              ASPA No. ...                                                              
                              Winter Quarters Bay                                                          
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                
Map B - Hut Point, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: site topographic map

                                                    
  166°39'30"E                                 166°38'00"E
77°50'35"S























McMURDO
SOUND
















77°50'40"S



























77°50'45"S











          Vince's Cross
          Historic Monument 17

                                                             Discovery Hut
                                                             Historic Monument 18
                                                             ASPA No: ...









                  Hut Point







0         metres       50
Note: Contours in feet
(interval: 10 ft)

                Estimated coastline
                Historic building
                (protected area)
                Roads

Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Spheroid: WGS84
Source: Hut Point historic area
management plan
Draft Management Plan for Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. XX
for Historic Site No. 22
(containing the historic huts of Carsten Borchgrevink and
Scott's Northern Party and their precincts)

CAPE ADARE
(Lat. 710 18'S, Long. 1700 09'E).

1   Description of Values to be Protected

This Area was originally listed as Historic site 22 in ATCM Recommendation VII-9 proposed
by New Zealand.

There are three main structures in the Area. Two were built in February 1899 during the British
Antarctic (Southern Cross) Expedition led by C.E. Borchgrevink (1898-1900). One hut served
as a living hut and the other as a store. They were used for the first winter spent on the
Antarctic continent.

Scott's Northern Party hut is situated 30 metres to the north of Borchgrevink's hut. It consists
of the collapsing remains of a third hut built in February 1911 for the Northern Party led by
V.L.A. Campbell of R.F. Scott's British Antarctic (Terra Nova) Expedition (1910-1913),
which wintered there in 1911.

In addition to these features there are numerous other historic relics located in the Area. These
include stores depots, a latrine structure, two anchors from the ship "Southern Cross", an ice
anchor from the ship "Terra Nova", and supplies of coal briquettes. Other historic items within
the Area are buried in guano.

Cape Adare is one of the principal sites of early human activity in Antarctica. It is an important
symbol of the Heroic Age of Antarctic exploration and, as such, has considerable historical and
cultural significance. Some of the earliest advances in the study of earth sciences, meteorology,
flora and fauna in Antarctica are associated with the two earliest expeditions based at this site.
The history of these activities and the contribution they have made to the understanding and
awareness of Antarctica give this Area significant technical, architectural, aesthetic and social
values.

2   Aims and Objectives

The aim of the management plan is to provide protection for the Area and its features so that its
values can be preserved. The objectives of the Plan are to:

    avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;

    maitain the historic values of the Area through planned restoration and conservation
work which may include;
a. 'on-site' maintenance
b. monitoring the condition of artefacts and structures, and the factors which affect them
c. conservation of artefacts to be conducted on and off site;
-       allow management activities which support the protection of the values and features of 
        the Area including;
        a. mapping and otherwise recording the disposition of historic items in the hut environs
        b. recording other relevant historic data.

        -       prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area, its features and artefacts through 
                managed access to Borchgrevink's hut.

3      Management Activities

        -       A programme of restoration and preservation work shall be undertaken on the Southern 
                Cross hut and associated structures and artefacts in the Area.

        -       Visits shall be made as necessary for management purposes.

        -       Control of the number of visitors.

        -       National Antarctic Programmes operating in, or those with an interest in, the region shall 
                consult together with a view to ensuring the above provisions are implemented.

4      Period of Designation

        Designated under Measure X(1998) for an indefinite period.

5      Maps

        Map A: Cape Adare regional map. This map shows the Cape Adare region along with the 
        boundaries of the Area with significant topographic features. It also shows the approximate 
        location of significant historical items within the Area.

        Map B: Cape Adare site map. This map shows the approximate location of specific historic 
        relics and structures within the Area.

6      Description of the Area

6(i)   Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

        Cape Adare is a generally ice free, prominent volcanic headland, at the northern extremity of 
        Victoria Land, which marks the western approaches to the Ross Sea. The Area is located to the 
        south west of the Cape on the southern shore of Ridley Beach, which encloses a large, flat, 
        triangular area of shingle. The whole of the flat area and the lower western slopes of the Adare 
        Peninsula are occupied by one of the largest Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) rookeries in 
        Antarctica. Penguins have almost completely occupied the Area and the need to avoid 
        disturbance often restricts access to the huts,
The boundaries of the proposed ASPA are:

- North, an east-west line drawn 50 metres north of the Northern Party Hut.
- East, a north-south line drawn 50 metres to the west of Borchgrevink's stores hut.
- West, a north-south line drawn 50 metres to the east of Borchgrevink's living hut.
- South, the shoreline of Ridley Beach.

Major features of the Area include Borchgrevink's Southern Cross expedition living hut and the unroofed stores hut. Scott's Northern Party hut is situated 30 metres to the north of Borchgrevink's living hut and is in a state of collapse.

In addition to these structures there are many other historic relics distributed around the Area. These include stores depots, a latrine structure, two anchors from the ship "Southern Cross", an ice anchor from the ship "Terra Nova", and supplies of coal. Many of these items are either partly or completely covered in the guano of the Adélie penguins which also occupy the Area. Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) nest in the vicinity and Weddell seals also haul up along the beach.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area
None

6(iii) Structures within the Area
Apart from a Treaty plaque all structures within the Area are of historic origin.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity
There are no other Protected Areas in the vicinity.

7       Permit Conditions

Entry to the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit.

Permits shall be issued only by appropriate national authorities and may contain both general and specific conditions. A permit may be issued by a national authority to cover a number of visits in a season. Parties operating in the Ross Sea area shall consult together and with groups and organisations interested in visiting the Area to ensure that visitor numbers are not exceeded.

General conditions for issuing a permit may include:
- activities related to preservation, maintenance, research and/or monitoring purposes;
- management activities in support of the objectives of this plan;
- activities related to tourism, educational or recreational activities providing they do not conflict with the objectives of this plan;
- the Permit should be valid for a stated period;

- a copy of the permit must be carried within the Area.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Control of movement within the Area is necessary to prevent disturbance to wildlife and damage caused by crowding around the many vulnerable historic features within the Area. The maximum number in the Area at any time (including those within the hut) is :  40 people

Control of numbers within Borchgrevink's hut is necessary to prevent damage caused by crowding around the many vulnerable features within the hut. The maximum number within the hut at any time (including guides) is : 
                                    4 people

Avoidance of cumulative impacts on the interior of Borchgrevink's hut requires an annual limit on visitor numbers. The number of visitors to the hut varies considerably from year to year but the effect of visitors to other Ross Sea area historic huts suggests that similar limits should apply. The annual maximum number of visitors is : 
                                    2000 people

These limits have been based on current visitor levels and on the best advice available from conservation advisory agencies (which include conservators, archaeologists, historians, museologists and other heritage protection professionals). The limits are based on the proposition that any significant increase in the current level of visitors would be detrimental to the values to be protected. An ongoing monitoring programme of the effect of visitors is in place. This will provide the basis for future reviews.

Helicopter landings are prohibited within the Area. There are no designated helicopter pads in the vicinity of the Area. For most of the access season it is unlikely that helicopters could be operated without causing harmful interference to wildlife.

Vehicles are prohibited within the Area. Landings from the sea by boat, or vehicles travelling on the sea ice, may be made directly onto the beach at several locations.

Movement on foot around the Area may need to be restricted to avoid harmful interference to penguins nesting around and on the structures and artefacts in the Area.

7(ii) Activities which may be conducted within the Area
Activities which may be conducted within the Area include:

- visits for restoration, preservation and/or protection;

- educational and/or recreational visits including tourism;

- scientific activity which does not detract from the values of the Area.
7(iii) Installation, modification and removal of structures
No new structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for 
conservation or scientific activities that do not detract from the values of the Area as specified in 
1. No historic structure relic or artefact shall be removed from the Area, except for the 
purposes of restoration and/or preservation and then only in accordance with a permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Use of the historic hut, or other structures in the Area, for living purposes is not permitted.

Camping is prohibited within the Area.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area
No living animals or plant material shall be introduced to the Area.

No food products shall be taken into the Area.

Chemicals which may be introduced for management purposes shall be removed at or before the 
conclusion of the activity for which they are required.

Fuel or other materials are not to be left in depots in the Area, unless required for essential 
purposes connected with the preservation and conservation of the historic structures or the 
associated relics. All such materials are to be removed when no longer required.

Use of combustion type lanterns, is not permitted in the hut under any circumstances.

Smoking in the Area is not permitted.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
This activity is prohibited except in accordance with a separate permit issued by the appropriate 
national authority specifically for that purpose.

7(vii) Collection of anything not introduced by a visitor
Material may be collected and removed from the Area only for restoration, preservation or 
protection purposes, or scientific reasons consistent with the objectives of this plan, and only in 
accordance with a separate permit issued by the appropriate national authority specifically for 
that purpose.

Visitors must remove objects, substances and waste introduced by them during their time in the 
Area.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All waste generated by work parties shall be removed from the Area.
7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the plan continue to be met
The provision of information for visitors.

The development of skills and resources, particularly those related to conservation and preservation techniques, to assist with the protection of the Area's values.

7(x) Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report Form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan. Parties should wherever possible deposit originals or copies of such reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both for review of the Management Plan and in organising the use of the site.
Map A - Cape Adare, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: regional map.

Inset: Cape Adare Peninsula, Ross Sea

SOUTHERN OCEAN                                                
Ridley         
Beach                                                                      
Robertson Bay                                                        
                                                                      
ROSS                                                                  
SEA                                                                   
Possession                                                            
Islands                                                               

                                          Cape Adare              

The Sisters                                                           
Gertrude                                                              
Rose                                                                  

Hanson's                                                              
Grave                                                                 
Historic                                                              
Monument 23                                                           

North Beach                                                           


Ridley Beach                                                          
                                                                      
ASPA. No....                                                          
                                                                      
Scott's Northern Party Hut (derelict)                                 
Borchgrevink's Hut                                                    
(Historic Site 22)                                                    

South                                                                 
Beach                                                                 

Estimated site of                                                     
1899 Provisions Depot                                                 

Boulder Rock                                                          


0            metres         500                                   
Note: Contours in feet                                                
(primary interval: 100 ft)                                            

   Estimated coastline                                                
--- Protected area boundary                                         
   Historic structures                                                
   Lagoons                                                            

Projection: Lambert conformal conic                                   
Spheroid: WGS84                                                       
Source: Cape Adare historic area                                      
managament plan                                                       
Map B - Cape Adare, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: site map

                   170°11'30"E                                 170°11'40"E  
 
71°18'30"S











                   Historic Site 22                                      
                   ASPA. No. ...                                      

                      Terra Nova                                        
                      Ice anchor                                        
                                                                          
                      Stores dump                                        
                      Borchgrevink's                                     
                      Living Hut                                         
                      Scott's Northern Party                             
                      Hut (derelict)                                     
                      Anchor (Southern Crass)                            
                      Anchor                                            
                      Stores Hut                                         
                      Stores Boxes                                       
                      Bags of coal                                       
                      Roof trusses                                       
                      Stores &                                          
                      Latrine                                            
                      Stores Boxes                                       
                      Supply Dump                                        


71°18'34"S











                                      South Beach                     






0 metres 20                                 Estimated coastline           
                                            Protected area boundary       
                                            Historic structures           

                                            Projection: Lambert conformal conic
                                            Spheroid: WGS84               

                                            Source: Cape Adare historic area
                                            management plan               
Draft Management Plan for Specially Protected Area (SPA No XX)
for Historic Site No. 15
(containing the historic hut of Sir Ernest Shackleton and its precincts)

BACKDOR BAY, CAPE ROYDS, ROSS ISLAND
(Lat. 77° 33' 10.7" S, Long. 166° 10' 6.5" E)

1 Description of Values to be Protected

This site was originally listed as Historic Site 15 in ATCM Recommendation VII-9 proposed by
New Zealand.

The hut on which this Area is centred was built in February 1908 by the British Antarctic
(Nimrod) Expedition of 1907-1909 which was led by Sir Ernest Shackleton. It was also
periodically used by the Ross Sea Party of Shackleton's Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of
1914-1917.

Structures associated with the hut include stables, kennels, a latrine and a garage created for the
first motor vehicle in Antarctica. Other significant relics in the Area include an instrument
shelter, supply depots, and a rubbish site. Numerous additional artefacts are distributed around
the Area.

Cape Royds is one of the principal areas of early human activity in Antarctica. It is an important
symbol of the Heroic Age of Antarctic exploration and, as such, has considerable historical and
cultural significance. Some of the earliest advances in the study of earth sciences, meteorology,
flora and fauna in Antarctica are associated with the Nimrod Expedition which was based at
this site. The history of these activities and the contribution they have made to the
understanding and awareness of Antarctica give this Area significant scientific, technical,
architectural, aesthetic and social values.

2 Aims and Objectives

The aim of the management plan is to provide protection for the Area and its features so that its
values can be preserved. The objectives of the Plan are to:

·     avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;
·     maintain the historic values of the Area through planned restoration and conservation
      work which may include;
      a. an annual 'on-site' maintenance programme
      b. a programme of monitoring the condition of artefacts and structures, and the factors
      which affect them
      c. a programme of conservation of artefacts conducted on and off site;
·     allow management activities which support the protection of the values and features of
      the Area including;
      a. mapping and otherwise recording the disposition of historic items in the hut environs
      b. recording other relevant historic data.
·     prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area, its features and artefacts through
      managed access to the Nimrod hut.
3    Management Activities

·    A regular programme of restoration and preservation work shall be undertaken on the 
     Nimrod hut and associated artefacts in the Area.

·    Visits shall be made as necessary for management purposes.

·    Control of the number of visitors.

·    National Antarctic Programmes operating in, or those with an interest in, the region shall 
     consult together with a view to ensuring the above provisions are implemented.

4    Period of designation

Designated under Measure X(1998) for an indefinite period.

5    Maps

Map A: Cape Royds regional map. This map shows the location of the Area in relation to the 
existing SSSI No.1 and significant topographic features in the vicinity. Inset: shows the 
position of the site in relation to other protected sites on Ross Island.

Map B: Cape Royds Area map. This map shows the boundaries of the Area and the adjacent 
SSSI No.1. Also shown are the approaches, field camp and helicopter landing sites.

6    Description of the Area

6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Cape Royds is an ice free area at the western extremity of Ross Island, approximately 40 
kilometres to the south of Cape Bird and 35 kilometres to the north of Hut Point Peninsula on 
Ross Island. The ice free area is composed of till covered basalt bedrock. The designated Area 
is located to the north east of Cape Royds adjacent to Backdoor Bay. It is immediately to the 
east of the existing SSSI No.1, an Adélie penguin rookery. The Area is centred on 
Shackleton's Nimrod expedition hut.

The boundaries of the proposed Area are:

·    South and East, by the shoreline of the eastern coast of Cape Royds including Arrival and 
     Backdoor Bays.

·    West, by a line following the boundary of SSSI No.1, from the coastline to Pony Lake 
     and then by a line following the eastern shore of Pony lake to its northern extremity.

·    North / west, by a line extending from the northern extremity of Pony Lake along a gully 
     leading to a point at 77º 33' 7.5" S, 166º 10' 13" E.

·    North, by a line extended due east from a point at 77º 33' 7.5" S, 166º 10' 13" E to the 
     coastline of Backdoor Bay.
A major feature of the Area is Shackleton's Nimrod expedition hut located in a sheltered basin.
The hut is surrounded by many other historic relics including an instrument shelter, supply 
depots, and a dump site. Numerous additional artefacts are distributed around the site.

Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) from the adjacent rookery at Cape Royds often transit the 
Area. Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) nest in the vicinity.

6(ii)   Restricted zones within the Area
None.

6(iii)  Structures within the Area
Apart from a Treaty plaque all structures within the Area are of historic origin.

6(iv)  Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity
SSSI No 1 Cape Royds is immediately adjacent to this Area. SSSI No 2 Arrival Heights, Hut 
Peninsula is 32 kilometres south of Cape Royds ; and SSSI No 11 Tramway Ridge is 20 
kilometres east of Cape Royds. SSSI No 10, New College Valley, and SPA No 20, Caughley 
Beach are located 35 kilometres north in the vicinity of Cape Bird. SPA No. 25, Cape Evans is 
12 kilometres south, and SPA No. 26, Lewis Bay is 36 kilometres to the north east.
All sites are located on Ross Island.

7       Permit Conditions

Entry to the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit.

Permits shall be issued only by appropriate national authorities and may contain both general 
and specific conditions. A permit may be issued by a national authority to cover a number of 
visits in a season. Parties operating in the Ross Sea Area shall consult together and with 
groups and organisations interested in visiting the Area to ensure that visitor numbers are not 
exceeded.

General conditions for issuing a permit may include :

    •   activities related to preservation, maintenance, research and/or monitoring purposes;
    •   management activities in support of the objectives of this plan;
    •   activities related to tourism, educational or recreational activities providing they do not 
        conflict with the objectives of this plan;
    •   the permit should be valid for stated period;
    •   a copy of the permit must be carried within the Area.
7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Control of movement within the Area is necessary to prevent damage caused by crowding around the many vulnerable features within the Area. The maximum number in the Area at any time (including those within the hut) is:
                                    40 people

Control of numbers within the hut is necessary to prevent damage caused by crowding around the many vulnerable features within the hut. The maximum number within the hut at any time (including guides) is:
                                    8 people

Avoidance of cumulative impacts on the interior of the hut require an annual limit on visitor numbers. The effects of current visitor levels (approximately 1,000 per calendar year) suggest that an increase of more than 100% could cause significant adverse impacts. The annual maximum number of visitors is:
                                    2000 people

These limits have been based on current visitor levels and on the best advice available from conservation advisory agencies (which include conservators, archaeologists, historians, museologists and other heritage protection professionals). The limits are based on the proposition that any significant increase in the current level of visitors would be detrimental to the values to be protected. An ongoing monitoring programme of the effect of visitors is in place. This will provide the basis for future reviews.

Helicopter landings are prohibited within the Area as they have the potential to damage the site by blowing scoria and ice particles and to accelerate the abrasion of the hut and surrounding artefacts. Landings may be made at the designated landing sites (see Map B.). One site is approximately 50 metres to the north of the New Zealand shelter, outside the Area. A further designated site is located 100 metres further north east.

Vehicles are prohibited within the Area. Landings from the sea by boat, or vehicle travelling on the sea ice, may be made by approaching from Backdoor Bay.

7(ii) Activities which may be conducted within the Area

Activities which may be conducted within the Area includes:

- visits for restoration, preservation and/or protection;
- educational and/or recreational visits including tourism;
- scientific activity which does not detract from the values of the Area.

7(iii) Installation, modification and removal of structures

No new structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for conservation or scientific activities that do not detract from the values of the Area as specified in 1. No historic structure relic or artefact shall be removed from the Area, except for the purposes of restoration and/or preservation and then only in accordance with a permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Use of the historic hut for living purposes is not permitted.
Camping is prohibited within the Area. An existing field camp site and a New Zealand shelter is located at the north western boundary of the Area (see Map B).

7(v)  Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area
No living animals or plant material shall be introduced to the Area.

No food products shall be taken into the Area.

Chemicals which may be introduced for management purposes shall be removed at or before the conclusion of the activity for which they are required.

Fuel or other materials are not to be left in depots in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the preservation and conservation of the historic structures or the associated relics. All such materials are to be removed when no longer required.

Use of combustion type lanterns is not permitted in the hut under any circumstances.

Smoking in the Area is not permitted.

7(vi)  Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
This activity is prohibited except in accordance with a separate permit issued by the appropriate national authority specifically for that purpose.

7(vii)  Collection of anything not introduced by a visitor
Material may be collected and removed from the Area only for restoration, preservation or protection purposes, or scientific reasons consistent with the objectives of this plan, and only in accordance with a separate permit issued by the appropriate national authority specifically for that purpose.

Visitors must remove objects, substances and waste introduced by them during their time in the Area.

7(viii)  Disposal of waste
All waste generated by work parties or visitors shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix)  Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the plan continue to be met
The provision of information for visitors.

The development of skills and resources, particularly those related to conservation and preservation techniques, to assist with the protection of the Area's values.
7(x)  Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report Form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan. Parties should wherever possible deposit originals or copies of such reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both for review of the Management Plan and in organising the use of the site.
Map B - Cape Royds, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: site topographic map

166°09'30"E                  166°10'00"E                  166°10'30"E
____________________________________________________________________
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
77°33'10"S                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|__________________________________________________________________|
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                  x                               |
|                            CAPE ROYDS                            |
|                            SSSI No.1                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|__________________________________________________________________|
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
77°33'20"S                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|__________________________________________________________________|
                         McMurdo Sound              Cape Royds         

          0 metres 50
Contour interval: 2 m

Lakes/ponds                  Protected area boundary         Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Estimated coastline         Historic building              Spheroid: WGS 1984
SSSI boundary               Helicopter landing area       Source: Cape Royds historic area 
                                                             management plan
Map A - Cape Royds, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: regional topographic map
166°05'00"E                                  166°10'00"E                                  166°15'00"E

Inset: Ross Island showing sites of nearby protected areas (underlined) and stations                  10 km

ROSS SEA

New College
Valley                                                                                              
                        Tramway Ridge
Cape
Royds                                                                                           
Cape
Evans                                                                                           
                        Mt Erebus
Ross Island                                                                                         
McMurdo Arrival Heights
Station                                                                                             
Ross Ice Shelf

77°00' S

McMurdo
Sound                                                                                               

77°30'00"S                                                                                          

0        metres         1000
Contour interval: 10 m

Lakes/ponds                  Historic building
Estimated coastline         Helicopter landing area
SSSI boundary               Landing place
Protected area boundary     

Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Spheroid: WGS84
Source: Cape Royds historic area
management plan
\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n
