Antarctic Treaty                                       XXII ATCM/WP15
XXII Consultative Meeting                             April, 1998
                                                          Original: English
Traité sur L’Antarctique                              
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                          Agenda item 9

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                        The Question of
                        Liability - Art. 16 of
                        the Protocol

Submitted by
Germany

<1203KET1>
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XXII. Consultative Meeting

Working Paper

THE QUESTION OF LIABILITY
AS REFERRED TO IN
ARTICLE 16 OF THE PROTOCOL
(Agenda Item 9 of
the Prelininary Agenda)

(Submitted by Germany)

<0903KEWP>

1) The XVIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Venice established the Group of Legal Experts and gave it the mandate „to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for damage“.

In accordance with its mandate the Group of legal Experts has concentrated on the legal aspects as reflected in the report submitted to the XXII ATCM.

2) At the same time the report identifies several „issues deserving further consideration“ and areas which need further factual clarification, e.g.

- „rules concerning the quantum of damage“ (Paragraph 6)

- „the method, that should be adopted to determine the amount of compensation of such (i.e. „unrepaired) damage“ (paragraph 31)

- „ the issue of insurance generally“ (paragraph 36)

3) The question of „limiting“ liability must take into consideration the likely financial magnitudes of potential damages as well as the feasibility of possible response actions. This in turn requires an in depth-analysis of the typical activities in Antarctica, their environmental impacts and the possibilities and probability of damage taking into account i.a. cases of environmental damage which occured in the past. Only based upon such an analysis, assessments of the costs of response actions and of reasonable remedial measures (under the circumstances of Antarctica) could be undertaken.

4) A risk and cost evaluation, as described above, would have to take into account both technical and statistical (i.e. probability) data. In order to enable insurance companies as well as international insurance associations to calculate the necessary insurances and premiums they would have to be provided with the data obtained by the in-depth analysis.

5) The workshop („Monitoring of Environmental Impacts frome Science and Operations in Antarctica“) held by SCAR and COMNAP in 1996 provided some information in this respect. The report of the Norwegian Delegation on insurance terms and conditions applicable to vessels sailing south of 60 degrees south will contain additional information. Nonetheless there is a need further to deepen the factual basis of the liability question.

6) National authorities and institutions might add further information in this regard. However, in our view, it will be essential to invite primarily the competent scientific bodies, in particular SCAR, as well as COMNAP, the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) and the CEP to submit Information Papers to ATCM XXIII containing facts, data and evaluations with regard to typical cases of damage, the financial magnitude
of potential environmental damages and the probale costs of response actions and remedial measures under the circumstances of Antarctica.

The Information Papers should
- differentiate between the type and cause of damage
- assess the average and maximum financial magnitudes of these various types of damage and, if possible, indicate the degree of probability of the occurrence of such damages.
- contain views on the type and dimension of reasonable response actions.

7) A solution of several key liability issues depend on the availibility of pertinent data and facts, i.e. risk analysis. Conclusions based on the information provided by the above-mentioned institutions should therefore adequately be taken into consideration in further negotiations on the liability annex.
