Antarctic Treaty 
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique 
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico 
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике 
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

                                           XXII ATCM/WP24
                                           May, 1998
                                           Original: English

                                           Agenda item 5c

Committee for 
Environmental 
Protection (CEP): 
A Discussion paper


                                           Submitted by
                                           United Kingdom
(no text to extract, image is blank)
COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (CEP) : A DISCUSSION PAPER

Submitted by the United Kingdom

Introduction

A principal focus of ATCM XXII, Tromso will be the implementation of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty which entered into force on 14 January 1998. The inaugural meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) established by Article 11 of the Protocol will be a particular priority.

Some elements of working practices in relation to environmental advice to the ATCM have, to a limited degree, been developed over the past three years of operation of the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG).

However, if the CEP is to function effectively from the outset as the principal advisory body to the ATCM on environmental, scientific and technical subjects, then a range of issues needs further attention from Treaty Parties (eg in relation to the Committee's composition, operating procedures, and relationship with other bodies, both within, and related to, the ATCM).

A number of pertinent issues relating to the establishment of the CEP were presented at Christchurch in Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 2/REV 1), submitted by the Netherlands/New Zealand/South Africa.

This present Paper re-traces in part some of those issues, but develops them further. It is however recommended that WP 2/REV 1 should be read in conjunction, for it remains a highly relevant bench-mark in relation to any discussions on the organisation of the work of the CEP.

1
ATCM XXII will need to address key issues relating to the CEP, 
specifically:

-   adoption of its draft Rules;

-   election of officers (Chairman, Vice-Chairmen);

-   identification of Agenda items (key issues);

-   working procedures.

Draft Rules

The draft Rules of the CEP were developed initially at ATCM 
XVII, refined at ATCM XXI and under Norway's lead further 
amendments have been made inter-sessionally.  The draft Rules 
are, to a large extent, modelled on those of the Scientific 
Committee of CCAMLR. Early adoption of the Rules will enable 
the Committee to address its substantive Agenda in a timely 
fashion.

Election of Officers (Chair and Vice-Chair) will take place, 
at least formally, at ATCM XXII following adoption of the 
Rules by the CEP, and their subsequent approval by the 
ATCM. In this respect, two parameters warrant consideration: 
that the Officers concerned should provide (a) relevant 
environmental, scientific or technical, expertise and (b) 
continuity of service. These requirements will be especially 
important in the initial years of the Committee's existence to 
provide guidance and stability.  The draft Rules do however 
allow for adequate tenure and overlapping of Chair and 
Vice-Chairs.

Competence of the Committee

The establishment of the Committee is addressed in 
Article 11 of the Protocol; its functions in Article 12. 
The Committee has neither an executive nor political role. 
Rather, the remit of the Committee (if it is to be effective) 
is to provide timely and appropriate advice on environmental 
issues to the ATCM. Despite operating under its own Rules, 
the Committee is not free-standing.  It will remain 
subordinate, and accountable to the ATCM.

2
The establishment of the CEP provides the Treaty Parties with an opportunity to strengthen the central role of the ATCM. For the first time the capacity will exist for environmental, scientific and technical advice to be dealt with "in-house" rather than, as has occurred previously, to be delegated elsewhere, however competent the outside body.

If the CEP is to address its role effectively, and to meet the criteria of Article 10 (providing the ATCM with "the best scientific and technical advice available"), then the Committee must be seen as:

i) environmentally, technically and scientifically competent (and therefore staffed as such), and

ii) non-political.

Advice from the CEP must be (and seen to be) rational and objective. To achieve this, politicisation of the composition and procedures of the Committee should be avoided at all costs, as has been done successfully by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee. Political bias, whether real or perceived, would undermine the credibility of the CEP. Such politisation would be needless in any case given that political oversight can be injected by the Plenary of the ATCM - the appropriate body politic.

Functions

The functions of the Committee are set out in Article 12 of the Protocol. This identifies eleven elements. But the list is not exhaustive. Rather, it identifies particular matters that the CEP should address. More generally the Committee's function is to provide advice and formulate recommendations to the Parties on the implementation of the Protocol and its Annexes and to perform "such other functions as my be referred to it by the ATCM".

3
All of this provides the new Committee with a daunting task.
If the functions of Article 12 are addressed too literally,
they run the risk that the efforts of the Committee will be
dissipated by attempting to do too much, too rapidly. The net
result would be a reduction in the effectiveness of the CEP's
advisory role.

To overcome this it is recommended that the Committee
should, at least in its formative years, maintain a more
narrowly focussed role. It should deal only with priority
items. Prioritisation was dealt with by XXI/ATCM WP 2/REV 1
which recommended that the eleven item shopping list of
Article 12 be reduced to five priority items. Discussion at
ATCM XXI endorsed the principle of prioritisation, and refined
the priority elements. Those are reflected in the CEP's
current Agenda. It is recommended that prioritisation and a
focussed approach should remain key issues guiding the CEP's
work.

Relationship with the ATCM

The advisory function of the CEP to the ATCM has been already
emphasised.  A key issue which requires particular attention
is the respective roles of the CEP and WG II. Although the
functions of the former are prescribed by the Protocol
(Article 12), those of the latter have not been formally
stated eg through terms of reference. But tradition and
working practice have seen WG II address various matters of
a technical, scientific or environmental nature.

Over the past three Consultative Meetings informal
accommodation has been reached on the allocation of work
between the TFWG and WG II. However, whether this working
relationship is cost-effective is open to question. Is there
duplication?  Does the Agenda of WG II contain sufficient
substance? (At ATCM XX for example, WG II had before it well
over one hundred Information Papers, yet not a single Working
(ie substantive) Paper).
Once the CEP is operational and addressing fully its 
prescribed functions, is there indeed a need to retain WG II? 
If not, what should be the timetable for its phase out, and 
how should work be distributed between the CEP and WG II 
during this period of phase out?

Relationship with ATCM Observers

The Protocol, through its Articles 10, 11 and 12, recognises 
the important contribution that SCAR can bring to the work of 
the Committee (and the ATCM). Article 10 provides SCAR with a 
"twin-tracking" approach, whereby SCAR can make input to the 
CEP, whilst at the same time retaining the ability to provide 
advice directly to the ATCM, as appropriate. Under Article 11 
both SCAR and CCAMLR, as ATCM Observers, will also be 
Observers to the Committee.

In addition, the final draft Rules of Procedure of the CEP 
(draft Rule 4) propose extending Observership to COMNAP. 
This reflects (a) the importance of COMNAP's contribution 
to the environmental, technical and logistic debate, and (b) 
recognition of COMNAP's new-found Observer status to the ATCM 
(under revised Rules, as adopted at ATCM XXI).

Tradionally, SCAR has been tasked by the ATCM to provide 
advice on a wide range of environmental, technical and 
scientific issues. Invariably SCAR has ably delivered on such 
requests. Indeed, the Treaty Parties have come to recognise 
SCAR as a major repository for such advice, even when SCAR was 
not necessarily best suited to providing such advice, or when 
such work in effect distracted SCAR from its more fundamental 
role of designing, coordinating and implementing the 
International Science Programme of Antarctica. Latterly, a 
similar position has been adopted towards COMNAP.

5
The establishment of the CEP now provides the ATCM with a specialised, in-house advisory capacity. This then raises questions as to whether the previous advisory mechanism (reliant heavily on SCAR and COMNAP) needs to be retained, and if so at what level.  A balance may need to be struck between strengthening the institutional mechanisms of the ATCM (by addressing issues in-house), and maintaining links with ATCM Observers, who individually and collectively possess considerable expertise on environmental, scientific and technical matters.

In the light of this, Treaty Parties need to reappraise their requirements for advice, and decide to what extent these should be addressed directly by the CEP or delegated elsewhere to the SCAR and COMNAP.

Working Procedures of the CEP

The draft Rules of Procedure of the CEP indicate that, wherever possible, advice from the Committee should be on the basis of consensus.  However, where consensus cannot be reached, all views, including minority views, should be expressed.  This working practice is sound for an Advisory Committee.  It parallels the procedure in place in CCAMLR's Scientific Committee and its Working Groups.

How continuity of the work of the CEP can be best maintained requires further discussion. Reliance on only an annual meeting of the CEP may well produce a "stop start" mentality. Mechanisms need to be explored to ensure that the work of the CEP maintains momentum. These might eventually include Working Groups (in a more formal sense), sub-groups, workshops/seminars, correspondence groups etc. Whichever is decided (and funding availability may well dictate the means) some form of inter-sessional work of the Committee is almost certainly desirable. But, although the draft Rules of Procedure of the CEP are modelled on CCAMLR's Scientific 

6
Committee, the unavailability of ready funds for the CEP suggests that the CCAMLR model for scientific and technical advice is almost certainly not the appropriate way forward, as yet, for the CEP. Some more simple and cost-effective mechanism might need to be found. For the moment this might for example consist of inter-sessional Correspondence Groups for each of the main Agenda items of the CEP (EIA, Protected Areas, SAER etc) with identified lead countries or conveners.

Conclusions

By virtue of Article 11 of the Protocol the CEP is now formally established, though it has yet to adopt its Rules of Procedure and have them agreed by the ATCM.

To ensure the effective operation of the CEP from the earliest opportunity, Treaty Parties need to give further thought to a range of issues related to the Committee. These include:

-   ensuring the technical and scientific integrity of the CEP is maintained (that the Committee is not politicised);

-   the relationship of the CEP to:
    a) WGII, and
    b) ATCM Observers;

-   the working procedures of the Committee, including inter-sessional dialogue;

-   funding.

MGR
PRS/FCO, London
                                                                                             7
There is no text to extract from the image. The image is blank.
\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n

