Antarctic Treaty 
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique 
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico 
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике 
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/WP11 
April, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 6

Report on the Work 
of the Intersessional 
Contact Group ... 
(SAER)

Submitted by 
New Zealand
```
REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE INTERSESSIONAL CONTACT GROUP
ON A
STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORT

Agenda Item 6

Submitted by New Zealand

BACKGROUND

1. Two papers tabled at ATCM XXI made the case for a State of the Antarctic Environment Report (SAER) - WP32: On the Need for a State of the Antarctic Environment Report submitted by New Zealand and WP19: State of the Antarctic Environment Report submitted by SCAR. These papers argued the value at both regional and global levels of a "benchmark" document on the Antarctic environment, the value of such a document for Parties in meeting their obligations under the Protocol and its Annexes, and for the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) in meeting its mandated advisory function on the state of the Antarctic environment under Article 12 of the Protocol.

n.b. - The following paragraphs are cross-referenced to pertinent paragraphs from the Final Report of ATCM XXI - numbers in square brackets.

2. The Meeting discussed concerns about the potential scope, focus, cost and production of a SAER, noted that a report could be done in several ways, and agreed that its objectives needed clarification to take into account different audiences and foci. The uses to which the Report might be put were seen to include:
i) as an archival benchmark/baseline document of global relevance;
ii) as a basis for the provision of policy guidance; and
iii) as a basis for the provision of trend analysis in environmental monitoring. [140, 141, 143]

3. ATCM XXI agreed to the formation of an open-ended contact group facilitated by New Zealand which would consider intersessionally how uncertainties about the focus of a SAER and the methodology of production might be resolved [147]. Paragraphs 139-150 of the Final Report of ATCM XXI, relating to the discussion of SAER and establishment of the intersessional contact group, are attached as Appendix 1.

4. The contact group was tasked with:
i) developing clear objectives for the Report;
ii) recommending whether the Report should be comprehensive or summary in nature;
iii) proposing a time-frame for the Report;
iv) considering the financial and human resources required to meet the proposed time-frame and scope of the Report;
v) consideration of indicative cost estimates based on different options;
vi) investigating possible sources of funding, and publication outlets;
vii) considering what progress might be made on the Report framework. [147, 148]

5. This Working Paper constitutes the report to ATCM XXII on the work of the intersessional contact group prepared by the facilitator, New Zealand. It also includes a draft Resolution on SAER.

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                  1
MODUS OPERANDI OF THE CONTACT GROUP

6. Interested Parties, observers and experts were invited to notify New Zealand by the end of June 1997 of their interest in participating in the intersessional contact group. The Final Report of ATCM XXI identified an email address at the Antarctic Policy Unit at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade in Wellington for correspondence on SAER.

7. On 18 June 1997 New Zealand diplomatic posts accredited to Antarctic Treaty Parties were instructed to approach National Contact Points, reminding them of the establishment of the contact group, enquiring whether they would like to participate in its work, and requesting names and contact details for any persons who they wished to nominate to the group by 30 June. Some preliminary draft Objectives for a SAER were also provided to initiate discussion within the group. New Zealand diplomatic posts accredited to Antarctic Treaty Parties followed up these enquiries in late August.

8. A number of Parties and experts provided detailed comments on SAER and on the preliminary Objectives distributed by New Zealand.

9. On 28 November 1997, on the basis of comments received, New Zealand circulated a Discussion Paper by email and fax to members of the contact group. This addressed the issues of Scope, Area of Application, Timeframe, Resources and Process and provided a revised Goal and Objectives for SAER. Although originally responses to this paper were requested by 15 December, this "deadline" was subsequently extended to 30 January 1998.

10. On the basis of comments received a further Discussion Paper was circulated on 13 February 1998, with an expanded treatment of Scope, Timeframe and Area of Application and new attention to the Focus and possible Audience for a report. Responses were requested by 6 March.

11. Following receipt of comments, a draft of the Working Paper was prepared, and circulated to members of the contact group on 26 March. This Working Paper draws upon the comments received.

12. New Zealand expresses its gratitude to the participants in the contact group for their detailed and positive contributions to the intersessional work. New Zealand particularly appreciates the ability and willingness of many of the respondents, for whom English is not their first language, to participate in technical exchanges in that language.

13. A listing of notified participants in the contact group, including a number added subsequent to the initial enquiries, is provided as Appendix 2.

MATTERS ADDRESSED BY THE CONTACT GROUP

GOAL AND OBJECTIVES

14. An overarching Goal statement and a set of four primary Objectives have been drawn up (below). These generic SAER statements require fine-tuning to fit the particular level of SAER that Parties decide upon. They fit reasonably well with the Compilation and Comprehensive SAER options in their present form (discussed below). However, they are likely to go beyond the reasonable expectations of a Summary option. In that case, the references to "the Antarctic environment" found in the Goal and Objectives will require some further qualification. This does not look to be a major task.

15. Policy issues are not addressed in the Objectives presented here, although there is a recognition amongst the contact group that an SAER will provide Parties with important information bearing on broader Antarctic environmental policy.

16. One Party did not share the view that an SAER would necessarily be useful at this point. It believed that it could be more useful to expend resources to develop and implement programmes to detect and minimize any adverse anthropogenic effects in Antarctica. Noting the

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                  2
work of SCAR and COMNAP on environmental monitoring, it suggested that this be carefully 
examined before further work was considered on a SAER. It expressed concern lest resources 
were used to complete an SAER which might be better used to other ends, such as developing 
and implementing programmes to document impacts on local environments.

17. Goal and Objectives for a State of the Antarctic Environment Report:

      Goal

To provide decision-makers, policy analysts and advisory bodies, including Governments 
and the Committee for Environmental Protection, with an overview of the condition of, 
pressures on, and trends in the Antarctic environment, in order to aid management of the 
Antarctic environment, and in relation to global processes, particularly pressures originating 
beyond Antarctica, which affect the Antarctic environment.

      Objectives

(i)     to identify a set of core environmental indicators; (key data drawing from inter alia, 
        SCAR/COMNAP Workshops);

(ii)    to provide a current state or condition of the Antarctic environment; (draw on current 
        scientific knowledge of the environment, identifying major areas of uncertainty and gaps 
        in knowledge, draw on reviews/audits, EIAs and monitoring programmes);

(iii)   to document the principal pressures on the Antarctic environment; (historic and current 
        local, regional and global pressures on key indicators; effects and consequences)

(iv)    to identify "current" trends in a changing Antarctic environment; (human induced and 
        natural change) through monitoring of indicators at (ii))

18. In taking issue with the Goal above, one Party felt that a more realistic goal would be to provide 
baseline information on the state of the environment in Antarctica, particularly for areas of 
existing research stations and in locations which are most often visited.

SCOPE OF THE REPORT - A Summary or a Comprehensive SAER?

19. The issue of the Scope of the SAER may be approached in two ways. Parties could make a 
decision in principle between different options of greater or lesser comprehensiveness. 
Alternatively, Parties could view SAER in developmental terms as a "staged" process. In the 
latter case a decision to produce a summary SAER in the first instance could provide Parties 
with the knowledge upon which to decide whether a more comprehensive SAER is required.

20. A staged approach does not assume that Parties will wish to develop a more comprehensive 
SAER, but is managed to enable Parties to build incrementally upon an existing SAER should 
they wish to. The contact group favours a staged approach and considers that three tiers are 
sufficient in principle.

21. Summary SAER
This could be compiled from existing information - both published and readily accessible data 
held by national and international agencies. It would provide baseline data on the current state 
of the environment and focus on impacts of human activity. The production of such a report 
would essentially entail the integration of information provided by national programmes. 
Agreement on the broad approach taken and the format of data would be necessary in order to 
ensure some compatibility and consistency of information across national contributions.

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                  3
22. Compilation SAER
A compilation of agreed key environmental information to an agreed format relating to primary 
areas of interest - (eg) climate change, ozone depletion, environs of stations, areas of research or 
logistic activity, or sites of outstanding environmental value. The production of such a SAER 
would involve development of agreed methodologies and, in the case of areas larger than 
individual stations, it may require coordination between several Parties. The components of 
such a SAER may be "regional" reports largely compiled by Parties operating in those areas. The 
SAER may address management activities such as monitoring programmes

23. Comprehensive SAER
The theoretically "comprehensive" SAER - ie the level of report which would, for the moment, 
represent "best practice" in relation to State of the Environment Reporting. In practice, a 
comprehensive approach will inevitably be patchy in its coverage, reflecting differing levels of 
scientific knowledge across Antarctic areas and issues.

24. The production of a Comprehensive SAER could involve (and acting on advice from the CEP, 
consistent with its functions under Protocol Article 12.1(j)) the specific identification of issues 
and/or geographical areas where new information is required. Such a report may entail the 
development of a substantial data-base on the Antarctic environment. A regularly updated data-
base may provide one of the primary tools allowing for periodic revision of the SAER if this 
should be required by Parties. Moreover such a data-base would have important "spin-off" 
value for the scientific community and in the generation of, or contribution to, other types of 
Antarctic reports and analyses which Parties may require.

FOCUS

25. For any SAER option the question of the focus arises. Should the report consider geographical 
areas (reflecting Parties' areas of operation and hence the distribution of knowledge), specific 
issues (eg atmosphere, oceans, or particular environmental pressures, etc) or a combination of 
both (as in some national State-of-the-Environment reports)? The contact group believes that a 
combination of both is likely to be required for any SAER option.

26. The level of coordination necessary amongst Parties increases with the comprehensiveness of the 
SAER. If components of a SAER are assembled on a regional basis it may be possible for a group 
of interested Parties to work together as already occurs with multinational Antarctic science 
collaboration (eg the Cape Roberts and Concordia projects). Where continent-wide issues such 
as the state of the atmosphere or other generic issues arise, a far greater level of coordination 
amongst Parties will be required.

AUDIENCE

27. There is broad agreement across the contact group that the primary audience for SAER are 
national managers and decision-makers, and the Committee for Environmental Protection, with 
an important secondary audience in the science community. Any SAER should aim to be 
scientifically rigorous and be of sufficient reliability for managers to have confidence in it when 
making decisions. If a data-base is developed in the context of producing a more Comprehensive 
SAER, this may be of particular value to the scientific community. SAER may also have value as 
a source for broader public education about Antarctica.

AREA OF COVERAGE

28. Members of the contact group were evenly split between those who saw the natural boundary 
for Antarctica, and hence any SAER, as provided by the Antarctic Convergence, and those who 
felt that the area of the Antarctic Treaty itself should be adopted. However, a primary focus on 
the area south of 60 degrees South latitude, with some flexibility on more northerly coverage 
depending on the issue, would appear to be an appropriate way of meeting Parties' concerns.

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                         4
29. Particularly for a "Summary" option, the area of coverage would likely be more circumscribed than the entire Antarctic Treaty area.

30. Uncertainties about the practical interpretation of "dependent and associated ecosystems" suggest that their coverage may be problematical. The contact group discussions indicate that attention to these might best be left to an SAER option beyond the summary level.

TIME-FRAME

31. Two components to the question of SAER time-frame need to be considered: (i) the time taken to produce a SAER and (ii) the time-horizon of that SAER.

32. The following production times have been suggested for the SAER options canvassed:
        Summary             1-3 years
        Compilation         5 years
        Comprehensive       up to 10 years

33. As regards the SAER time-horizon, there is broad agreement that its lifetime should project about 5 years beyond its delivery date for the Compilation or Comprehensive options. For a Summary option the time-horizon may be shorter - of the order of 2-3 years.

COSTS - HUMAN AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES IMPLICATIONS

34. Costs for the three SAER options canvassed are difficult to quantify at this point. A number of members of the contact group have proposed that the time and data costs associated with SAER should be met internally by appropriate national agencies.

35. Indicative cost estimates:
        Summary             US$200,000
        Compilation         circa US$1,000,000 (over 5 years, based on The State of New Zealand's Environment Report)
        Comprehensive       a conservative estimate over 10 years for a continent-wide report may be circa US$5,000,000

36. As with many other SAER factors, work on a Summary SAER should place Parties in a better position to ascertain the possible cost implications for Compilation or Comprehensive SAER.

37. Anticipated costs obviously rise with increasing comprehensiveness of the SAER. For a Summary SAER, the figure above represents the anticipated costs of integrating national contributions into a single continent-wide document and its publication costs. For Compilation and Comprehensive options, far greater coordination between Parties and agencies is required - and in the case of a Comprehensive SAER, de novo data acquisition may be required.

38. The facilitator notes that the Cape Roberts scientific programme has shown that a group of Parties working together on a project can achieve substantial reductions in cash costs via payment-in-kind contributions.

39. In all cases, publication costs will vary depending upon the media selected and the amounts of data presented - and these factors are coupled, since large amounts of data may only be feasible if CD-ROM capabilities are involved.

40. Based on New Zealand domestic experience, the major cost components in the production of a SAER will be for:
        (i) Specialist expertise - including drafting - from individuals and agencies;
        (ii) Project management - staff time and contracting costs for a body or bodies having core responsibility;
        (iii) Peer review

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                        5
(iv) Pre-production costs such as editing and page layout;
(v) Printing and publication;
(vi) Launch and distribution.

POSSIBLE SOURCES OF FUNDING

41. No substantive discussion on this issue occurred, beyond the suggestion that costs be met via contributions in kind by national Antarctic institutions. The question, and importance, of funding sources may depend upon the SAER option preferred. The higher costs likely to be associated with the Compilation or Comprehensive options may necessitate dedicated funding. However, Parties will need to determine whether, in the case of the Summary SAER option, additional funding sources are required, or whether these costs can be met from current sources.

REPORT FRAMEWORK

42. No substantive discussion on this issue occurred within the contact group. However, a Draft Structure for SAER has been provided by SCAR in XXI ATCM/WP19 which may provide a helpful starting point for discussions on structure within a CEP sub-group or working group.

RECOMMENDATION

43. On the basis of the work carried out by the intersessional contact group, New Zealand, as facilitator, proposes a draft Resolution for consideration by ATCM XXII. The text of this is attached at Appendix 3.

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                                      6
Appendix 1

Mandate for the Intersessional Contact Group - pp 29-31 Final Report ATCM XXI

Item 14: Environmental Monitoring and State of the Antarctic Environment

(139) New Zealand and SCAR presented Working Papers (ATCM XXI/WP 32 and 19 respectively) 
on the need for, and suggested structure of, a State of the Antarctic Environment Report (SAER). 
Discussion then focused on the potential benefits and concerns facing Parties in the production of 
such a report, and on ways in which it might be taken forward.

(140) Parties acknowledged that a SAER could provide a valuable benchmark against which 
environmental change might be monitored and impacts measured, and that it might provide a 
valuable synthesis of the large and diverse amount of scientific information available. The 
discussions noted that such a report could be done in several ways, each with a differing focus and 
level of detail.

(141) The Meeting raised concerns about the potential scope, focus, cost and production of an SAER, 
noting that while there are numerous models for State of the Environment reporting elsewhere, an 
Antarctic report was likely to be a comprehensive undertaking. Existing world experience of SOE 
reporting suggested that the more comprehensive a report, the greater the time and financial 
resources required.

(142) Parties noted New Zealand's intention to prepare a framework for a Ross Sea Region State of 
the Environment Report (SOE-RSR) by the year 2000 in consultation with other countries active in 
the region. While it was acknowledged that this regionalised report could be used as a pilot for a 
larger, continent-wide report, it was felt that commencement of work on the SAER should not be 
tied to the timing or the completion of the SOE-RSR.

(143) The Parties agreed that the objectives for the SAER needed clarification to take into account 
different audiences and, consequently, foci for the Report. Uses to which the Report might be put 
include:
    i)      as an archival benchmark/baseline document of global relevance;
    ii)     as a basis for the provision of policy guidance; and
    iii)    as a basis for the provision of trend analysis in environmental monitoring.

(144) The Meeting agreed that any one, or combination, of these uses might be appropriate and the 
approach should be clearly established by the ATCM before work on the SAER began.

(145) It was suggested that it could be useful for the SAER to distinguish the process of data 
collection, validation, and compilation, in which SCAR would play a major role, from the process of 
providing advice and formulating recommendations, which would have to be done by the 
TEWG/CEP.

(146) The Meeting noted that the Antarctic scientific community could be expected to play a major 
role in the preparation of the report. It expressed its appreciation for the work that SCAR had 
already done in preparing draft guidelines and a schema for the Report. SCAR had identified a 
number of organisations with the relevant specialist capabilities which might usefully be consulted 
in the development of the SAER.

(147) The Meeting agreed to form an open-ended contact group facilitated by New Zealand to 
consider intersessionally how uncertainties about the focus of a SAER and the methodology of 
production might be resolved, and to report back to ATCM XXII. The contact group would be 
tasked with:
    i)      developing clear objectives for the Report;
    ii)     recommending whether the Report should be comprehensive or summary in nature;
    iii)    proposing a time-frame for the Report;

Report on intersessional work on SAER
                                                                   7
iv)      considering the financial and human resources required to meet the proposed time-
         frame and scope of the Report; and
v)      considering what progress might be made on the Report framework.

(148) The Meeting noted that there was likely to be a range of options involving possible financial 
commitment from Parties. The contact group should consider preparing indicative cost estimates 
based on different options, investigate possible sources of funding and potential outlets for 
publication.

(149) New Zealand’s offer to coordinate the work of the contact group prior to ATCM XXII was 
gratefully accepted by the Meeting. New Zealand was asked to facilitate the intersessional work of 
the contact group by correspondence, including email, and to report back to ATCM XXII. The 
Meeting noted that such intersessional work should take account of the financial, technical and other 
resource implications for participants in the production of a SAER.

(150) The Meeting agreed that the project should be open to the widest participation by Parties, 
observers and experts, and that interested Parties, observers and experts should notify the New 
Zealand national contact point by the end of June 1997 of their interest in participating in the 
intersessional work to be carried out by the contact group. (Contact is apu@mft.govt.nz).

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                                    8
Appendix 2

Members of the Intersessional Contact Group notified to New Zealand

ARGENTINA             jmacero@abaconet.com.ar          Mr. Jose Maria Acero
AUSTRALIA             tom_mag@antdiv.gov.au           Mr. Tom Maggs
BRAZIL                cogen@mma.gov.br                Mr. Jose Correa Machado Neto
CHILE                 dtorres@inach.cl                Prof. Daniel Torrrres Navarro
                      Amb. Oscar Pinochet de la Barra
CHINA                 chinare@public.bta.net.cn       Ms. Lina Tao
FINLAND               paula.kankaanpaa@vyh.fi         Mr. Paula Kankaanpaa
FRANCE                Fax: (33) (2) 9928-1425         Prof. Paul T[?]hen
GERMANY               ulrike.doyle@uba.de             Dr. Ulrike Doyle
INDIA                 pdast@alpha/nic.in              Mr. Prabhl Das
ITALY                 in[?]nazio@enea.pnra.it         Dr. Pietro Giuliani
                      prog-scie@enea.pnra.it          Dr. Luana Testa
JAPAN                 siichi.urauchi@mofi.go.jp       Mr. Seiichi Urauchi
KOREA                 iahn@sari.kordi.re.kr           Dr. In-Young Ahn
NETHERLANDS           bastmeijer@dimz.dgm.minvrom.nl  Mr. Kees Bastmeijer
NEW ZEALAND           apu@mft.govt.nz                 Dr. Alan Hemmings
NORWAY                njaastad@tromso.npolar.no       Dr. Birgit Njaastad
                      orheim@tromso.npolar.no         Prof. Olav Orheim
POLAND                ndbirken@cyf-kr.edu.pol         Prof. Krzysztof Birkenmajer
SWEDEN                anders@internet.kvg.se         Prof. Anders Karlquist
UK                    saad.fco@g[?]net.gov.uk         Dr. Michael Richardson
                      jshears@pcmail.nerc-bas.ac.uk   Dr. John Shears
USA                   jjatko@nsf.gov                  Dr. Joyce Jatko

CANADA                103221.1637@compuserve.com      Dr. Olav Loken
                      Fax (1) (613) 997-5813          Dr. Fred Roots

SCAR                  arcampo@usp.br                  Prof. Antonio Rocha Campos
                      f.davey@gns.crl.nz              Dr. Fred Davey
                      execsec@scar.demon.co.uk        Dr Peter Clarkson
CCAMLR                ccamlr@ccamlr.org               Mr. Esteban De Salas
COMNAP                g.wratt@antarcticnz.govt.nz     Ms. Gillian Wratt

ASOC                  m.depoorter@auckland.ac.nz      Dr. Maj De Poorter
IAATO                 dschoeling@aol.com             Mr. Darrel Schoeling
IUCN                  antarctica@tgc.org              Ms. Beth Marks Clark
UNEP                  tony.edwards@unep.no            Mr. Tony Edwards

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                  9
Appendix 3

DRAFT RESOLUTION ( ) 1998
State of the Antarctic Environment Report

The Representatives,

Noting the responsibility of the Committee for Environmental Protection to provide advice to the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment;

Considering that the determination of the current state of the Antarctic environment is necessary for the effective implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty by providing vital baselines against which any future changes in the environment as a result of natural or anthropogenic influences might be measured;

Acknowledging the work of SCAR and COMNAP on environmental monitoring and protection;

Agreeing that the production of a State of the Antarctic Environment Report will assist the work of the ATCM;

Considering that a State of the Antarctic Environment Report will also be an important demonstration to the international community of the Antarctic Treaty System’s commitment to comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment;

Invite the Committee for Environmental Protection to:

1.      facilitate the production of a Summary State of the Antarctic Environment Report, drawing upon the expertise of SCAR, COMNAP, CCAMLR and other appropriate experts;

2.      report back to the ATCM on the framework, time-lines and costs for this State of the Antarctic Environment Report and on the steps which Parties, observers and appropriate expert groups might take to progress work on it.

Report on intersessional work on SAER                                  10

2
5
o
o
p
r
s
