DEVELOPING THE PROTECTED AREAS SYSTEM IN ANTARCTICA 
 
 
1. The very successful Antarctic Protected Areas Workshop broke new ground in providing 
an informal yet effective forum for discussion of scientific and technical subjects at an 
Antarctic Treaty Meeting.  Such a forum clearly offers advantages in the future for 
examining some of the difficult subjects within the remit of the CEP.  There are, 
however, limits to what can be achieved in a single day. 
 
2. The terms of reference were too limited for the Workshop to provide recommendations 
on all the aspects of Protected Areas but it was able to identify some major fields of 
concern for the attention of the CEP. 
 
3. Of especial concern to SCAR is the recognition that there is no coherent protected areas 
strategy to address the requirements of Annex V.  The Workshop considered the 
classification systems used both inside the Antarctic and world-wide to identify the 
categories encompassed by various types of protected areas (for example which organism 
groups or habitat features were included) and noted that each provided some useful 
features.  However, there is an urgent need for a single strategy to provide the framework 
within which the present activities can be organised and could link Antarctic protected 
areas to similar activities elsewhere. 
 
4. There already exist various documents which provide elements of a possible strategy and 
from these and a discussion of scientific experts it should be possible to develop a 
strategy which meets the following requirements: 
• 
identifies the key objectives of Antarctic conservation; 
• 
identifies the major threats to Antarctic flora, fauna and landscape and thus provides 
priorities for action; 
• 
proposes how the objectives can be achieved by using the range of protected areas 
defined in Annex V, Article 3. 
 
 
Such an approach would also provide a framework within which various other activities 
would have a clear place.  For example it would encompass: 
• 
criteria for assessment of existing and proposed protected areas; 
• 
the continued improvement of the guidelines for the preparation of management 
plans; 
• 
the links between the management of specific types of Antarctic protected areas and 
the classifications adopted for protected areas in other parts of the world (for example 
Nature Reserves, National Parks etc) 
 
5. It is the view of SCAR that agreeing such a strategy is fundamental to any future 
development of the protected area system.  It would provide the framework within which 
many of the technical recommendations made by the Workshop would be most 
effectively and coherently addressed as well as linking Antarctic conservation practice to 
that of the rest of the world. 
 
6. SCAR believes that this is a key task for the CEP and suggests that an international 
scientific workshop should be convened to provide the next meeting of the CEP with 
such a draft strategy.  SCAR would be happy to contribute to such a workshop in any 
way. 
