Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/WP21
April, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 7f

Antarctic Protected
Area System. Historic
Sites and Monuments.
South-West Coast of
Elephant Island.

Submitted by
United Kingdom

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

SOUTH-WEST COAST OF ELEPHANT ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

In 1971, in the course of the first ground survey of Elephant Island, South Shetland Islands, Lieutenant Commander M K Burley, RN found a considerable amount of wreckage in a small cove on the south-west coast of Elephant Island (map 1; cove coordinates:  61° 14'S, 55° 22'W).  A sample of small pieces of timber was brought back to Britain and in January of this year, they were given to the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI), University of Cambridge, with a half serious suggestion that they might come from Sir Ernest Shackleton's ship, Endurance.

In March of this year, the UK's Ice Patrol Vessel, HMS Endurance was tasked with visiting the cove and making a survey and description of the present state of the wreckage.  A diagram of the wreckage from this recent survey is provided as map 2.  In the meantime, some of the timber brought back in 1971 has been undergoing radio carbon and dendrochronological examination in an attempt to date the wood.

It is clear from HMS Endurance's report that the wreckage comes from a substantially built sailing ship.  Records indicate that twelve sealing ships sank in the vicinity of the South Shetland Islands between 1819 and 1877 and that the only two other sailing ships to have been wrecked since, were Otto Nordenskjold's Antarctic, sunk in Erebus and Terror Gulf in 1903, and Shackleton's Endurance.  While the probability is that the wreckage is of a sealing ship, it is not impossible to see how wreckage from the later ships could have reached Elephant Island.

Media Interest in the UK in this wreckage, that has arisen as a result of the recent investigations has ensured wide publicity.  Until such time as its possible provenance can be more readily identified, it is felt appropriate that the site should be protected.

1
It seems likely that closer identification of the wreckage will require a further visit to the cove and it is considered important that the site should not be disturbed in the meantime.

At the suggestion of the United Kingdom Antarctic Heritage Trust, the United Kingdom therefore proposes that a section of the south-west coast of Elephant Island, between the southern side of Mensa Bay (61° 10'S, 55° 24'W) and Cape Lookout (61° 17'S, 55° 13'W) be temporarily listed as an Historic Site and that this listing be reviewed at a time when the historical significance of the relics will be better understood.  A draft Measure is attached.

Further background information is given at Annex 1.

2
DRAFT MEASURE ..... (1998)

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

SOUTH-WEST COAST OF ELEPHANT ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16
and XIV-8;

Noting the urgent nature of the case for protecting the site
of historic relics on the south-west coast of Elephant Island;

Aware that the historical significance of these relics is
still not known and that further research on site may be
necessary;

Considering that Historic Site status should be conferred on
the site until such time as its historical significance is
better understood;

Recommend to all Consultative Parties that:

The following site be added to the "List of Historic Monuments
Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or
Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9 and that
thereafter it be accorded the respect and protection required
by the Recommendations recalled above:

The south-west coast of Elephant Island between the southern
side of Mensa Bay and Cape Lookout, including all of the
foreshore and intertidal areas, in which the wreckage of a
large wooden sailing ship has been found and requires further
investigation in an attempt to identify the
ship.

 
3
Annex 1.

THE INTERESTS OF THE UNITED KINGDOM ANTARCTIC HERITAGE TRUST 
IN THE WRECKAGE FOUND ON ELEPHANT ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND 
ISLANDS, ANTARCTICA.

The aims of the United Kingdom Heritage Trust are to preserve 
Britain's Antarctic Heritage, both in Antarctica and Britain, 
and to increase the awareness of the British public regarding 
that heritage. An important element of the Trust's work is to 
help their colleagues in the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage 
Trust and who have done a great deal over many years to 
preserve the huts of Scott and Shackleton on Ross Island.

Following a news item in the UK's Naval Journal Navy News 
(April 1998), about pieces of wreckage of a substantially 
built wooden sailing ship which had been found on Elephant 
Island, there has been speculation that the wreckage might 
have come from Sir Ernest Shackleton's ship Endurance, which 
was abandoned in the Weddell Sea in October 1915 and was 
believed to have sunk.

The wreckage was surveyed by a party from the UK's Ice 
Patrol Vessel, HMS Endurance, on 7 March 1998. It consists of 
about 12 pieces of mast, hull and decking. It is unusual to 
find wreckage concentrated in one place unless the ship, or a 
substantial part of it, broke up close to where the wreckage 
lies. So it is highly possible that these pieces of wreckage 
came from the same ship, and it should be possible to 
identify the age of the ship. In this regard pieces of mast 
with their tree rings are likely to be particularly valuable, 
but no samples have yet been taken. However, pieces of wood 
brought back in 1971 by a UK Joint Services Expedition, which 
did the first survey of Elephant Island, may provide a first 
approximation of the age of the wreckage.

Because of the speculation that the wreckage was from a 
British ship and because the pieces collected earlier had been 
deposited in the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI), 
University of Cambridge, the Trust felt that the available 
evidence should be analysed without delay. Co-ordinated by 
SPRI, work is now proceeding in other departments of the 
University.

The Trust is conscious that the wreckage may not be from 

4
Endurance, nor indeed from Antarctic the ship of Otto Nordenskjold's Swedish expedition which sank in Erebus and Terror Gulf in 1903. If the wreckage is from either of these ships it should be possible to say which ship it was. If however, the wreckage is older that either of these two ships, the choice widens to about 12 sealing ships which were wrecked or sank in the vicinity of the South Shetland Islands between 1819 and 1877. In this case an individual identification will be a great deal more difficult.

Relics from the early days of Antarctic exploration are rare and the Trust is anxious to throw what light it can on the provenance of this wreckage. In the event that the relics are identified as being of a nationality other than British, the Trust would relinquish its interests accordingly.

5
MAP 1. ELEPHANT ISLAND AND WRECKAGE SITE
Map 2  Wreck Site on SW Coast of Elephant Island

(NOT TO SCALE)

A - E  PARTS OF MAST
F - G  PARTS OF HULL & DECKING
H  -  H  PARTS OF HULL & DECK

