Antarctic Treaty                                                    
XXII Consultative Meeting                                            
                                                                     
Traité sur L’Antarctique                                             
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                                         
                                                                     
Tratado Antartico                                                    
XXII Reunión Consultiva                                              
                                                                     
Договор об Антарктике                                                
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание                                   
                                                                     
                                     XXII ATCM/WP13                  
                                     April, 1998                     
                                     Original: English               
                                                                     
                                     Agenda item 10                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                      The Polar Code                                 
                      for Shipping                                   
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                     Submitted by                    
                                     COMNAP                         
WORKING PAPER
ON
THE POLAR CODE FOR SHIPPING

ATCM XXII
Tromso Norway
May 25- June 5 1998

Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs
XXII ATCM/WP13

COMNAP
Working Paper on the
POLAR CODE

BACKGROUND

1.      At ATCM XXII it was noted that a draft Polar Code for shipping is to be considered by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) during 1998. The meeting considered that the technical issues raised in this Code should be discussed at ATCM XXII (Final Report of ATCM XXI, para 19 & 98). COMNAP subsequently considered the technical aspects of the Code and has identified a number of issues relevant to national Antarctic operators.

APPLICATION OF THE POLAR CODE TO THE ANTARCTIC

2.      The principal objective in developing the Polar Code is to harmonise and improve the structural and operating standards for ships operating in polar waters. The Code is not intended to be a stand-alone document, but rather to supplement other existing IMO conventions including SOLAS, MARPOL and STCW.

3.      The draft Polar Code has been developed by a committee of experts drawn predominantly from Northern Hemisphere countries and countries with coastlines bordering the Arctic. As a consequence the Code has, to a large extent, been influenced by considerations of the ice navigation conditions that prevail in northern Polar waters.

4.      Because there are no coastal states and safe ports in close proximity to the Antarctic, the lack of port infrastructure and the difficulty of dealing with emergency situations must be taken into consideration to a greater extent than in the Arctic. Nevertheless, the Polar Code's regulations for the construction and operation of ice-strengthened vessels and icebreakers could, following further development, be applied to vessels for Antarctic operations.

5.      COMNAP believes that there are a number of special features of the Antarctic that need to be taken into account when reviewing the Polar Code, namely:

- The extended distances between established ports and "safe" anchorages, which can present a considerable challenge to shipping.

- Special regulations for the discharge of oil, garbage and noxious liquids and litter in the Antarctic are already applied under MARPOL 73/78 [including Annex I (Oil), Annex II (Noxious Liquids), Annex IV (Sewage), and Annex V (Garbage)]. By designating Antarctica a "special area" IMO has already given the Antarctic special consideration with regard to oil pollution, noxious liquids, sewage and garbage. Annex IV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty also regulates these types of discharges.
2

-   The regular ocean trading routes of the world avoid Antarctic waters therefore ship traffic in the area is, to a great extent, specialised. In general, (with the exception of one nation, the United States, who annually employ a fuel tanker and a cargo vessel for one voyage each) Antarctic operators do not use large cargo ships, oil tankers or chemical-carrying ships in Antarctic waters. There is, however, a considerable traffic of research vessels in the area (that also serve as re-supply vessels for land based stations) together with cruise ships and fishing vessels.

-   Arctic and Antarctic ice are different. The Antarctic, a continent surrounded by oceans, develops very little multi-year sea ice. Each year a considerable area of the sea ice around the Antarctic melts. A major exception is in the Western Weddell Sea but this ice, which is subject to a significant gyre, is typically rotated out of the Antarctic within two years.

6.  It is therefore important to consider the Polar Code in the light of the special conditions that apply to the Antarctic and consider the merits of either developing separate regulations in the code (or include an Annex) for Antarctic vessels, or limiting the scope of the Code to the Arctic.

DISCUSSION POINTS

7.  The following points are presented for consideration by ATCM XXII:

7.1 In view of the vast differences between the Arctic and Antarctic with respect to distances, regimes, governance and commerce, should the Polar Code be applied to both Polar regions?

7.2 If the Code is adopted for the Antarctic, it is suggested that the Code should include a description of the Antarctic Treaty System, perhaps as an Annex to the Code. Furthermore, it is recommended that the development of any sections of the Code pertinent to the Antarctic be undertaken with the full cognizance and input of Antarctic ship operators as represented by COMNAP and IAATO.

7.3 No pollutants should be carried directly against the shell of ships operating in the Antarctic. If this requirement is applied to oil/fuel carried by non-tankers, then a proposal for alterations in Regulation I to MARPOL 73/78 is required. Such a proposal has already been supported by COMNAP for new ship construction. For existing ships, this would require major structural changes to vessels that are likely to prove impractical. If pollutants also include substances other than oil/bunkers, the proposal would have to include alterations to several Annexes of MARPOL (III, IV and V).

7.4 For Antarctic operations, shipboard emergency plans and emergency response should be based on the Protocol for Environmental Protection as well as IMO standards. The Oil Pollution, Preparedness, Response and Cooperation (OPRC) requires regional solutions to oil spill response be developed. MARPOL 73/78 Annex 1, Rule 26, requires that a response plan be available on board vessels.

In addition, Article 15 of the Protocol requires each Party to provide for prompt and effective response actions to such emergencies as might arise from activities in the Antarctic, and the establishment of contingency plans for responses to incidents. Annex IV of the Protocol also requires the development of contingency plans for marine pollution response.
3

7.5   Fuel transfers from ship to shore in the Antarctic should adhere to the 1992 
      COMNAP Guidelines. IMO issues a manual for the prevention of oil pollution 
      (Oil Pollution Manual Part I) embodying advice on how to avoid oil spills during 
      fuel transfer operations by ships. COMNAP has formulated its own guidelines for 
      national Antarctic operators and a copy will be made available to IMO for 
      consideration.

7.6   According to Record I in MARPOL 73/78, all ships are to report to the closest 
      coast radio station when an oil spill or possible oil spill occurs ensued by incidents 
      in connection with the operation of the ship. COMNAP has issued guidelines on 
      the reporting of oil spills and these should be considered by IMO for inclusion in 
      the Code, should it be adopted for the Antarctic.

7.7   The transport of bunker fuel for ship propulsion in the Antarctic treaty area should 
      be limited to diesel only; with the introduction of heavier ship fuel or bulk oil 
      products by special permits only. The proposal to prohibit the use of heavier ship 
      fuel by the ships in the Antarctic area (south of 60°S) was recommended by 
      COMNAP in 1992 as follows:

      "that members of COMNAP agree:

      i)    to use light, non-persistent fuels in the Antarctic Treaty Area whenever 
            practicable and possible; and

      ii)   specify engines using light diesel fuel for the construction of new vessels 
            intended for service in Antarctica."

      [Note: A survey conducted by SCALOP for the 1992/93 Antarctic shipping season 
      indicated that 34% of the vessels used by national Antarctic operators and 40% of 
      the tourist vessels use medium or heavy fuels for ships bunkers (Proceedings of 
      Sixth Symposium on Antarctic Logistics and Operations, Rome, August 1994)].

7.8   There should be special training and qualification requirements for ship's officers 
      and crew for operation in the Antarctic. It is assumed that the STCW convention 
      (for training of ship's crew) is open for such a regional adjustment. However, it is 
      very important that such a definition (which COMNAP supports) is handled 
      through the proper channels in IMO with input from national Antarctic operators. 
      It may be considered appropriate for COMNAP to develop guidelines on training 
      requirements that could be presented to the ATCM.

7.9   Special navigation/communications equipment standards for the Antarctic should 
      be considered if Antarctica is included within the scope of the Code. A further 
      tightening of the requirements is needed. COMNAP believes that there are special 
      conditions in the Antarctic, which necessitate other regulations being developed. 
      Perhaps guidance on navigation/communication equipment should also be 
      developed by COMNAP and presented to the ATCM.

7.10  The Code should take note of the potential liability related to Antarctic ship 
      operations that stem from the Protocol on Environmental Protection. This matter 
      is dependent on the resolution of the Liability Annex to the Protocol on 
      Environmental Protection.
4

7.11   The Protocol contains several other special environmental requirements involving 
        environmental impact assessment and monitoring, protected areas, waste 
        management, etc. If the Antarctic were to be included in the Polar Code, it would 
        need to be cognizant of, and consistent with, these additional environmental 
        protection measures already established by the Protocol.

7.12   Aircraft operations in the Antarctic conducted from ships should comply with the 
        requirements of the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM).

7.13   Reference to "coastal state" in the code should be amended to clarify the situation 
        in the Antarctic if a common code for the Arctic and Antarctic is adopted. The 
        Code also contains numerous references to "Antarctic authorities" which would 
        need to be revised.

7.14   It is essential that all international shipping regulations be established by the IMO. 
        Regulations for the Antarctic agreed by Antarctic Treaty nations are of limited 
        value if ships of non-Treaty nations are not obliged to comply with them.

CONCLUSION

8.      COMNAP wishes to emphasise that matters relating to ship design and ship safety should 
        be handled by the IMO. It is important that the relevant expert committees of the IMO consider the 
        Polar Code in detail taking into account the matters raised by ATCM XXII. Nevertheless, the 
        ATCM may also wish to refer specific matters to COMNAP for the development of further input to 
        the IMO (e.g. training, navigation/communication equipment, fuel transfer and contingency 
        planning). It is also noted that Antarctic agencies can, when necessary, provide comments to their 
        respective national maritime authorities and thereby continue to participate in the further 
        development of the Code via these channels.

9.      COMNAP wishes to emphasise that there are vast differences (e.g. distances, ice regimes, 
        governance, commerce) between the Arctic and the Antarctic. Any regulations that pertain to the 
        Antarctic need to be written with a full understanding of the conditions and the governance of 
        operations in that very unique area of the world and cannot be readily extrapolated from regulations 
        written for the Arctic.
