Antarctic Treaty                                  XXII ATCM/WP16
XXII Consultative Meeting                        April, 1998
                                                     Original: English
Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva                           Agenda item 8

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-ое Консультативное Совещание

                                  Emergency Response
                                  Action and
                                  Contingency
                                  Planning

                                                     Submitted by
                                                     Germany
:
<1203KET2>

ANTARTIC TREATY

XXII. Consultative Meeting

Working Paper

EMERGENCY RESPONSE
ACTION AND CONTINGENCY
PLANNING

(Agenda Item 8 of the Prelininary Agenda)

(Submitted by Germany)
I.

1.      Resolution 1 on emergency response action and contingency planning, which was adopted at ATCM XXI in Christchurch, focuses on an important aspect of the wider issue of safety of operations in Antarctica. Germany shares the view that there is a need for consultation and action in this area. There must be a sustained effort to give practical effect to the mandate in Article 15 of the Environmental Protocol, which entered into force on 14 January 1998. Germany believes a pragmatic approach is called for so that concrete progress can be achieved as soon as possible.

2.      Resolution XXI/1 identifies some of the areas where consultation and action are deemed necessary and which are to be discussed at ACTM XXII. Information papers to be presented by COMNAP and IAATO as well as steps to be taken under paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Resolution will also form the basis of the discussions.

        In Germany's view there is a need to distinguish clearly between steps to be taken
        (a) on land and 
        (b) at sea, taking into consideration Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol. Distinguishing between the Antarctic marine and terrestrial environment is of practical relevance with regard to the various international conventions for the protection of the marine environment (e.g. MARPOL, Code of Polar Navigation etc.). In this regard it is not necessary to extend the provisions of Annex IV of the Protocol on „Prevention of marine pollution“. Where adequate safeguards for the Antarctic exist under other generally applicable Conventions the establishment of a separate regime covering activities at sea in the Antarctic Treaty area should be avoided (reference is made to the evaluation under II.).

        As far as the Antarctic terrestrial environment is concerned, however, no such regime exists. Here special provision is warranted and necessary.
- 2 -

II.

1.     As far as marine oil pollution is concerned, the greatest environmental hazard connected with ship-related incidents, the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL 73/78) stipulates that as of 4 April 1995 all oil tankers over 150 tons gross and all other vessels over 400 tons gross must carry ship-board emergency plans. The new Regulation 26 in Annex I of the Convention stipulates that vessels must carry shipboard oil pollution emergency plans approved by the Administration. Under Regulation 26 (2) these contingency plans must comply with IMO Guidelines. This means therefore that the Guidelines for the development of shipboard oil pollution emergency plans approved by the Marine Environment Protection Committee of the IMO in Resolution MEPC.54 (32) of 6 March 1992 are binding under international law.

      These Guidelines were published in Germany in the Official Transport Bulletin of the Federal Ministry of Transport (VkBl. 1994, p. 833) on 7 December 1994. The regulatory body in Germany responsible for their application is the See-Berufs-genossenschaft (Seamen's Accident Prevention and Insurance Authority) in conjunction with German Lloyd or other authorized classification society.

      The important point is that, in accordance with Regulation 26, the existence of such contingency plans must be documented in a vessel's IOPP certificate and is thus, under Article 5 of MARPOL, fully subject to the control of the port state.

      In this area Germany considers that no further action is required.

2.     As of 1 July 1998 for passenger ships, oil tankers, chemical tankers, gas carriers, bulk carriers and high-speed freighters of 500 tons gross or over, and as of 1 July 2002 for other freighters and mobile offshore drilling units of 500 tons gross or over, the new Chapter IX on safety management systems in the Annex to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) of 1974 will come into force. This means that the International Management Code for the Safe Operation of Ships and for Pollution Prevention (ISM Code) will be binding under international law.
- 3 -

In order to ensure ship safety and protection of the marine environment, the ISM Code stipulates that a comprehensive safety management system is to be developed, implemented and maintained, and that such a system must cover

- both the shore-based Company
- and the ship itself.

Such comprehensive safety management systems are to be authorized by the flag states, calling where necessary on the services of recognized organizations (classification societies) and are, in keeping with quality assurance principles, to be certified by means of two documents, viz.

- the document of compliance for the Company and
- the Safety Management Certificate for the individual ship.

Under Regulation I/19 and Regulation XI/4 SOLAS, compliance with these requirements is in all respects subject to port state control.

Safety management systems must provide specifically for

- instructions and procedures to ensure safe operation of ships and protection of the environment in compliance with relevant international and flag state legislation (item 1.4.2, ISM Code)

- defined levels of authority and lines of communication between, and amongst, shore and shipboard personnel (item 1.4.3, ISM Code),

- procedures for reporting accidents and non-conformities with the provisions of the Code (item 1.4.4, ISM Code)

- procedures to prepare for and respond to emergency situations (item 1.4.5, ISM Code), and

- procedures for internal audits and management reviews (item 1.4.6, ISM Code).
- 4 -

Obviously, safety management systems must ensure that all relevant laws and regula-
tions, including notably the environmental protection provisions applicable to Antarc-
tica, are complied with and appropriate contingency and emergency plans put in place.

This will address the need to ensure the safety of maritime operations in Antarctica 
and protect its marine environment also in areas other than oil pollution contingency 
planning as envisaged in Regulation 26 of Annex I MARPOL.

Here, too, Germany considers that no further action is required.

3.	The IMO is currently drafting the International Code of Safety for Ships Navigating in 
Polar Waters (Polar Code), which under the SOLAS, MARPOL and „Standard of 
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping“ Conventions is to be applicable worldwide. 
For vessels operating north of 60° N lat. and south of 60° S lat. in ice-bound waters 
(with the exception of the Baltic and the Sea of Okhotsk) the Code lays down 
standards

-	for ship construction (e.g. ice-strengthened hulls, double-panelled cargo and 
bunker tanks),

-	equipment regulations (e.g. fire safety, rescue and nautical equipment) as well as

-	operational regulations (e.g. special operating rules in ice-bound waters, risk 
management, qualifications and training, emergency equipment, environmental 
monitoring regulations).

At its last session in January 1998 in Hamburg an international expert group adopted 
and forwarded the draft of the Polar Code to the competent IMO bodies for further 
deliberation and decision. It is envisaged that the Polar Code should be world-wide 
applicable by the year 2001.

With regard to the areas covered by the Polar Code, the Consultative Parties should 
focus exclusively on the ongoing work in the IMO, which both technically and organi-
zationally is the appropriate international forum for the establishment of universally 
valid and recognized norms. There is no point in the Consultative Parties setting up a
- 5 -

special regime, which would for example be difficult to operate and enforce vis-à-vis countries that are not Treaty Parties.

III.

Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning are complex issues. In the view of Germany the first priority should be to discuss and determine what practical action is required in what terrestrial areas. For the purpose of initiating this process, COMNAP should be invited

- to give an overview over the measures and steps taken so far especially with regard to stations and logistic operations,

- to indicate, in which fields of activities is to be expected the higest risk potential and hence where prevention should be focused and concentrated.

- to submit proposals as to how internationally agreed guidelines for Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning should complement respectively replace existing measures and plans.

Once there is agreement on what concrete steps and actions are to be taken and in what specific areas there is a need for emergency response action and contingency planning, subsequent decisions should be taken with a view to implementing further the provisions of Article 15 in an appropriate form.
