Antarctic Treaty
XXII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur L’Antarctique
XXIIème Réunion Consultative

Tratado Antartico
XXII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание

XXII ATCM/WP5
April, 1998
Original: English

Agenda item 7f

Guide to the
Preparation of
Management Plans -
Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas

Submitted by
the Secretariat
There is no text to extract from the image. The image appears to be a blank white page with some minor marks and a small black rectangle on the left side, but it does not contain any text.
GUIDE TO THE PREPARATION OF MANAGEMENT PLANS
FOR
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

At XXI ATCM, SCAR presented Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP18)
setting out a draft Guide for the Preparation of Management
Plans for Specially Protected Areas.

The Meeting considered that the Guide required further
improvements before its adoption could be considered.

In line with the intersessional procedures agreed at ATCM
XXI, this Paper is the product of further revision and sets
out a revised draft of the Guide.
GUIDE TO THE PREPARATION OF MANAGEMENT PLANS 
FOR 
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS 

CONTENTS                     Page 
Introduction                  1 
Purpose of this Guide         2 
Format of Management Plans for ASPAs  3 
Approval Process for Management Plans 15 

APPENDICES 

1. Text of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol (on Area 
   Protection and Management). 
2. Moe Island Management Plan. 
3. Guidelines for the production of maps. 
4. Reporting forms for visits to ASPAs. 
5. Select Bibliography 
6. Contact list.
GUIDE TO THE PREPARATION OF MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR ANTARCTIC
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS.

1. INTRODUCTION

Activities in Antarctica are governed by the Antarctic Treaty
of 1961, which applies to the area south of 60 degrees South
Latitude, including all ice shelves.

The concept of setting aside areas for special protection was
introduced in 1964 when the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties (ATCPs) adopted the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna.  Under these and
subsequent measures five categories of protected areas were
established:

-Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)
-Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)
-Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs)
-Specially Reserved Areas (SRAs)
-Multiple-use Planning Areas (MPAs)

The Recommendations addressing the last two categories have
not entered into force.  In 1991 the ATCPs adopted the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
to ensure comprehensive environmental protection in
Antarctica.  The Protocol designates the whole of Antarctica
as "a natural reserve devoted to peace and science".

Annex V to the Protocol, adopted subsequently at ATCM XVI
under Recommendation XVI-10, rationalises the protected area
system.  It introduces two new site designations:  Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially
Managed Areas (ASMAs).  On entry into force of Annex V, all
SPAs and SSSIs will become ASPAs.
Annex V of the Protocol requires Management Plans to be 
produced for ASPAs and ASMAs for which Management Plans were 
not previously adopted. Annex V also prohibits entry into 
ASPAs except in accordance with a permit issued by an 
appropriate national authority in accordance with the 
requirements of the Management Plan. The text of Annex V is 
reproduced at Appendix 1 to this Guide.

1.1 ASPA Values.

Article 3 of Annex V of the Protocol states that any area, 
including any marine area, may be designated as an ASPA so as 
to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, 
aesthetic or wilderness values and sets out a series of such 
values which ATCPs shall seek to incorporate into ASPAs.

In considering any new proposal for an ASPA, thought needs to 
be given as to how protected area status would address the 
values identified in Article 3 of Annex V, and whether such 
values are already adequately represented by protected areas 
in Antarctica.

To assist in the identification of new protected areas, the 
Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR) developed 
a matrix-framework, classifying terrestrial, inland water and 
marine ecosystems (Bonner and Smith (1985)). Further detail 
on the matrices is provided by Smith (1994).

2. PURPOSE OF THIS GUIDE.

The objectives of this Guide are:
-to assist in the preparation of Management Plans for ASPAs;
-to help achieve consistency of Management Plans and to 
expedite their review, adoption and implementation;
-to help ensure that Management Plans meet the requirements 
of the Protocol.
Caution:

This guide is intended as no more than an aid memoir to the 
production of Management Plans for ASPAs;  it has no legal 
status. Anyone intending to prepare a Management Plan should 
examine the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol carefully 
and seek advice from their national authority at an early 
stage.

3. FORMAT OF MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR ASPAs.

Annex V outlines the requirements of Management Plans and its 
Article 5 specifies the format that Management Plans should 
follow.  The headings used in this Guide have been structured 
to follow that format, though for brevity the headings have 
been shortened (see Table 1).

Management Plan Section                         Article 5 Reference

Introduction                                        
Description of Values                           3 a
Aims and Objectives                             3 b
Management Activities                           3 c
Period of Designation                           3 d
Area Description                                3 e (i - iv)
Identification of Zones                         3 f
Maps                                            3 g
Supporting Documentation                        3 h
Terms and Conditions for entry Permits          3 i (i - x)

Table 1. Headings used in this Guide are cross-referenced to 
Article V.
In 1995 at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) XIX, Resolution 9/95 was adopted. This recommended that the Moe Island (SPA number 13) Management Plan be regarded as a model for the preparation of new and revised Plans for ASPAs.  The Moe Island Plan is provided in Appendix 2. Since the development of Management Plans for ASPAs is an evolving process, more recent examples of Management Plans, agreed at subsequent ATCMs, should also be referred to. Those preparing Plans should be aware of current best practice.

3.1 Introduction.

An introduction to the Management Plan is not a stated requirement of Article 5 of Annex V, but might provide a useful opportunity for a brief overview.  Information might include a summary of the important features of the site, its history, the scientific research and other activities that have been carried out there.

Reasons why special protection is deemed necessary or desirable for a site should also be stated in the Management Plan, preferably in the introduction.

3.2 Description of values.

Justification for the site's designation should be given.  A description of the value or values of the site should state why it is that the site deserves special protection and how site designation will strengthen protection measures.

For example, if the designation of the site is intended to prevent interference with ongoing or planned scientific investigations this section should describe the nature and value of the intended research.
In cases where the intent is to protect the value of sites as reference areas or controls for long-term environmental monitoring programmes, the particular characteristics of the area relevant to long-term monitoring should be described. 
In cases where site designation is being conferred to protect histcric, ge]logical, aesthetic, wilderness or other values, those values should be described in this section.

In all cases the description should provide sufficient detail to enable readers to understand precisely what the site designation is intended to protect and how the Management Plan will achieve that aim.

3.3 Aims and Objectives.

This section should establish what is intended to be achieved by the Management Plan and how the Plan will address protection of the values described above. For example the aims of the Plan might be to:

-avoid any major changes to the site;
-prevent any human interference;
-allow only certain forms of research.

If the site contains a marine area the following objective might be included if appropriate:

-ensure protection to research which contributes to the objectives of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

A marine area requiring approval of the CCAMLR Commission has been defined by ATCPs and CCAMLR as an area in which:

- there is actual harvesting or potential capability for harvesting of marine living resources which might be affected by site designation; or
- there are provisions specified in a draft management plan that might prohibit or restrict CCAMLR-related activities.
3.4 Management Activities.

Management activities outlined in this section should relate 
to the aims of the Management Plan and to the objectives for 
which the site was designated.

There should be a clear indication of what is prohibited, 
what should be avoided or prevented as well as what is 
allowed.  The Plan should make it clear when permitted 
activities can take place.  For example some activities may 
only be allowed outside the breeding season of sensitive 
species.

This section should describe such actions as will be required 
to protect the particular values of the site (eg installation 
and maintenance of scientific instruments, or signs 
indicating that the site is an ASPA and that entry is 
prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an 
appropriate national authority).  If the management 
activities require cooperative action by two or more Parties 
conducting or supporting research in the area, the 
arrangements for carrying out the required activities should 
be jointly developed, and described in the Management Plan.

It is important to remember and to note in the Management 
Plan that active management may require an environmental 
impact assessment to be undertaken in accordance with the 
requirements of Annex 1 of the Protocol.

If no special management activities are required, this 
section of the Plan should state, "None required".
3.5 Period of Designation.

Designation of an ASPA is for an indefinite period unless the 
Management Plan provides otherwise.  It is a requirement 
under Article VI (3) of Annex V that the Management Plan is 
reviewed at least every five years, and updated as necessary.

If the intent is to provide protection for a finite period, 
while a particular study or other activity is conducted, an 
expiry date should be included in this section.

3.6 Description of the Area.

This section requires an accurate description of the site and 
its surrounding area to ensure that individuals planning to 
visit the site and national authorities responsible for 
issuing permits are sufficiently apprised of the special 
features of the area.

It is important that information relates adequately to those 
features of the site that are being protected, thus alerting 
users of the Management Plan to features of particular 
sensitivity.

The section is divided into four subsections:

3.6.1 Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural 
features.

The site should be delineated as unambiguously as possible 
and the important features of the site clearly described as will

The geographical co-ordinates should be as accurate as 
possible.  They should be given as latitude and longitude and 
should be accurate to within minutes, or seconds for small 
sites.  If possible, reference should be made to published
maps or charts to allow the site boundaries to be delineated 
on the map.  The survey and mapping methods employed at the 
site should be stated if possible along with the name of the 
agency producing the maps or charts referred to.

The boundary of the site should be carefully selected and 
described.  It is pr?ferable to describe a boundary that is 
identifiable at any time of the year.  This is often 
difficult due to snow cover in winter, but at least in summer 
it should be possible for any visitor to determine the limits 
of the site.  For sites near to areas frequented by tourists 
this is especially important.  It is best to choose static 
boundary markers such as exposed rock features for the site.  
Features such as the edges of snow fields or glaciers are not 
always suitable.  In some instances it may be advisable to 
install boundary markers where natural features are not 
sufficient.

When describing the physical features of the site, only place 
names formally approved by a Consultative Party should be 
used.  All names referred to in the text of the Plan should 
be shown on the maps.  Unofficial place names should not be 
used and the gazetteers published by several of the 
Consultative Parties should be used to determine the 
acceptable name(s) for particular features.  Where additional 
names are known to apply they might usefully be included in 
bracketed subtext.  If a new place name is needed, approval 
will be required by the appropriate national committee before 
using the new name on any maps and before submitting the 
plan.

The natural features of the site should include descriptions 
of the local topography such as permanent snow/ice fields, 
the presence of any water bodies (lakes, streams, pools) and 
a brief summary of the local geology and geomorphology.  An 
accurate, brief description of the biological features of the 
site is also useful including notes on major plant 
communities;  bird and seal colonies and numbers of
individuals or breeding pairs of birds. The locations of 
colonies or nesting areas and the presence of any seal 
haul-out sites, should be shown on attached maps.

3.6.2 Access to the area.

This subsection should include descriptions of access routes 
to the site by land, sea or air. These should be clearly 
defined to prevent confusion and suitable alternatives 
provided if the preferred route is unavailable.

All access routes as well as marine anchorages and helicopter 
landing areas should be described and clearly marked on the 
accompanying map of the site. Helicopter landing areas 
should usually be located well outside the site's boundaries 
to ensure minimum interference with the integrity of the 
site.

The subsection should also describe routes within the 
area.

3.6.3 Location of structures within and adjacent to the site.

It is necessary to describe and accurately locate all 
structures within or adjacent to a designated site. These 
include boundary markers, sign boards, cairns, field huts, 
depots and research facilities. Where possible the date the 
structures were erected and the country to whom they belong 
should be recorded, as well as the details of any HSMs in 
the area.

3.6.4 Location of other protected areas in the vicinity.

There is no guidance as to the radius to be used when 
describing other sites "in the vicinity", but a distance of 
up to 50km has been used in plans adopted so far. All such 
protected areas (ie ASPAs, ASMAs, HSMs, CCAS Seal Reserves, 
CCAMLR CEMP sites etc) in the vicinity should be given by
name and, where appropriate, number together with the
approximate distance and direction from the site in question.

3.7 Special Zones with the Area.

Special zones within the site might be established in which
activities are prohibit d, restricted or managed so ?s to
achieve the aims and objectives of the Management Plan.  For
example, special zones might include bird colonies to which
access is restricted during the breeding season or sections
of the site where access is prohibited for specified
scientific reasons.  The reasons for the establishment of the
zones should be stated in the Management Plan together with
clear descriptions of the zones and their boundaries.  The
zones should also be clearly identified on the accompanying
maps.

If there are no prohibited, restricted or specially managed
zones within the site, the Management Plan should state this.

3.8 Maps.

Maps are a critical component of any Management Plan and
should be clear and sufficiently detailed.  Maps should be
capable of retaining all detail if reduced or photocopied.
Several maps may be necessary for a given Plan, but the
minimum is likely to be two: one showing the general area in
which the site is situated, as well as the position of all
nearby protected areas; and a second map illustrating the
details of the site itself.

It is essential that the maps clearly indicate the
boundary of the Protected Area as described under section
3.6.1 above.

The recommended criteria for maps are set out in Appendix 3
together with a check-list of features to be included.
3.9 Supporting Documentation.

This section should refer to any additional documents that 
may be relevant to the management of the site. These may 
include any scientific reports or papers describing the 
values of the site in greater detail, although as a general 
rule the various comp?nents of the site and the intender? 
management activities should be explained in the various 
sections of the Management Plan itself. Any such papers or 
supporting documents should either be fully cited or appended 
as annexes to the Management Plan.

3.10 Terms and Conditions for Entry Permits.

Article 3(4) of Annex V of the Protocol, specifies that entry 
into ASPAs is prohibited except in accordance with a permit 
which may be issued by the National Authority.

The Management Plan should set out the conditions under which 
a permit might be issued. When drafting Management Plans, 
authors should note that the authorities appointed to issue 
permits for entry into ASPAs will use the contents of this 
section to determine whether, and under what conditions, 
permits may be issued.

Article 7(3) of Annex V of the Protocol directs that each 
Party must require the permit holder to carry a copy of the 
permit whilst in the ASPA. This requirement should be 
included in the terms and conditions of any permit issued.

Article 5 of Annex V sets out 10 separate issues that need to 
be addressed when considering the terms and conditions that 
might be attached to permits. These are set out below:
3.10.10 Requirements for Reports.

This section should describe the requirement for reports that should be included as a condition in permits issued by National Permitting Authorities.  It should, as appropriate, specify the information that should be included in reports.

SCAR has developed a visit report form that could be useful in this regard. National permitting authorities may wish to make use of the SCAR form a condition of permits that they issue.  The SCAR visit Report Form is reproduced in Appendix 4 of this guide.

It may be useful to give a deadline by which time reports of a visit to the site must be made (eg within six months).

4.  APPROVAL PROCESS FOR ASPA MANAGEMENT PLANS.

Most draft Management Plans are put forward by Parties for adoption by the ATCM.  However, a draft Management Plan can also be submitted by the CEP, SCAR or CCAMLR under Article 5 of Annex V of The Protocol.

The process by which Management Plans are handled from drafting through to acceptance is summarised by the flow chart in Figure 1.  This is based on the requirements of Article 6 of Annex V.

In the initial stages of drafting the Management Plan, it is recommended that widespread consultation, both nationally and internationally, is undertaken on the scientific, environmental and logistical elements of the Plan as appropriate.  This will aid the passage of the Plan through the more formal process at the ATCM.
3.10.6 Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora 
and fauna.

This is prohibited under Article 3 of Annex II of the 
Protocol except in accordance with a permit issued under the 
provisions of Annex II; this should be stated in the 
Management Plan. The requirements under Article 3 of Annex 
II must be used as the minimum standard.

3.10.7 The collection or removal of materials not imported by 
the permit holder.

It may be permissible to remove from the site, materials such 
as beach litter, dead or pathological fauna or flora or 
abandoned relics and artifacts from previous activities. 
What items or samples can or cannot be removed by the permit 
holder should be clearly stated.

3.10.8 Disposal of waste.

Annex III of the Protocol deals with the management of wastes 
in Antarctica. The requirements set out in Annex III must be 
used as the minimum standards for waste disposal in an ASPA.

All wastes should be removed from the site. Exceptions, 
which are in accordance with the provisions of The Protocol, 
should be identified as appropriate in the Management Plan.

3.10.9 Measures that may be necessary to continue to meet the 
aims of the Management Plan.

Under this section it is useful to establish the conditions 
under which the issue of a permit may be necessary so as to 
ensure continued protection of the site. For example it may 
be necessary to issue permits to allow for monitoring of the 
site; to allow for repair or replacement of boundary markers 
and signs; or to allow for some active management as set out 
in section 3.4 above.
3.10.4 Location of Field Camps.

It is likely that field camps would not usually be permitted
within the boundaries of the site. However it may be
permissible under certain conditions such as overriding
reasons of safety. If so the conditions under which field
camps may be permitted should be stat?d. It is possible that
field camps would only be acceptable in certain parts of the
site.  Such campsites should be identified and recorded on
the supporting maps.

3.10.5 Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be
brought into the site.

This section should set out prohibitions and give guidance on
the management of any materials that are to be used or stored
in the site. There is a complete prohibition on the
introduction of non-native species, parasites and diseases
under Article 4 of Annex II of The Protocol, except in
accordance with a separate permit issued under the Authority
provided for in Annex II.

It may be necessary, for example, to bring some chemicals
into the site for research or management purposes.  If so
guidance should be provided as to how they must be stored,
handled and removed. It may also be necessary to bring food
and fuel into the site, and guidance about the use, storage
and removal of such materials should be given.

In some instances special precautions may need to be taken to
prevent the introduction of non-native species.  If for
example the site has been designated for its special
microbial flora, it may be necessary to require all boots to
be cleaned before entering the site or that sterile clothing
should be worn within the site.
3.10.1 Access to, and movement within or over, the Area.

The Management Plan should set out restrictions on the means 
of transport, points of access, routes and movement within 
the site. It should also address the direction of approach 
for aircraft and the minimum height for overflying the site. 
Such infor?ation should state the type of aircraft (eg fixed 
or rotary wing) on which the restrictions are based.

3.10.2 Activities which may be conducted in the Area.

This should detail what may be undertaken within the 
protected area and the conditions under which such activities 
are allowed.  For example, to avoid interference with 
wildlife only certain types of activity may be permitted.

If the Management Plan proposes that active management within 
the site may be necessary in the future, this should also be 
listed here.

3.10.3 Installation, Modification or Removal of Structures.

It is useful to record what structures are permitted within 
the site.  For example, certain scientific research equipment 
might be allowed to be installed within the Area.

If any existing structures are present (eg refuges) the 
Management Plan should also indicate action which might be 
taken to modify or remove the structures.

Alternatively, if no structures are to be permitted within 
the site the Management Plan should make this clear.
Redrafting may be required.

Management Plan drafted                  National and International 
                                             Consultation

Copy submitted to SCAR                  Copy submitted to CCAMLR - if 
                                             marine component

                      Comments                          Comments

Plan submitted to CEP

Plan submitted to ATCM 
with advice from CEP

Plan accepted by ATCPs. 
Measure adopted.

Plan deemed to have been 
approved by ATCPs in 
accordance with the 
provisions of Article 6(1) of 
Annex V.

              Management Plan becomes effective.

Plan reviewed at least every five years.

Plan updated as 
necessary.

Figure 1. Flow chart showing the approval process for ASPA Management Plans.
3.10.3

The draft plan should be submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and SCAR, as well as CCAMLR if there is a significant marine component to the Plan (see Section 3.3 for definition).

The CEP will then consider the Management Plan along with any comments made by SCAR and, if appropriate, CCAMLR. If necessary the CEP may recommend modification to the Plan.

The CEP then formulates and submits its advice to the ATCM. The ATCPs will thereafter give further consideration to the plan.  It is still possible for the ATCM to suggest further redrafting.

If the ATCPs agree on the Plan a Measure is adopted at an ATCM in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless the Measure specifies otherwise, the Plan is deemed to have been approved 90 days after the close of the ATCM at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to approve the Measure.

The Management Plan shall be reviewed every five years in accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V of the Protocol and updated as required. Updated Management Plans then follow the same course of agreement as before.

The approval process for an ASPA Management Plan has many critical stages, which can take a long time to complete. However, these stages are necessary as an ASPA Management Plan requires the agreement of all ATCPs at an ATCM.

ANNEX V

TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
AREA PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Annex:
a) appropriate authority" means any person or
agency authorised by a Party to issue permits
under this Annex;
b) "permit" means a formal permission in writ-
ing issued by an appropriate authority;
c) "Management Plan" means a plan to manage
the activities and protect the special value or
values in an Antarctic Specially ProtectedArea
or an Antarctic Specially ManagedArea.

ARTICLE 2
OBJECTIVES

For the purposes set out in thisAnnex, any area, includ-
ing any marine area, may be designated as anAntarctic
Specially ProtectedArea or anAntarctic Specially Man-
aged Area. Activities in thoseAreas shall be prohibited,
restricted or managed in accordance with Management
Plans adopted under the provisions of thisAnnex.

ARTICLE 3
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

1. Any area, including any marine area, may be des-
ignated as an Antarctic Specially ProtectedArea to
protect outstanding environmental, scientific, his-
toric, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combina-
tion of those values, or ongoing or planned scien-
tific research.

2. Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic
environmental-geographical framework, and to in-
clude in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas:

(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference
so that future comparisons may be possible
with localities that have been affected by hu-
man activities;

(b) representative examples of major terrestrial,
including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and
marine ecosystems;

(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages
of species, including major colonies of breed-
ing native birds or mammals;

(d) the type locality or only known habitat of any
species;

(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or
planned scientific research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological,
glaciological or geomorphological features;

(g) areas or outstanding aesthetic and wilderness
value;

(h) sites or monuments of recognised historic
value; and

(i) such other areas as may be appropriate to pro-
tect the values set out in paragraph 1 above.

3. Specially ProtectedAreas and Sites of Special Sci-
entific Interest designated as such by pastAntarc-
tic Treaty Consultative Meetings are hereby desig-
nated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and
shall be renamed and renumbered accordingly.

4. Entry into an Antarctic Specially Protected Area
shall be prohibited except in accordance with a
permit issued under Article 7.

ARTICLE 4
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREAS

1. Any area, including any marine area, where activi-
ties are being conducted or may in the future be
conducted, may be designated as anAntarctic Spe-
cially Managed Area to assist in the planning and
co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts,
improve co-operation between Parties or minimise
environmental impacts.

2. Antarctic Specially ManagedAreas may include:

(a) areas where activities pose risks of mutual in-
terference or cumulative environmental im-
pacts; and

(b) sites or monuments of recognised historic
value.

3. Entry into an Antarctic Specially Managed Area
shall not require a permit.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3 above, an Antarctic
Specially Managed Area may contain one or more
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, entry into
which shall be prohibited except in accordance with
a permit issued under Article 7.

ARTICLE 5
MANAGEMENT PLANS

1. Any Party, the Committee, the Scientific Commit-
tee for Antarctic Research or the Commission for
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Re-
sources may propose an area for designation as an
Antarctic Specially ProtectedArea or an Antarctic
Specially ManagedArea by submitting a proposed
Management Plan to the Antarctic Treaty Consulta-
tive Meeting.

2. The area proposed for designation shall be of suffi-
cient size to protect the values for which the spe-
cial protection or management is required.

3. Proposed Management Plans shall include, as ap-
propriate:

(a) a description of the value or values for whi h
special protection or management is required;

(b) a statement of the aims and objectives of the
Management Plan for the protection or man-
agement of those values;

(c) management activities which are to be under-
taken to protect the values for which special
protection or management is required;

(d) a period of designation, if any;

(e) a description of the area, including:

        (i)   the geographical co-ordinates, boundary
              markers and natural features that deline-
              ate the area;

       (ii)   access to the area by land, sea or air in-
              cluding marine approaches and anchor-
              ages, pedestrian and vehicular routes
              within the area, and aircraft routes and
              landing areas;

      (iii)   the location of structures, including sci-
              entific stations, research or refuge facili-
              ties, both within the area and near to it; 
              and

      (iv)    the location in or near the area of other
              Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or
              Antarctic Specially Managed Areas des-
              ignated under this Annex, or other pro-
              tected areas designated in accordance
              with measures adopted under other com-
              ponents of the Antarctic Treaty System;

(f) the identification of zones within the area, in
    which activities are to be prohibited, restricted
    or managed for the purpose of achieving the
    aims and objectives referred to in subparagraph (b) above;

(g) maps and photographs that show clearly the
    boundary of the area in relation to surround-
    ing features and key features within the area;

(h) supporting documentation;

(i) in respect of an area proposed for designation
    as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area, a
    clear description of the conditions under which
    permits may be granted by the appropriate
    authority regarding:

        (i)   access to and movement within or over
              the area;

       (ii)   activities which are or may be conducted
              within the area, including restrictions on
              time and place;

              (iii) the installation, modification, or removal
                    of structures;

              (iv) the location of field camps;

              (v) restrictions on materials and organisms
                   which may be brought into the area;

              (vi) the taking of or harmful interference with
                    native flora and fauna;

              (vii) the collection or removal of anything not
                     brought into the area by the permit
                     holder;

              (viii) the disposal of waste;

              (ix)  measures that may be necessary to en-
                    sure that the aims and objectives of the
                    Management Plan can continue to be
                    met; and

              (x)   requirements for reports to be made to
                    the appropriate authority regarding vis-
                    its to the area;

(j) in respect of an area proposed for designation
    as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area, a
    code of conduct regarding:

        (i)   access to and movement within or over
              the area;

       (ii)   activities which are or may be conducted
              within the area, including restrictions on
              time and place;

      (iii)   the installation, modification, or removal
              of structures;

      (iv)    the location of field camps;

       (v)    the taking of or harmful interference with
              native flora and fauna;

      (vi)    the collection or removal of anything not
              brought into the area by the visitor;

      (vii)   the disposal of waste; and

     (viii)   any requirements for reports to be made
              to the appropriate authority regarding
              visits to the area; and

(k) provisions relating to the circumstances in
    which Parties should seek to exchange infor-
    mation in advance of activities which they
    propose to conduct.

ARTICLE 6
DESIGNATION PROCEDURES

1. Proposed Management Plans shall be forwarded to
the Committee, the Scientific Committee on Ant-
arctic Research and, as appropriate, to the Com-
mission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources. In formulating its advice to the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, the Com-
mittee shall take into account any comments pro-
vided by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research and, as appropriate, by the Commission
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources. Thereafter Management Plans may be
approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Par-
ties by a measure adopted at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antartic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the Plan shall be deemed to have been approved 90 days after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to approve the measure.

2. Having regard to the provisions of Articles 4 and 5 of the Protocol, no marine area shall be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area without the prior approval of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.

3. Designation of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area shall be for an indefinite period unless the Management Plan provides otherwise. A review of a Management Plan shall be initiated at least every five years. The Plan shall be updated as necessary.

4. Management Plans may be amended or revoked in accordance with paragraph 1 above.

5. Upon approval Management Plans shall be circulated promptly by the Depositary to all Parties. The Depositary shall maintain a record of all currently approved Management Plans.

ARTICLE 7
PERMITS

1. Each Party shall appoint an appropriate authority to issue permits to enter and engage in activities within an Antarctic Specially Protected Area in accordance with the requirements of the Management Plan relating to that Area. The permit shall be accompanied by the relevant sections of the Management Plan and shall specify the extent and location of the Area, the authorised activities and when, where and by whom the activities are authorised and any other conditions imposed by the Management Plan.

2. In the case of a Specially Protected Area designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting which does not have a Management Plan, the appropriate authority may issue a permit for a compelling scientific kpurpose which cannot be served elsewhere and which will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in that Area.

3. Each Party shall require a permit-holder to carry a copy of the permit while in the Antarctic Specially Protected Area concerned.

ARTICLE 8
HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

1. Sites or monuments of recognised historic value which have been designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed
Areas, or which are located within such Areas, shall be listed as Historic Sites and Monuments.

2. Any Party may propose a site or monument of recognised historic value which has not been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area, or which is not located within such an Area, for listing as a Historic Site or monument. The proposal for listing may be approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by a measure adopted at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the proposal shall be deemed to have been approved 90 days after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to approve the measure.

3. Existing Historic Sites and Monuments which have been listed as such by previous Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall be included in the list of Historic Sites and Monuments under this Article.

4. Listed Historic Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed.

5. The list of Historic Sites and Monuments may be amended in accordance with paragraph 2 above. The Depositary shall maintain a list of current Historic Sites and Monuments.

ARTICLE 9
INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY

1. With a view to ensuring that all persons visiting or proposing to visit Antarctica understand and observe the provisions of this Annex, each Party shall make available information setting forth, in particular:

(a) the location of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas;

(b) listing and maps of those Areas;

(c) the Management Plans, including listings of prohibitions relevant to each Area;

(d) the location of Historic Sites and Monuments and any relevant prohibition or restriction.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the location and, if possible, the limits, of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Historic Sites and Monuments are shown on its topographic maps, hydrographic charts and in other relevant publications.

3. Parties shall co-operate to ensure that, where appropriate, the boundaries of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Historic Sites and Monuments are suitably marked on the site.
ARTICLE 10
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1. The Parties shall make arrangements for:
(a) collecting and exchanging records, including 
    records of permits and reports of visits, includ-
    ing inspection visits, to Antarctic Specially 
    Protected Areas and reports of inspection vis-
    its to Antarctic Specially Managed Areas;
(b) obtaining and exchanging information on any 
    significant change or damage to any Antarctic 
    Specially Managed Area, Antarctic Specially 
    Protected Area or Historic Site or Monument;
    and
(c) establishing common forms in which records 
    and information shall be submitted by Parties 
    in accordance with paragraph 2 below.

2. Each Party shall inform the other Parties and the 
Committee before the end of November of each 
year of the number and nature of permits issued 
under this Annex in the preceding period of 1st July 
to 30th June.

3. Each Party conducting, funding or authorising re-
search or other activities in Antarctic Specially Pro-
tected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Ar-
eas shall maintain a record of such activities and in 
the annual exchange of information in accordance 
with the Treaty shall provide summary descriptions 
of the activities conducted by persons subject to its 
jurisdiction in such areas in the preceding year

4. Each Party shall inform the other Parties and the 
Committee before the end of November each year 
of measures it has taken to implement this Annex, 
including any site inspections and any steps it has 
taken to address instances of activities in contra-
vention of the provisions of the approved Manage-
ment Plan for an Antarctic Specially Protected Area 
or Antarctic Sp[?]cially Managed A[?]ea.

ARTICLE 12
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1. This Annex may be amended or modified by a 
measure adopted in accordance with Article IX(1) 
of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure speci-
fies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall 
be deemed to have been approved, and shall be-
come effective, one year after the close of the Ant-
arctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was 
adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within 
that time period, that it wishes an extension of that 
period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2. Any amendment or modification of this Annex 
which becomes effective in accordance with para-
graph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as 
to any other Party when notice of approval by it 
has been received by the Depositary.
Appendix 2

MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (SPA) No. 13
MOE ISLAND, SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS

1. Description of Values to be Protected

The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-13 (1966. SPA No. 13) 
after a proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that Moe Island provided 
a representative sample of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem. that intensive experimental 
research on the neighbouring Signy Island might alter its ecosystem and that Moe 
Island should be specially protected as a control area for future comparison.

These grounds are still relevant. Whilst there is no evidence that research activities 
at Signy Island have significantly altered the ecosystems there. a major change has 
occurred in the low altitude terrestrial system as a result of the rapidly expanding 
Antarctic fur seal (Arctocephalus gazella) population. Plant communities on nearby 
Signy Island have been physically disrupted by trampling by fur seals and nitrogen 
enrichment from the seals' excreta has resulted in replacement of bryophytes and 
lichens by the macro-alga Prasiola crispa. Low-lying lakes have been significantly 
affected by enriched run-off from the surrounding land. So far Moe Island has not 
been invaded by fur seals to any great extent and its topography makes it less likely 
that seals will penetrate to the more sensitive areas.

The values to be protected are those associated with the biological composition 
and diversity of a near-pristine example of the maritime Antarctic terrestrial and 
littoral marine ecosystems. In particular. Moe Island contains the greatest continuous 
expanses of Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf found in the Antarctic. Moe Island 
has been visited on few occasions and has never been the site of occupation for 
periods of more than a few hours.

2. Aims and Objectives

Management of Moe Island aims to:
- avoid major changes to the structure and composition of the terrestrial vegetation. 
in particular the moss turf banks:
- prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area:
- permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be served elsewhere. 
particularly research related to determining the differences between the ecology 
of an undisturbed island and that of an adjacent occupied and fur seal perturbed 
island.

3. Management Activities

Ensure that the biological condition of Moe Island is adequately monitored. 
preferably by non invasive methods. and that the sign-boards are serviced.

If fur seals were to gain access to the interior of Moe Island it would be necessary 
to take action to prevent damage to the vulnerable moss banks. This action would 
most likely consist of the erection of a seal-proof fence at the head of the gully at 
the northeast of Landing Cove. Any direct management activities in the Area would 
be subject to an environmental impact assessment before any decision to proceed is 
taken.

4. Period of Designation

Designated for an indefinite period.
5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of Moe Island in relation to the South Orkney Islands.
Map 2 shows Moe Island in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Moe island, South Orkney Islands, is a small irregularly-shaped island lying 300m
off the southwestern extremity of Signy Island, from which it is separated by Fyr
Channel. It is about 1.3km from the northeast to southwest and 1km from northwest
to southeast. Its position on Admiralty Chart No. 1775, latitude 60°44’S, longitude
45°45’W, does not agree closely with that in Map 2 (lat. 60°44’S, long. 45°41’W).

The island rises precipitously on the northeastern and southeastern sides to Snipe
Peak (226m altitude). There is a subsidiary summit above South Point (102m altitude)
and lower hills on each of three promontories on the western side above Corral Point
(92m), Conroy Point (39m) and Spaull Point (56m). Small areas of permanent ice
remain on the east- and south-facing slopes with late snow lying on the steeply
dipping western slopes. There are no permanent streams or pools.

The rocks are metamorphic quartz mica schists, with occasional biotite and
quartz-rich beds. There is a thin bed of undifferentiated amphibolite on the northeastern
coast. Much of the island is overlain with glacial drift and scree. Soils are predominantly
immature deposits of fine to coarse clays and sands intermixed with gravels, stones
and boulders. They are frequently sorted by freeze-thaw action in high or exposed
locations into small-scale circles, polygons, stripes and lobes. There are deep
accumulations of peat (up to 2m thick on western slopes), considerable expanses of
the surface of which are bare and eroded.

The dominant plant communities are Andreaea-Usnea fellfield and banks of
Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf (the largest known example of this community
type in the Antarctic). These moss banks constitute a major biological value and the
reason for the designation of the Area. The cryptogamic flora is diverse.

The mites Gamasellus racovitzaï and Stereotydeus villosus and the springtail
Cryptopygus antarcticus are common under stones.

There were five colonies of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) totalling
about 11.000 pairs in 1978-79. A more recent visit (February 1994) noted fewer than
100 pairs on the northern side of Landing Cove and more than a thousand on the
southern side. Numerous other birds breed on the island, notably about 2.000 pairs
of cape petrels (Daption capensis) in 14 colonies (1966) and large numbers of Antarctic
prions (Pachyptila desolata).

Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) are
found in the bays on the west side of the island. Increasing numbers of fur seals
(Arctocephalus gazella), mostly juvenile males, come ashore on the north side of
Landing Cove and have caused some damage to vegetation in that area. However, it
is possible that the nature of the terrain will restrict these animals to this small
headland where damage may intensify.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area

None.

6(iii) Location of structures within the Area

A marker board is located at the back of the small shingle beach in the northeast
corner of Landing Cove, beyond the splash zone on top of a flat rock, to which it
is bolted. The board was erected on 2 February 1994.

There is a cairn and the remains of a survey mast, erected in 1965-66, on Spaull
Point. This mast is of interest for lichenometric studies and should not be removed.
There are no other structures on Moe Island.
6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No. 14. Lynch Island. lies about 10km north-north-east of Moe Island. SPA 
No. 18. North Coronation Island. lies about 19km away on the northern side of 
Coronation Island. SPA No. 15. Southern Powell Island. is about 35km to the east.

7. Permit Conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by 
appropriate national authorities.

Conditions for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:
- it is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served 
elsewhere:
- the actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural ecological system in the 
Area:
- any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management 
Plan:
- the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan:
- the Permit. or an authorised copy. must be carried within the Specially Protected 
Area:
- a report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the 
Permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

There are no restrictions on landing from the sea. which is the preferred method. 
No special access points are specified. but landings are usually most safely made at 
the northeast corner of Landing Cove.

Helicopter landings should be avoided where practicable. Helicopters may land 
only on the col between hill 89m and the western slope of Snipe Peak. To avoid 
overflying bird colonies approach should preferably be from the south. though an 
approach from the north is permissible.

It is forbidden to overfly the Area below 250m altitude above the highest point 
except for access to the landing point specified above.

No pedestrian routes are designated but persons on foot should at all times avoid 
disturbances to birds or damage to vegetation and periglacial features. Vehicles are 
prohibited on Moe Island.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area. including restrictions on 
time and place
- Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere and which 
will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area
- Essential management activities. including monitoring

7(iii) Installation. modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Area. or scientific equipment installed. 
except for essential scientific or management activities. as specified in the Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Parties should not normally camp in the Area. If this is essential for reasons of 
safety. tents should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to vegetation 
or disturbance to fauna.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.

No poultry products. including food products containing uncooked dried eggs. 
shall be taken into the Area.
No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals. 
which may be introduced for a compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit. 
shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which 
the Permit was granted.

Fuel. food and other materials are not to be deposited in the Area. unless required 
for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been 
granted. All such materials introduced are to be removed when no longer required. 
Permanent depots are not permitted.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fa na

This is prohibited. except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or 
harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code 
of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica. as a minimum 
standard.

7(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a 
Permit. except that debris of man-made origin may be removed from the beaches of 
the Area and dead or pathological specimens of fauna or flora may be removed for 
laboratory examination.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area. Human waste may be 
deposited in the sea.

7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and 
site inspection activities. which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant 
material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit. to erect or maintain 
notice boards. or protective measures.

7(x) Requirements for reports

The Principal Permit Holder for each issued Permit shall submit a report of 
activities conducted in the Area using the accepted Visit Report form suggested by 
SCAR. This report shall be submitted to the authority named in the Permit as soon 
as practicable. but not later than 6 months after the visit has taken place. Such 
reports should be stored indefinitely and made accessible to interested Parties. SCAR. 
CCAMLR and COMNAP if requested. to provide the documentation of human 
activities within the Area necessary for good management.
60° 05' S         60° 10' S         60° 15' S         60° 20' S                   0         10         20         km  
                                                                                           Laurie Island  
                                                                                           Saddle Island  
                                                                                           Powell Island  
                                                                                           SPA No. 15  
                                                                                           Southern Powell Island  
South Orkney Islands  
                                                                                           Robertson Islands  
                                                                                           SPA No.18  
                                                                                           North Coronation Island  
                                                                                           Lynch Island  
                                                                                           SPA No.14  
                                                                                           Moe Island  
                                                                                           SPA No.13  
                                                                                           Signy Island  
                                                                                           Coronation Island  
46° 00' W         45° 30' W         45° 00' W         44° 30' W  
Map 1. Moe Island Specially Protected Area in relation to the South Orkney Islands
45°42'W                                          
N                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
45°41'W                       FYR CHANNEL       
                                                
60°44'S                                          
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                

Appendix 3

GUIDANCE NOTES FOR PRODUCING MAPS FOR INCLUSION IN MANAGEMENT PLANS

Management Plans should include a general location map to show the position of the site and the locati?n of any other protected areas in the vicinity, and at least one detailed map of the site showing those features essential for meeting the Management plan objectives.

1. All maps should include latitude and longitude as well as having scale bars. Avoid ratio scales - enlargement/ reduction renders them useless. The spheroid (eg WGS 84) or reference framework used should be indicated as text beneath these scale bar.

2. The importance of GPS for fixing positions cannot be overstated.  Over past years it has become clear that the original positioning of some protected sites is highly suspect.  The opportunity to revise the plan for each site is an opportunity to use GPS, to provide clear locational information on boundaries.  It is strongly recommended that plans are not submitted without such information.

3. It is important to use up-to-date coastline and glacier front data. Ice recession and advance continues to affect many areas with consequent changes to site boundaries. If an ice front is used as a boundary the date of the survey should be shown.

4. A map should show the following features:  any specified routes; any restricted zones; boat and/or helicopter landing sites and access points; camp-sites, installations and huts, major animal concentrations and breeding sites; any extensive areas of vegetation and should clearly delineate between ice/snow and ice-free ground.  In many instances it is useful to include a geological map of the Area.  It is suggested that, in most cases, it is helpful to have contouring at an appropriate interval on all maps of the Area. But contouring should not be too close as to mark other features or symbols on the map.
5. Be aware when preparing the map that it will be reduced to 
about 150 x 200 mm size to fit into the ATCM official 
report. This is of importance in selecting the size of 
symbols, the closeness of contouring and the use of 
shading. Reproduction is always monochrome so do not use 
colours to distinguish features in the original. There 
may well be other versions of an Area map available but 
as far as the legal status of the management plan is 
concerned it is the version published in the Final Report 
of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting that is the 
definitive version which will be included in national 
legislation.

6. Photographs can be a valuable aid to using the plan in the 
field. Remember that good contrast prints are essential 
for adequate reproduction. Screening or digitising of 
photographs will improve reproduction when the plan is 
photocopied.

7. Some plans have already used 3-dimensional terrain models 
which again can provide important locational information 
when approaching a site, especially by helicopter. Such 
drawings need careful design if they are not to become 
confusing when reduced.

8. If the Area will require evaluation by CCAMLR the location 
of nearby CEMP sites should be indicated. CCAMLR has 
requested that the location of bird and seal colonies 
(for penguins and seals) and the access routes from the 
sea should be indicated on the map wherever possible.
A CHECKLIST OF FEATURES TO BE CONSIDERED FOR INCLUSION ON MAPS

1.  Essential features

1.1 Title.
1.2 Latitude and longitude 
    coordinates.
1.3 Scale bar with numerical scale.
1.4 Comprehensive legend.
1.5 Adequate and approved place-
    names.
1.6 Map projection and spheroid.
1.7 North arrow.
1.8 Contour interval.
1.9 If image data are included, 
    date of image collection.

2.  Essential topographical features

2.1 Coastline, rock and ice.
2.2 Peaks and ridge lines.
2.3 Ice margins and other glacial 
    features.
3.5 Contours (labelled as necessary) 
    survey points and spot heights.

3.  Natural Features

3.1 Lakes, ponds, streams.
3.2 Moraines, screes, cliffs, 
    beaches.
3.3 Beach areas.
3.4 Vegetation.
3.5 Bird and seal colonies.

4.  Anthropogenic Features

4.1 Station.
4.2 Field huts, refuges.
4.3 Campsites.
4.4 Roads and vehicle tracks, 
    footpaths.
4.5 Landing areas for fixed wing 
    aeroplanes and helicopters.
4.6 Wharf, jetties.
4.7 Power supplies, cables.
4.8 Aerials, antennae.
4.9 Fuel storage areas.
4.10 Water reservoirs and pipes.
4.11 Emergency caches.
4.12 Markers, signs.
4.13 Historic sites or artefacts, 
    archaeological sites.
4.14 Scientific installations 
    or sampling areas.
4.15 Site contamination or 
    modification

5.  Boundaries

5.1 Boundary of Area.
5.2 Boundaries of subsidiary 
    zoned areas. Boundaries 
    of contained protected area
5.3 Boundary signs and markers 
    (including cairns).
5.4 Boat/aircraft approach 
    routes.
5.5 Navigation markers or 
    beacons.
5.6 Survey points and markers.

The same approach is obviously 
required of any inset maps.

At the conclusion of drafting 
a check should be made on 
cartographic quality to ensure:

- Balance between the elements.
- Appropriate shading to enhance 
  features but which will not be 
  confusing when photocopied and 
  where degree should reflect 
  importance.
- Correct and appropriate text 
  with no features overlap.
- Use of SCAR-approved map 
  symbols wherever possible.
- White text appropriately 
  shadowed on all image data.

Antarctic Specially Protected Area                  Appendix 4
VISIT REPORT

1.  Protected Area name and number:

2.  Name and address of Authority issuing permit:     3.  Date Report filed:

4.  Name and address of Authority to whom Report is made:   5.  Person completing Report:

6.  Name and address of Principal Permit Holder:     7.  List of all persons who
                                                        entered the Area under the 
                                                        current Permit:
                                                        
                                                        International telephone: +
                                                        International facsimile: +
                                                        E-mail address:      
8.  Objectives of the visit to the Area under the current Permit:

9.  Date(s) and duration of visit(s) under the current Permit:

10. Mode of transport to/from the Area:

11. Activities conducted in the Area:

12. Descriptions and locations of samples collected (type, quantity, and details of any Permits for sample collection):

13. Descriptions and locations of markers, instrumentation or equipment installed, or any material released into the environment (noting how long these are intended to remain in the Area):

14. Descriptions and locations of markers, instrumentation or equipment removed:
15. Any departures from the provisions of the Management Plan during this visit, noting 
dates, magnitudes and locations:

16. Measures taken during this visit to ensure compliance with the Management Plan:

17. Observations of human effects on the Area, distinguishing between those resulting from the 
visit and those due to previous visitors:

18. Evaluation of whether the values for which the Area was designated are being adequately 
protected:

19. Note any features of special significance that have not been previously recorded for the Area:

20. Recommendations on further management measures needed to protect the values of the 
Area, including location and appraisal of condition of structures, markers etc:

21. Summary of scientific research undertaken in the Area:

22. On an attached photocopy of the map of the Area, please show (as applicable) camp site 
location(s), land/sea/air movements or routes, sampling sites, installations, deliberate release 
of materials, any impacts, and features of special significance not previously recorded:

23. Any other comments or information:
Appendix 5

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

ANTARCTIC TREATY 1993. Final Report of the Seventeenth 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Venice, Italy, 
11-20 November 1992). [Rome, Ministry of Foreign Affairs] 
485 pp

ANTARCTIC TREATY 1995. Final Report of the Nineteenth 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Seoul, Korea, 
8-19 May 1995). [Seoul, Ministry of Foreign Affairs] 367 pp

ANTARCTIC TREATY 1997. Final Report of the Twentieth 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Utrecht, Netherlands, 
29 April-10 May 1996). [The Hague, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs] 278 pp

ANTARCTIC TREATY 1994. Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty 
System (Eighth edition). Washington DC, Department of State, 
Party 1 - 296 pp, Part 2 - 300 pp

Benninghoff, W S and Bonner, W N, 1985. Man's Impact on the 
Antarctic Environment, Cambridge, SCAR. 56 pp

Bleasel, J E (ed) 1989. Waste Disposal in the Antarctic 
(Report of the SCAR Panel of Experts on Waste Disposal) 
Hobart, Australian Antarctic Division for SCAR. 53 pp.

Bonner, W N and Lewis-Smith, R I (ed) 1985. Conservation 
Areas in the Antarctic, Cambridge, SCAR. 299 pp.

Dingwall, P R 1994. Progress in the Conservation of the 
sub-Antarctic Islands. (Proceedings of the SCAR/IUCN Workshop 
on Protection, Research and Management of sub-Antarctic 
Islands, Paimpont, France, 27-29 April 1992). Gland, IUCN, 
xvi + 225 pp.
Kennicutt II, M C, Sayers, J C A, Walton, D W H, and Wratt, G (compilers) 1996. Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica. Cambridge, SCAR, x+124 pp.

Lewis-Smith, R I, Walton, D W H and Dingwall, P R (ed) 1994. Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System (Proceedings fo the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Protected Areas, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 29 June-2 July 1992). Gland, IUCN, x + 137 pp.

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 1991. Final Report of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting (Madrid, Spain, 7-18 October 1991), Madrid Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores, 225 pp.

Rutford, R H (ed) 1986. Reports of the SCAR Group of Specialists on Antarctic Environmental Implications of Possible Mineral Exploration (AEIMEE), Cambridge, SCAR, 95 pp

Zumberge, J H (Ed) 1979. Possible Environmental Effects of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation in Antarctica. Cambridge, SCAR, 59 pp
Appendix 6

NATIONAL CONTACT POINTS

ARGENTINA

Direccion de Antártida
Minsterio de Relciones Exteriores
Comercio Internacional y Culto
Reconquista 1088 - Piso 10
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Tel: (+54) 1.311.1801
Fax: (+54) 1.311.1660

Dirección Nacional del Antartico
Instituto Antartico Argentino
Cerrito 1248
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Tel: (+54) 1.813.7807
Tel: (+54) 1.812.1689
Fax: (+54) 1.1812.2039

AUSTRALIA

The Assistant Secretary
Environment and Antarctic Branch
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Administrative Building
PARKES
ACT 2600, Australia

Tel: (+61) 2 6269 1111
Fax: (+61) 2 6261 2594

The Director
Australian Antarctic Division
Channel Highway
Kingston
Tasmania
Australia 7050

Tel: (+61) 3 6232 3209
Fax: (+61) 3 6232 3215

BELGIUM

Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres
Service Droit de la MER/Antarctique
2 Rue Quatre Bras
1000 Bruxelles, Belgium

Tel: (+32) 2.516.89.26
Fax: (+32) 2.513.91.48
                Belgium cont/..
Federal Office for Scientific,
Technical and Cultural Affairs (OSTC)
Rue de la Science 8
B-1000 Brussels, Belgium

Tel: (+32) 2.238.3608
Tel: (+32) 2.238.3411
Fax: (+32) 2.230.5912

BRAZIL

Divisao do Mar, da Antartica e do Espaco (DMAE)
Ministerio dos Relacoes Exteriores
Palacio Itamaraty, Sala 737
Brasilia-D.F CEP:70.000
Brazil

Tel: (+55 61) 211 6282/211 6367
Fax: (+55 61) 223 7362/224 1079

Programa Antartico Brasileiro (PROANTAR)
Secretaria de Commissao Interministerial
Parsa os Recursos do Mar
Ministerio da Marinha
Esplanada os Ministerios
Bloco N, Anexo B, 3° Andar
Brasilia-D.F. CEP:70.055-900, Brazil

Tel: (+55 61) 226 3937/312 1308/312 1309
Fax: (+55 61) 312 1336

CHILE

Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Direccion de Politica Especial
Departamento Antártica
Catedral #1158
Santiago, Chile

Tel: (+56) 2 6794379
Fax: (+56) 2 6725071

Instituto Antartico Chileno
Luis Thayer Ojeda 814 Providencia
Santiago, Chile

Tel: (+56) 2 2310105
Fax: (+56) 2 2320440
CHINA, PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF

Division for Environmental and Antarctic Affairs
Department of Treaty & Law
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Beijing 10070, China

Tel: (+86) 10 525 5520
Fax: (+86) 10 513 4505

Chinese Antarctic Administration
Beijing 100860, China

Tel: (+86) 10 803 3682
Fax: (+86) 10 851 1613

ECUADOR

Director General de Intereses Martinmos
Av.Amazonas y Cordero - Edif.Flopec 7° Piso
Quito, Ecuador S.A

Tel: (+593) 2508909/2505187
Fax: (+593) 2563075

Secretario Ejecutivo del Progrma Antartico Ecuatorian
Instituto Oceanografico de la Armada
Av.25 Julio Base Naval Sur
P O Box 5940
Guayaquil, Ecuador

Tel: (+593) 4481847/4480033
Fax: (+593) 4485166

FINLAND

Ministry for Foreign Affairs
Political Department
P.O Box 176
SF-00160 Helsinki
Finland

Tel: (+358) 9.13.41.51
Fax: (+358) 9.13.41.50.65

Polar Commission of Finland
Ministry of Trade and Industry
P O Box 230
SF-00171 Helsinki
Finland

Tel: (+358) 9.160.37.24
Fax: (+358) 9.160.37.05
FRANCE

Adminstration des Terres Australes et Antarctiques
Francaises (T.A.A.F)
34 Rue des Renaudes
75017 Paris, France

Tel: (+33) 40.53.46.77
Fax: (+33) 47.66.91.23

Ministère des Affaires Etrangères
Direction des Affaires Juridiques
Sous direction de droit de la mer,
des Pêches et de l'Antarctique
37 Quai d'Orsay 75007 Paris
France

Tel: (+33) 47.53.53.31 ext 4386/5331/5325
Fax: (+33) 47.53.94.95

Institut Francais pour la Recherche
et la Technologies Polaires (IFRTP)
Technopôle Brest-Iroise
BP 75 29280 Plouzané
France

Tel: (33) 98 05 6500
Fax: (33) 98 05 6555

GERMANY

Auswärtiges Amt
Referat 504
Postfach 1148
53001 Bonn
Germany

Tel: (+49) 228 172997
Fax: (+49) 228 173784

Alfred-Wegener-Institut
Columbusstrasse
27568 Bremerhaven
Germany

Tel: (+49) 471 4831 0
Fax: (+49) 471 4831 149
INDIA

Government of India
Department of Ocean Development
12 Mahasagar Bhawan
CGO Complex
New Delhi
Pin 11003 India

Tel: (+91) 11 436087 4
Fax: (+91) 11 436264 4

ITALY

Ministero Degli Affari Esteri
Direzione Generale Delle Relazioni Culturali (DGRC)
Ufficio VII
Ple Delle Farnesina 1-00194 Roma
Italy

Tel: (+39) 6 36914057/36914061
Fax: (+39) 6 3236239

Enea
Progetto Antartide
S P Anguillares 301
00060 Roma A.D
Italy

Tel: (+39) 6 30484939
Fax: (+39) 6 30484893

JAPAN

Global Issues Division
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
2-2-1 Kasumigaseki
Chiyoda-ku
Tokyo, Japan

Tel: (+81) 3 3581 3882
Fax: (+81) 3 3592 0364

KOREA, REPUBLIC OF

International Legal Affairs Division
Treaties Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
77 Sejongro
Chongro-ku
Seoul
Republic of Korea

Tel: (+82) 2 720 4045/2 737 3150
Fax: (+82) 2 733 6737                 Korea cont/...
Polar Research Centre
Korea Ocean Research and Development Institute
Ansan P O Box 29
Seoul, 425-600
Republic of Korea

Tel: (+82) 345 400 6400
Fax: (+82) 345 408 5825

THE NETHERLANDS

DES-ET
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
P O Box 20061
2500 EB The Hague
The Netherlands

Tel: (+31) 70 348 4971
Fax: (+31) 70 348 4412

Netherlands Geoscience Foundation
Laan van Nieuw Oost Indië 131
NL 2509 AC The Hague
The Netherlands

Tel: (+31) 70 344 07 80
Fax: (+31) 70 383 21 73

NEW ZEALAND

Antarctic Policy Unit
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Private Bay 18 901
Wellington
New Zealand

Tel: (+61) 04 472 8877
Fax: (+61) 04 472 8039

NORWAY

Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Section for Marine Resources and Polar Affairs
P O Box 8114 DEP
0032 Oslo
Norway

Tel: (+47) 22 24 36 14/10
Fax: (+47) 22 24 2782/9580

Norway cont.....
Norwegian Polar Institute
P O Box 399
Storgata 25a
Postboks 399
N-9001 Tromso
Norway

Tel: (+47) 77 60 6700
Fax: (+47) 77 60 6701

PERU

Nacional de Asuntos Antarticos (CONAAN)
"Palacio Torre Tagle" - UCAYALI 363
Lima 01
Peru

Tel: (+51) 1 427 3860/427 0995
Fax; (+51) 1 431 7170

POLAND

Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Al.Jana Christiana Szucha 23
Warsaw
Poland

Tel: (+48) 2 2 6239 34
Fax: (+48) 2 2 6218 22

Polish Acadamy of Sciences
Senacka 3, 31-002 Krakow
Poland

Tel: (+48) 12 2216 09
Fax: (+48) 12 2216 09

RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
Legal Department
Russian Federation
Moscow
Arbat str, 54, Russian Federation

Tel: (+7) 095 241 2825
Fax; (+7) 095 241 1166

Federal Service of Russia for
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring
Novovagan'kovsky str, 12
123242 Moscow
Russian Federation

Tel: (+7) 095 252 0313
Fax: (+7) 095 255 2269
SOUTH AFRICA

Environmental, Marine and Antarctic Matters
Department of Foreign Affairs
Route DEAM/MA77
Private Bag X 152
Pretoria 0001
South Africa

Tel: (+27) 12 351 1531
Fax: (+27) 12 351 1651

Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
Directorate Antarctic and Islands
Private Bag X 447
Pretoria 0001
South Africa

Tel: (+27) 12 310 3666
Fax: (+28) 12 322 2682

SPAIN

Subdirector General de Cooperatión Científico-TécnicA
Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores
Atocha, 3.28017 Madrid
Spain

Tel: (+341) 379 9559
Fax: (+341) 442 7657

SWEDEN

Ministry of Foreign Affairs
PO Box 16121
10323 Stockholm
Sweden

Tel: (+46) 8 4051000
Fax: (+46) 8 7231176

Swedish Polar Research Secretariat
Box 50005 S-10405 Stockholm
Sweden

Fax: (+46) 8 6739500
Tel: (+46) 8 152057

\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n
