ATCM homepage 
Summary 
At ATCM XXI in Christchurch, New Zealand, Norway offered to explore new means 
of document distribution, especially giving thought to electronic means of 
distribution. 
During the preparations for ATCM XXII, an ATCM world wide web homepage 
(http//:www.tromso.npolar.no/atcm) was established by the Norwegian Polar 
Institute (NPI) in cooperation with the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  
It was furthermore decided to examine the possibility of using the ATCM homepage as 
a means of distributing documents. A protected page which gave restricted access to 
submitted ATCM XXII information papers was consequently established under the 
ATCM homepage.  
Norway believes that the establishment and operation of a WWW-site for the Antarctic 
Treaty System (ATS) will greatly enhance the transparency of the ATS, based on 
the Consultative Parties’ decisions and practice thus far. To that effect, a homepage 
could provide a vehicle for enabling an easy access to the official ATCM 
documents, upon their becoming publicly available. In accordance with the 
Consultative Parties’ decisions and practice, this will in principle be from the 
closure of the ATCM at which documents were submitted. Parties could also 
consider making some documents publicly available via a WWW-site before the 
closure of an ATCM, or even before its opening.  
General background 
In March 1998 a homepage for ATCM XXII was made accessible to the Treaty Parties 
and the world community on the world wide web (WWW). The homepage was 
prepared by NPI in cooperation with the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
The establishment of the homepage primarily had three aims: 
to provide delegates with easy access to information about ATCM XXII 
(program, venue, facilities, etc.) 
to provide delegates with easy access to information about the city in which the 
meeting was to take place 
to provide information about the Antarctic Treaty System and Antarctica to the 
public at large  
The ATCM XXII homepage was designed as to give an as simple as possible access to 
the information provided in the homepage. Readers should refer to Appendix 1 for 
further information on the structure and contents of the homepage. 
Due to the fact that the homepage was established relatively late (i.e. close to the 
opening of ATCM XXII), the homepage has in all likelihood not reached its full 
potential as an information tool for ATCM XXII. Based on the registered general 
response level, however, it is believed that an ATCM homepage does have a high 
potential as an information tool for delegates and other interested people.  
The homepage established for ATCM XXII may constitute the basis for homepages for 
future ATCMs. This would enable host countries to establish an ATCM homepage 
without needing to establish a new framework for it. Refer to sketch in Appendix 2 
for illustration of possible use of the ATCM XXII homepage in a future ATCM 
homepage. 
Document distribution on the WWW 
At the time of the establishment of the ATCM XXII homepage it was decided to 
include a protected page which would provide the ATCM XXII delegates access to 
ATCM XXII information documents.  
The document page was established with both username and password protection. 
Antarctic Treaty Parties and ATCM Observers were informed about the access 
information through diplomatic channels in an ATCM XXII Circular Note. 
As this form for document distribution was initiated as a pilot project, it was decided 
that only information papers would be made accessible. Parties were requested to 
specifically note whether they wished their information papers posted on the 
homepage when submitting a paper to the ATCM XXII Secretariat. Papers were as 
far as possible posted continuously as they were received by the Secretariat, 
although some time lag was experienced, mainly due to limited available resources.
Only a limited number of the submitted information papers were posted on the 
protected page. It is considered likely that to a large degree this is a consequence of 
the novelty of the concept, and that the option of posting of documents would 
become more utilized at future ATCMs if the option continues to be provided. 
Statistics indicate that the net-accessible documents page has been visited regularly by 
various parties, and thus seem to indicate that there is utility in providing access to 
documents in this manner. 
More and more international organizations and other international collaborative fora 
utilize the WWW for document distribution and as a communication tool. It is 
Norway’s hope that document distribution via electronic means (e-mail and 
Internet) in the future also may replace the slow and costly document distribution 
system currently practiced in the ATS. It is believed that this will aid the ATCM 
Host Government greatly in their preparations of a meeting. 
The WWW and the public availability of ATCM documents  
Since the period of 1960s and early 1970s, when the ATCM documents were generally 
not available to public, the ATS has passed through a gradual process of evolution 
towards transparency. Since early 1980s, the Consultative Parties have discussed 
the public availability of documents as a regular agenda item at ATCMs, in order to 
make information about Antarctica and the ATS better available to all those 
interested in it. Decisions taken by the Consultative Parties, and their practice 
consistently followed in this matter, have in the course of the 1990s enabled public 
availability of all official documents of all the ATCMs held so far.  
The documents of the ATCMs are now, in principle, available to the public as from the 
closure of the ATCM at which these were submitted, unless indicated otherwise by 
the Party submitting a document. However, there still exist practical obstacles to the 
transparency of the ATS. The papers are available in theory, but are hardly 
accessible in practice. While the Consultative Parties have, through their decisions 
and practice, allowed for public availability of ATCM documents, they have still 
failed to ensure easy access to these documents. 
In order that the Parties succeed to ensure the transparency of the ATS, Norway firmly 
believes that all official documents from ATCMs, including both working and 
information papers, should not only be offered available but also made accessible, 
as far as possible. One way of remedying this situation is to establish an archive on 
the WWW, to be accessed through an ATCM homepage (see suggested structure in 
Appendix 2).  
In light of development of modern means of communication, Norway believes it to be a 
best practical way in the preparation of an ATCM, that all the official documents 
submitted to the Host Country are placed at a password protected Home Page. As 
from the closure of an ATCM, any password restrictions on the protected document 
page for that ATCM should be eliminated, so as to make all official documents 
publicly available. Parties should indicate, when submitting official documents for 
the Meeting in question, whether they intend certain document not to be made 
public. 
Furthermore, Norway believes that there are no real obstacles for a large number of 
official documents submitted to the ATCMs to be made publicly available already 
in advance of an ATCM. In fact, it is believed that this could increase general public 
involvement in and awareness of Antarctic management issues in the contemporary 
international community. 
Based on the above, Norway believes that in preparation of future ATCMs there should 
be an option for Parties to make their ATCM documents available to the public also 
in advance of the commencement of the Meeting. In practice, this could be 
accomplished by establishing a page for net-accessible documents which is not 
password protected in addition to a protected page.  
Based on the above discussions Norway proposes that the ATCM XXII adopt a 
decision for which a draft text is attached. 
  
Draft Decision [ ] (1998) 
ATCM Home Page 
The Representatives, 
Decide: 
An Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting Internet Home Page (ATCM homepage) shall 
be established at the World Wide Web (WWW). 
The ATCM homepage shall inter alia contain: 
a) in an area freely accessible to the general public: 
• general information on Antarctica and the Antarctic Treaty System;1  
• within the resources available and in accordance with paragraph 3 of this 
Decision, an archive of official documentation from the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings, containing working and information papers 
submitted to the Meetings, as well as the Final Reports of the Meetings with 
text of annexes. 
b) in a password protected area accessible only to the Antarctic Treaty Parties and the
Antarctic Treaty System Observers2, experts invited by the ATCM and any other 
entities that the ATCM decides should have such access: 
• official documents submitted electronically to the Host Government in 
advance of an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting; 
• any practical information related to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting, which the Host Government may wish to communicate this way. 
As from the closure of an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, and if no Delegation 
has indicated its intention to the contrary when submitting a document, the Host 
Government shall enable free public access to all the official documents which have 
been placed on the ATCM homepage, by removing the password protection from 
these. 
Should any Delegation, when submitting a document to the Host Government indicate 
that the document can be placed in the ATCM homepage area freely accessible to the 
general public in advance of the Meeting, and if no other Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Party objects within 30 days from the placement of that document on the ATCM 
homepage password protected area, the Host Government shall remove the password
protection from that document. 
Norway, as the Host Government of the XXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
shall, based on the Home Page prepared in advance of the XXII Meeting, establish 
the ATCM homepage, and shall maintain it until three months after the closure of 
ATCM XXII. 
 
Thereafter, within the resources available and pending any more permanent solution 
agreed upon by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, the ATCM homepage 
should be maintained by any subsequent Host Government of the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting, from three months after the closure of the previous Meeting 
until three months after the closure of the Meeting it hosts3 . 
This Decision shall be operative at adoption. 
  
Footnotes: 
1 Developed in pursuance of paragraph 132 of the Final Report of the XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 
2 as referred to in Rule 2 of the Revised Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (1997) 
3 Cf. Guidelines for Pre-sessional Document Circulation and Document Handling, paragraph 7. 
  
  
APPENDIX I 
ATCM Homepage - Overview of Structure 
Level 1: "The homepage" - containing three gateways to level 2 
Level 2.1.: ATCM General information  
Level 2.1.1: The Treaty. Information about the Antarctic Treaty. 
Level 2.1.2: The Treaty Meetings. Information about work. 
Level 2.1.3: The Environmental Protocol. Information about the Protocol and 
the CEP. 
Level 2.2.: ATCM XXII  
Level 2.2.1: Delegates’ Handbook  
2.2.1.1: Delegates’ ABC to the Meeting 
2.2.1.2: General information for delegates to the XXIIth ATCM 
2.2.1.3: Receptions and Excursions 
Level 2.2.2: Meeting Program. 
Level 2.2.3: Documents and Annotated Agenda.  (NB: protected) 
2.2.3.1: List of Documents  
2.2.3.2: Net-accessible Documents  
2.2.3.3: Annotated Agenda 
Level 2.2.4: List of Participants  
Level 2.2.5: News to delegates  
Level 2.2.6: Information about Tromsø - the Host City.  
Level 2.3: Antarctica (information to the general public)  
Level 2.3.1: Description.  
Level 2.3.2: Research 
Level 2.3.3: Environmental Management 
Level 2.3.4: Norway in Antarctica 
Level 2.3.5: Pointers to other Antarctic sites 
  
 
 
 
 
   
Home     News     List of Delegates    Delegate Handbook  
Documents    Meeting Program     Tromsø 
 
 
 
22.05.98 : Norwegian Polar Institute : Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
 
