ATCM XXII Working Paper  
 
1/8 
 
9/24/2008 
EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTION 
 
 
 
Summary 
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty entered into force 
on 14 January 1998.  As a consequence, the Contracting Parties are now obliged to 
implement the provisions of the Protocol, including the provisions regarding 
emergency response action (Article 15 of the Protocol and related articles of Annex 
IV). 
 
Implementation of the provisions of Article 15 would be facilitated by: 
 
• Preparation of an environmental risk assessment.  This would provide the basis for  
the development of guidelines for preventive measures, contingency plans and 
response action; 
 
 
• Development of common guidelines for preventive measures; 
 
 
• Development of a common set of standards for contingency planning; 
 
 
• Development of common guidelines for notification procedures; 
 
• Identification of effective response measures 
 
 
Background 
 
1. Article 15 of the Protocol stipulates that the following actions shall be undertaken 
by Parties with regard to Emergency Response Action1: 
 
 
a) prompt and effective response action to such emergencies which 
might arise in the performance of activities in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area 
b) establishment of contingency plans for response to incidents with 
potential adverse effects on the Antarctic environment 
c) co-operation in the formulation and implementation of such 
contingency plans 
d) establishment of procedures for immediate notification and co-
operative response to environmental emergencies 
e) draw upon advice of appropriate international organisations 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The provisions on Emergency Response Action addressed by this Paper relate to those identified in 
Article 15 of the Protocol, and the related provisions (Articles 10 and 12) of Annex IV. 
 
 
ATCM XXII Working Paper  
 
2/8 
 
9/24/2008 
2.  Working paper ATCM XXI/WP 9 presented by the UK at the Consultative 
Meeting in Christchurch reviewed implementation of the above, and concluded 
that, with some exceptions, the ATCM has paid limited attention to the 
implementation of Article 15 and in related provisions. 
 
3.  Using ATCM XXI/WP 9 as the basis for discussion, the ATCM XXI adopted 
Resolution 1.  This states i.a. that ATCM XXII should review the issue of 
emergency response action and contingency planning with a view to implementing 
further the provisions of Article 15, and the related provisions of Annex IV to the 
Protocol on co-operative response action, and decide on further action. 
 
 
4.  Subsequent to that, the Protocol has now entered into force, and Parties have an 
obligation to implement Article 15 and its related provisions. 
 
 
5.  For any human activity there will always be a finite risk of environmental damage, 
and emergency response action can be hindered by the harsh and isolated Antarctic 
environment.  Issues raised by Article 15 need to be resolved in order to have in 
place effective provisions in the event of environmental emergencies.  
 
 
6.  The main task of the Committee for Environmental Protection, is to provide advice 
and formulate recommendations to the Parties in connection with the 
implementation of the Environmental Protocol.  The functions of the Committee 
are set out in Article 12 of the Protocol.  Article 12 (1) (f) specifies that the 
Committee shall provide advice on “procedures for situations requiring urgent 
action, including response action in environmental emergencies”. 
 
 
7.  This paper highlights aspects of the actions required by Article 15, as well closely 
related aspects not covered by Article 15.  Proposals for further action are 
identified.   
 
 
Risk Assessment 
 
8. Environmental emergencies may occur as a result of e.g.:  oil spills (at sea, on ice, 
on ice-free ground, etc.), chemical spills, accidental release of micro-organisms 
carrying disease, accidental introduction of flora/fauna, etc.  Environmental 
emergencies can be defined to include all unplanned or accidental events that result 
in or threaten to result in negative impacts on the environment.   
 
 
9. It is assumed that the risk of an environmental emergency occurring is likely to 
increase with an increase of activity in Antarctica.  However, no assessment of 
potential environmental emergencies has been carried out within the ATS.  
 
 
10. To facilitate implementation of Article 15 of the Protocol, it would be appropriate 
to develop a common understanding within the ATS of what activities are most 
likely to give rise to environmental emergencies, and what these environmental 
emergencies might be.   
 
 
11. Consequently, the ATCPs should undertake an assessment of environmental 
emergency risks due to on-going activities in Antarctica.  Furthermore, the risks 
ATCM XXII Working Paper  
 
3/8 
 
9/24/2008 
should be prioritised depending on the likely consequences in terms of 
environmental impact.  A pragmatic approach could be adopted in the process, 
given the limited range of activities taking place in Antarctica. 
 
 
12. The ATCM should request COMNAP to provide the CEP with such an evaluation, 
i.e. a risk assessment.  The CEP should, using the risk assessment as the basis, 
identify which areas/activities warrant the development of guidelines for 
preventive measures (cf. paragraphs 14-19), contingency plans (cf. paragraphs 20-
24) and response strategies (cf. paragrahps 28-32). 
 
 
13. The risk assessment should be reviewed at regular intervals in order to include any 
new types of activities in the assessment.  This would ensure that operators, Parties 
and the CEP have current up to date information at all times on which to plan for 
and react to environmental emergencies in a proper manner.  The CEP also has 
need of such information in order to effectively to undertake its functions as set out 
in Article 12 (1) (f). 
 
 
Preventive Measures 
14. There are no provisions relating to precautionary/preventive actions in the 
Protocol, except for Article 10 in Annex IV which covers design, construction, 
manning and equipment of ships.  The term “preventive measures” is also included 
in the heading of Article 12 in Annex IV, but is not further elaborated.    
 
 
15. Preventive measures are, however, very important in the whole discussion of 
minimising impacts from environmental emergencies/accidents.  The best way to 
reduce risks to the environment is through preventive measures, e.g. by prescribed 
handling procedures, storage procedures, equipment, etc. 
 
 
16. SCALOP/COMNAP has developed guidelines for handling and storage of fuel:  
“Recommended procedures for fuel oil transfer at stations and bases” (1992) and 
“Recommendations for spill prevention and containment of fuel oil at stations and 
bases” (1992).  These are examples of preventive measures, as is the Polar 
Shipping Code under discussion by the IMO (cf. paragraph 19). 
 
 
17. The ATCM should adopt guidelines for preventive measures.  The SCALOP/ 
COMNAP 1992 guidelines should be reviewed, modified as necessary and adopted 
by the ATCM.  The ATCPs should also consider the need to formulate further 
preventive guidelines for environmental risks that are not covered by the existing 
SCALOP/COMNAP guidelines.   
 
 
18. COMNAP should be requested to review the SCALOP/COMNAP 1992 
preventive guidelines and provide the CEP with guidelines modified as 
appropriate.  The CEP should also, using the risk assessment as basis, identify 
other areas/activities that warrant the development of such guideline(s).  The CEP 
should furthermore, using COMNAP’s suggestions as basis, provide advise to the 
ATCM as to the adoption of guideline(s) for preventive measures. 
 
 
19. The IMO is in the process of developing a “Polar Shipping Code” which covers 
amongst other things the design, construction, manning and equipment of ships 
ATCM XXII Working Paper  
 
4/8 
 
9/24/2008 
that will operate in polar waters.  The ATCM should encourage Consultative 
Parties to provide the IMO with appropriate input as to the Antarctic issues that 
should be addressed by the Polar Code.  The ATCM should also encourage the 
ATCPs that are IMO members to, in due course, approve and adopt the Polar 
Code. 
  
 
Contingency plans 
 
20. In order to facilitate contingency planning and thereby preparedness for 
environmental emergencies, the ATCPs should develop common standard(s) for 
plans covering preparedness and response to environmental emergencies in 
Antarctica. 
 
 
21. SCALOP/COMNAP has developed guidelines to oil spill contingency planning 
(1992).  The guidelines specify two types of plans, namely i) Facility Plans which 
are to be developed for individual stations by national operators, and ii) Multi-
Operator Plans to be developed to encompass a geographic area where a co-
ordinated and compatible response by two or more national operators is feasible.  
Many Parties have used the guidelines as the basis for the development of 
contingency plans in accordance with Article 15.   
 
 
22. All ships (of a given size) from signatory states to Annex I to MARPOL 73/78 are 
also required to carry oil spill contingency plans developed in accordance with 
IMO guidelines - “Guidelines for the development of the shipboard oil pollution 
emergency plans” (Rule 26 of Annex I to MARPOL 73/78). 
 
 
23. The ATCM should consider developing common standards for contingency plans 
for all types of environmental emergencies in Antarctica, i.e. in addition to those 
already covering oil.  In developing standards for oil spill contingency plans, the 
SCALOP/COMNAP guidelines, as well as the MARPOL guidelines and other 
relevant international agreements, should be used as the basis. 
 
 
24. COMNAP should be requested to review the SCALOP/ COMNAP 1992 oil spill 
contingency plan guidelines and provide the CEP with modified (as appropriate) 
guidelines for oil spill contingency planning.  Reference should also be made to the 
IMO guidelines.  The CEP should also, using the risk assessment as basis, identify 
additional areas/activities that warrant guidelines for contingency planning.  The 
CEP should furthermore, on the basis of COMNAP’s recommendations,  provide 
advise to the ATCM as to the adoption of contingency plan guideline(s). 
 
 
Notification and Co-operative Response Procedures 
 
25. In the event of environmental emergencies it might be necessary to require 
assistance from nearby operators.  Furthermore, information concerning 
environmental emergencies should be forwarded to CEP and its members as soon 
as possible (cf. Annex I, Article 2; Annex III, Article 12; Annex IV, Article 7; and 
Annex V, Article 11).   
ATCM XXII Working Paper  
 
5/8 
 
9/24/2008 
 
 
26. Common procedures for notification and co-operative response should be 
developed to ensure effective communication amongst all parties that might be 
involved in such operations.  
 
 
27. The ATCM should request COMNAP to provide the CEP with recommendations 
on procedures for notification and co-operative response.  The CEP should using 
COMNAP’s recommendations as the basis provide advise to the ATCM as to the 
adoption of such procedures. 
 
 
 
Response Measures 
 
29. Response action to an environmental emergency will vary from case to case, and 
it will be the prerogative of the operator at the time of the emergency as to how to 
respond to the emergency.  However, the operator would benefit from being able to 
access concrete information regarding effective response action.  This would give 
operators a sound basis on which to plan and prepare for emergencies at all levels. 
 
 
30. Effective response depends on a variety of factors, e.g.: type of emergency (oil 
spill/chemical spill, introduction of flora/fauna, disease), dimension/extent of 
emergency, location (vulnerable/less vulnerable areas), timing (summer/winter). 
 
 
31. Using the risks identified by the risk assessment as a focus the ATCPs should 
adopt guidelines for response strategies for the various types of emergencies that 
have been identified.  These guidelines could appropriately be incorporated into the 
guideline(s) for contingency plans. 
 
 
32. The ATCPs should also consider identifying the type and amount of equipment 
that should be available in order to achieve appropriate and effective response to 
the various types of emergencies. Equipment requirements could be identified in 
parallel to the development of guidelines for response strategies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33. COMNAP should be tasked to provide the CEP with suggested guideline(s) on 
response measures. The CEP should, using the risk assessment as basis, identify 
areas/activities tht warrant the development of such guideline(s).   The guidelines 
should be included as part of the contingency plan guideline(s).  The CEP should, 
using COMNAP’s suggestions as the basis provide advise to the ATCM as to the 
adoption of guidelines for response strategies. 
 
 
Proposal 
 
To achieve progress on the issues discussed above, it is suggested that the Parties 
adopt a Resolution (draft attached) which would recommend the following actions: 
 
ATCM XXII Working Paper  
 
6/8 
 
9/24/2008 
◊ Initiate a review of existing guidelines on preventive measures and contingency 
plans 
 
 
◊ Initiate the development of a Risk Assessment for activities in Antarctica in order to 
evaluate potential environmental risks  
 
 
◊ Identify areas where guidelines on preventive measures, contingency plans and response 
strategies still are needed, and initiate process for developing such guidelines 
 
 
◊ Initiate the development of procedures for notification and co-operative response in 
case of environmental emergencies.   
ATCM XXII Working Paper  
 
7/8 
 
9/24/2008 
Draft Resolution   [     ]  (1998) 
EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTION 
 
The Representatives, 
 
Welcoming the entry into force of the Environmental Protocol; 
 
Noting the provisions of Article 15 of the Environmental Protocol and related 
provisions of Annex IV on emergency response action and contingency planning; 
 
Recalling also Resolution 1 (1997); 
 
Aware that effective procedures for preventive measures, contingency planning and 
response strategies are essential in enabling appropriate protection of the Antarctic 
environment; 
 
Conscious that the existing provisions of Article 15 of the Environmental Protocol 
and related provisions of Annex IV on emergency response action and contingency 
planning need to be further developed in order to enable Parties to provide prompt and 
effective response in case of environmental emergencies in Antarctica;    
 
Recommend that:  
 
1.  COMNAP is requested to review and if necessary revise as appropriate, existing 
measures and guidelines on preventative measures and contingency plans:  
Recommended Procedures for Fuel Oil Transfer at Stations and Bases, 
Recommendations for Spill Prevention and Containment of Fuel Oil at Stations 
and Bases, and Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning. 
 
 
2.  COMNAP is tasked with developing a risk assessment for environmental 
emergencies in Antarctica.   The risk assessment should be reviewed at regular 
intervals in order to ensure that the list remains sufficiently inclusive.   
 
 
3.  Based on the risk assessment COMNAP should identify additional areas/activities 
(ie other than those posing risk of oil pollution) where emergency response 
planning is necessary, and initiate the following actions: 
 
 
• development of guidelines for preventive measures  
• development of contingency plan guidelines 
• development of guidelines for response strategies (including equipment 
requirements) 
 
4.  COMNAP is requested to provide the CEP with recommendations on procedures 
for notification and co-operative response in case of environmental emergencies.   
 
 
5.  COMNAP should report back on the above commissioned work to the Committee 
on Environmental Protection at ATCM XXIII for evaluation and advice. 
 
 
ATCM XXII Working Paper  
 
8/8 
 
9/24/2008 
6.  The ATCM shall adopt guidelines for preventive measures and contingency plans 
(including response strategies) for environmental emergencies in Antarctica based 
on advise from the CEP.  Furthermore, the ATCM shall also adopt procedures on 
notification and co-operative response. 
 
 
