Antarctic Treaty                                       XXII ATCM/WP8
XXII Consultative Meeting                             April, 1998
                                                          Original: English
Traité sur L’Antarctique                              
XXIIème Réunion Consultative                          

Tratado Antartico                                     
XXII Reunión Consultiva                                Agenda item 5c

Договор об Антарктике                                 
XXII-oe Консультативное Совещание                     

                                                      
                    Antarctic Treaty
                    Secretariat

                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                             Submitted by
                                             Australia
Working Paper submitted by Australia

AGENDA ITEM 5c

ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT

1. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have for many years given attention to the question of establishing a permanent secretariat. In 1992, at ATCM XVII, consensus was reached that a secretariat should be established to assist the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee for Environmental Protection in performing their functions.

2. Since that meeting the Parties have investigated a number of elements of the proposed secretariat including its status, functions, staffing, budget, privileges and immunities. This work has been greatly assisted by the guidance of Professor Rudiger Wolfrum of Germany.

3. In July 1992 the Republic of Argentina graciously offered Buenos Aires as the location for the permanent headquarters of the Antarctic Treaty secretariat. Despite this generous offer, the widespread support for it and the fact that there is consensus among Parties that the secretariat should be established, there has been no agreement on Buenos Aires as the location of the secretariat. It appears that there is little, if any, prospect in the foreseeable future of a change to this position and there have to date been no initiatives to address this impasse, which has existed for more than five years.

4. In common with other Parties, the Australian Government is of the view that the Antarctic Treaty Parties would gain significant benefit from the early establishment of a secretariat, and is keen to do what it can to assist Parties reach early agreement. Accordingly, in order to promote discussion and, hopefully, resolution of this matter, the Australian Government has decided to offer the city of Hobart as an alternative location. This offer is made in the spirit of assisting the achievement of consensus on an issue important to the future effectiveness of the Treaty.

5. In proposing that Parties consider an alternative location, the Australian Government is conscious of the advantages that Hobart would offer. These include that Hobart is host to the headquarters of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and to the Secretariat for the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs. Parties will be aware of the potential advantages in terms of efficiency and cost-
effectiveness in shared location of three bodies that play a central role in the deliberations of the Antarctic Treaty system.

6. Australia is a southern hemisphere country and an original signatory to the Antarctic Treaty, and Hobart is an active gateway to the Antarctic. These factors also combine to provide an experienced host for the secretariat.

7. A pamphlet with more detail on Hobart is provided separately.

8. The Australian Delegation in Tromso looks forward to working in cooperation with its colleagues in other delegations so that a solution can be found to the longstanding impasse on this important issue.

Proposal

That, in recognition of the advantages of having a permanent secretariat for the Antarctic Treaty, the Consultative Parties give careful consideration to Hobart as the location for the secretariat.
