





Site Guidelines for Visitors Pendulum Cove, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands










Site Guidelines for Visitors, Pendulum Cove, Deception Island, South Shetland Island
by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom and United States


Summary
In accordance with Resolution 5 (2005), the Deception Island Management Group (DIMG)1 have drafted site guidelines for Pendulum Cove at Deception Island. The guidelines aim to minimise the risk of visitor related pressures at this site of outstanding natural and historic value, as well as to safeguard visitor safety. It is proposed that the attached site guidelines be adopted by means of a resolution and that the secretariat publish the guide as it has done for existing site guidelines.

Background
In accordance with Resolution 5 (2005), DIMG have drafted site guidelines for Pendulum Cove, Deception Island. The area has outstanding natural and historic value and contains the ruins of Chile's Pedro Aguirre Cerda station which was destroyed in a 1969 volcanic eruption.  Site specific guidelines for this site will support the protection of the values in the area, as well as safeguard visitor safety.
Pendulum Cove is one of four commonly visited sites in Deception Island: Pendulum Cove
(the others being Whalers Bay, Baily Head and Telefon Bay). In addition to the natural and historic sights at this site, visitors are often given the opportunity to bathe in thermally heated water. The site has consistently been amongst the 20 most visited sites in Antarctica, numbering between 1000-2000 visitors in a season.
This site is in the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 4). As part of the review of the ASMA Management Plan this year, visitor guidelines appended to the plan have been re-formatted as Site Guidelines. The guidelines reflect the existing Management Plan provisions for the area, and are intended to be used in conjunction with the Management Plan. 
We note that some of the text of this site guideline is contingent on the endorsement of the review of the ASMA Management Plan at this meeting, and if necessary, minor changes can be made to the guideline to accommodate any revision of that Management Plan. 

Recommendation
It is proposed that the attached site guide be adopted by means of a Resolution and that the Secretariat publish the guide as it has done for the existing site guidelines.


