





Developing Protection for a Geothermal Area; Volcanic Ice Caves at Mount Erebus, Ross Island









Developing Protection for a Geothermal Area; Volcanic Ice Caves at Mount Erebus, Ross Island
Introduction
In Antarctica there are few locations where the ground surface is warmed by geothermal activity above the ambient air temperature.  In such places steam emissions from fumaroles (openings in the earth’s crust that emit steam and gases) condense forming a regular supply of water.  This, coupled with warm soil temperatures, provide an environment that selects for a unique and diverse assemblage of organisms.  Geothermal sites are vulnerable to the introduction of new species as they present an environment where organisms typical of more temperate regions can grow.  The sites are also vulnerable to damage as changes in the soil can affect the location and rate of steam emission.  At high altitude, geothermal environments may be formed by the release of heat from the volcano which creates ever shifting voids in the ice and snow pack that blankets the mountain.  One such fragile location is the area of ice caves and fumaroles near the summit of Mount Erebus.

Mount Erebus, Ross Island, (77o 31’ 47” S   167 o 09’ 12” E) is presently the most active volcano in Antarctica.  Geothermal activity is visible at the surface as steaming ice free ground, as fumaroles (also known as ice towers, pinnacles, tubes or chimneys) and as ice caves.  All contain ground surface soils warmed by geothermal activity above the ambient air temperature.  The Mount Erebus ice caves are home to microbial communities that are isolated from surface dwelling microbes and have developed a unique lifestyle. It is unlikely that any other volcanoes can rival Mount Erebus in terms of the number and diversity of ice caves.  
Scientists from many disciplines have conducted research at the summit of Mount Erebus over the last several decades.  Research has focused on volcanology, gas and lava chemistry, mineralogy, seismology and microbiology.  Management activities have also been conducted in the area, including the installation of radio repeaters, huts for shelter, survey markers, and the establishment and maintenance of markers associated with ASPA 130 Tramway Ridge.  In recent years, attention has been drawn to the large fumaroles and ice caves at the summit of Mount Erebus. 
The ice caves have become popular shelters from the cold temperatures at the summit.  Those working on Mount Erebus have entered the ice caves to have lunch inside the warm ice caves or simply enjoy the sheltered environment.  Those engaging in these activities rarely clean their boots or gear before entering.  Similarly, several of the ice caves have a history of scientific research that is not focussed on microbiology.  Those scientists working in the ice caves may not have taken precautions to prevent the introduction of microorganism.  All human activities conducted inside the ice caves and large fumaroles have the potential to contaminate the areas with introduced microbes or introduced nutrients that could allow alien microbes to outcompete the endemic microbial communities.  Both types of contamination will compromise the scientific value of these ice caves.
Contamination through introduced microbes or organic matter is a serious concern for the microbiologist working in the ice caves.  Microbial contamination is akin to the threats associated with non-native species and can drastically disturb the local communities that are specialized in deriving all their energy from rocks.  Contamination can result from obvious sources such as dropping crumbs while eating, smoking in the caves, leaving human waste, operating gasoline powered tools and less obviously via dirt and other materials brought in on boots or  attached to non-sterilized research equipment and off humans themselves.  As soon as contaminants are identified, a location is no longer “pristine”; any novel observation must be evaluated as to whether it is a trait of the natural system or related to contamination.  This limits the types of studies that can be conducted in contaminated ice caves.  Already, several ice caves have been identified as contaminated with human introduced eukaryotic cells.  All contamination is likely to get worse with time if access remains unchecked. Ice caves and ice fumaroles on Mount Erebus moved from a barely known curiosity to a prominent and attractive destination for science and recreation.  As these ice caves become better known they will be under increasing pressure from unregulated visits.  Hence, the current contamination issues need to be addressed and future contamination needs to be avoided.
Ice Cave Inventory
The first step in addressing contamination is to determine the scope and scale of the problem.  To do this a systematic inventory of all ice caves, including those inside ice fumaroles, on Mount Erebus should be completed.  This inventory would be a catalogue of all known Mount Erebus ice caves.  It would describe their location, size, characterization of the microbial community, and a history of human visits. Much of these data can be collated from the records already held by Mount Erebus science teams.  Additionally, some field work to confirm ice cave locations, size, and localized contamination is anticipated.  Ice caves would be classified as certainly contaminated, likely to have only localized contamination, and likely to be pristine because they have never been entered.
Ice caves that are classified as certainly contaminated from multiple undocumented scientific and informal visits are of little value for microbial studies.  
Ice caves that have been visited before, but the type or frequency of visits to suggest that their microbial ecology is unaffected in particular sections, are classified as likely to have only localized contamination but are still of value for microbial research studies.  These ice caves need to be sampled to document the extent and type of contamination.  A monitoring program should be developed to determine the level of contamination by humans.  Knowledge of the level of contamination will inform and justify any plans for protection of their microbial communities for future study.

Ice caves that have never been entered are classified as likely to be pristine and are of extreme interest and value for microbial studies.  It is important to preserve these ice caves as contamination free.  

It may be desirable to restrict access to the ice caves classified as likely to be pristine until a Code of Conduct that seeks to minimize contamination, is developed and agreed upon.  However, non-invasive studies of such caves may be conducted, such as surface analysis of collapse features, gas flow measurements at the vent area and possibly ground-penetrating radar.

Ice Cave Code of Conduct
Given the unique nature and increasing interest in the Mount Erebus ice caves, it is important to protect them from further contamination to ensure their continued value to all disciplines of science.  The best way to achieve this may be to develop a Code of Conduct that incorporates best management practices to manage the risk of contamination across all Mount Erebus ice caves.  Ideally, a Code of Conduct would take into account the current level of microbial contamination and anticipated scientific value of each ice cave.  For example, strict microbial control procedures would be recommended for pristine ice caves, while more general procedures would be recommended for entry to contaminated caves. Until a Code of Conduct is put into practice, all visit to the Mount Erebus ice caves may contribute to the potential degradation of the scientific value of these areas due to the risk of contamination to the microbial communities. 
Conclusions
The unique environments of the Mount Erebus ice caves are threatened by human activity.  It would be beneficial to take steps to restrict activities in the Mount Erebus ice caves until a Code of Conduct is developed.  The Mount Erebus ice caves are just one example of a fragile Antarctic geothermal environment.  Other geothermal areas might also benefit from a Code of Conduct.

Recommendations
    1) Encourage interested Parties and their scientists to collaborate in generating an inventory of Mount Erebus ice caves that identifies the location, size, history of human activity and current microbial community characteristics in each ice caves.
    2) Encourage interested Parties and their scientists to collaborate in developing a Code of Conduct that recognizes the current level of microbiological contamination in the Mount Erebus ice caves and strives to prevent further contamination in ice caves of interest for microbiology studies.
    3) Encourage Parties to adopt a temporary moratorium on informal visits or visits for any purpose other than scientific research inside all Mount Erebus ice caves until a Code of Conduct is agreed.
    4) Encourage Parties to adopt a temporary moratorium on entry for any purpose into Mount Erebus ice caves that are currently believed to be pristine until a Code of Conduct can be agreed.
    5) Encourage scientists working in Mount Erebus ice caves to sterilize their gear and clothing to the best of their abilities and eliminate the use of gasoline powered tools inside caves, acknowledging that best practices will be identified when developing the Code of Conduct.
    6) Encourage scientists, interested Parties, and SCAR to work together to develop appropriate guidance material for other geothermal areas in Antarctica.

