





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands








ASPA No. 128, Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) through Recommendation X-5 (1979, SSSI No 8)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation X-5 (1979)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Current management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation XII-5 (1983)
Recommendation XIII-7 (1985)
Resolution 7 (1995)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 128, Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:
Measure 2 (2006), Designation of ASMA No 1 (Admiralty Bay), including ASPA No 128 and HSM No 51 (Puchalski Grave)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
yes
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, captions and graphics
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
yes
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
no
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for a complete list of changes
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a

Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

Summary
Poland has conducted a review of the management plan for ASPA No. 128, Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands and has determined that only minor amendments are required. Poland recommends that the CEP approves the revised management plan attached to the Working Paper.
Introduction
Western Shore of Admiralty Bay was originally designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 8 through Recommendation X-5 (1979, SSSI No. 8) after a proposal by Poland. on the grounds that it contains diverse avian and mammalian fauna and locally rich vegetation, providing a representative sample of maritime Antarctic ecosystem. The date of expiry of the Area was extended by Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985) and Resolution 7 (1995). In accordance with Decision 1 (2001) the Area was redesignated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA No. 128). A revised Management Plan was adopted through Measure 1 (2000). 
ASPA No. 128 is embedded within Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 1 Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, designated under Measure 2 (2006).
The original goals for designating the Area are still relevant.
Revisions
Small revision to the boundary of the Area was made in the current Management Plan. The northern boundary has been extended north to include parts of the Adèlie Penguin rookery that were previously left out of the Area, the slope on which penguins migrate to and from the sea, and a site where elephant seals rest during moulting period. The area added is ca 0.04 km2. The change resolves an anomaly in the previous definition of the boundary, and shall enhance the protection of the values which are safeguarded in the Area. Appropriate changes were made in Map 2 and in the description of the Area.
Amendments to the text are summarized below:
    • Paragraph detailing the Area history (e.g. initial designation, modifications) was updated.
    • Map A and B showing the location of the Area were compiled in one Map 1. Map C was redrawn into Map 2 to reflect change made to the northern boundary of the Area, as well as changes connected with the retreating glaciers.
    • The description of the boundary in Section 6(i) has been updated.
    • Amendments were made in Section 6 (i) reflecting new data on penguins’ and  pinnipeds’ numbers, as well as new research on glacial retreat and alien grass species Poa annua.  
    • Section 6 (iv) was updated to reflect the new naming and numbering system of Protected Areas.
    • Section 7 (iii) was rewritten and the requirement has been added that installation, maintenance, modification or removal of structures in the Area shall be done in such a way as to minimize disturbance to fauna and flora.
    • A requirement that visitors take precautions against the introduction of alien species to the Area was added to Section 7(v). Precautions against poultry products have been strengthened.
    • Minor editorial improvements were made throughout, including for consistency with wording in management plans recently adopted by ATCM and with the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.

Recommendation
Poland recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.

