





Coastal Camping Considerations








Coastal Camping Considerations
Introduction
We have noticed an increase in non-governmental interest in engaging in vessel supported camping.  We received a variety of enquiries ranging from small groups (less than 10 total people) that intend to camp on the same beach for several days with a support vessel anchored nearby, to groups who want to put large numbers of  tourists (60) ashore for an overnight camping  expedition.  We have also received requests from a group who wanted to “island hop” in kayaks, camping ashore overnight, with a support vessel nearby.
In the course of reviewing these requests in light of national environmental protection legislation we’ve faced several challenges in determining if environmental best practices would be met during the expedition, thus ensuring that the expeditions have no more than a minor or transitory impact.  It is likely that others assessing coastal camping requests face similar challenges, namely: 1) Are the intended camping areas safe and suitably large for the number of campers, 2) Is the management plan for human waste suitable for the number of campers?  3) Will the staff be able to provide sufficient oversight of the tourists?
This paper attempts to address each of these challenges and suggests potential mechanisms for ensuring that environmental best practices will be met during the coastal camping expeditions.

Other Parties may have encountered other issues that may be relevant to discuss in this context of coastal camping.
Coastal Camping Sites
Several of the sites that are frequently proposed for coastal camping are already covered by Site Guidelines for Visitors (SGV).  None of the SGVs explicitly address camping; however seven out of the 32 approved SGVs imply that camping is allowed.  These SGVs include the sentence “No visitors ashore between 22:00hrs and 4:00hrs (local time), except for those engaged in organized overnight stays”.  In addition, 10 out of the 32 approved guidelines imply that camping is not allowed at the site by prohibiting visitors ashore from 22:00hrs to 4:00hrs with no exceptions.  The remaining 15 SGVs are completely silent on camping.  
Repeated camping in the same location or large groups of campers may have an environmental impact.   The existing SGV’s serve to protect the areas they cover by providing guidance on how to avoid or mitigate impact from visitor activities.  In our view, it would be very helpful if the SGVs made explicit statements about whether camping could be conducted safely and in a manner that avoids or mitigates environmental impact.  This could be easily accomplished by adding a sentence to the “Visitors” section in the “Landing Requirement” subsection.  For those SGVs that allow camping, it would be useful to state the maximum number of campers the site can accommodate, and to note the preferred camp site(s) on the map.  It would also be useful to list any hazards for campers.  
We also note that a number of the campsites that have been used for non-governmental camping in the past are not covered by SGVs.  Therefore it is likely that those reviewing the initial environmental evaluation (IEE) or other required documentation would not be familiar with the sites.  In these cases it might be useful to develop guidelines for appropriate camp sites.  These standards would relate to minimum area per camper,  availability of snow covered ground or at least ground that has not been colonized by moss or lichen, distance from colonies or known haul out locations of native birds and mammals, and distance from the high tide line.  Distance between campers and wildlife can impact the safety of the campers and the wildlife.  Camping too close may result in increased disturbance to wildlife or an increase in aggressive interactions between pinnipeds and campers.  It might be useful for non-governmental operators to make available a consolidated list of all the sites they have successfully camped, including GPS coordinates, and details about the location such as total area suitable for camping, typical number of campers, presence of moss or lichen, and presence of native birds and mammals.  Perhaps working from this set of information best management practices could be identified and used to inform the guidelines. 
Human Waste Management
Each camping expedition handles human wastes quite differently.  Annex III, Article 1 of the protocol recommends that sewage and domestic liquid wastes be removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area to the maximum extent practicable.  Annex III, Article 4 recommends that waste generated at field camps be returned to supporting ships.  Annex III, Article 5 of the protocol allows for human wastes and grey water to be discharged directly into the sea, provided there is sufficient circulation to disperse the waste.  It further requires maceration before discharge, if the average weekly occupancy will be more than 30.  In considering permit applications in the US context this has been interpreted to allow camping groups of 30 or less (including staff and guides) to individually discharge their human waste directly into the sea.
A number of expeditions prefer to use toilet tents with full containment toilets.  This is much more comfortable for the campers than the method mentioned above and reduces the amount of human waste released into the environment.  However, it then becomes important that sufficient toilets, in terms of number of toilets and volume of waste they can contain, are provided.  With small group, of 20 or less it has not been a problem to use one toilet, with a capacity of approximately 45 liters.  However, some NGOs have expressed interest in significantly increasing the number of campers per landing.  
It would be useful to develop guidelines or best management practices for human waste management during coastal camping.  Based on experience the US has gained by reviewing expeditions it is suggested that the following guidance could be considered:  
Camping expeditions with 30 or more total people ashore are required to use full containment toilets, and dispose of the waste through the shipboard sewage system or outside of the Treaty Area.
Camping expeditions that use toilets are required to provide one toilet for every 30 total (inclusive of campers, staff and guides) people ashore.  Each toilet should have minimum capacity of 30 liters per day. 
.
Oversight of Campers
Broadly speaking, there seem to be two models for camping expeditions.  The first model is characterized by a small group of experienced campers who plan the activity as an integral part of the expedition.  In our experience, this type of expedition provides names and relevant experience for most of the campers at the time of IEE submission.   The environmental documentation also assigns monitoring responsibilities to particular individuals.  We have found the documents to be sufficient in describing the supervision and responsibilities of the campers.
The second model is characterized by larger groups of campers.  Often, camping is a novelty for these individuals, who purchased a camping supplement to their Antarctic cruise program.  When ashore during the day time for landings, these same tourists are typically are closely supervised by the guides and expedition leader.  We would like to see this same -or perhaps a higher- level of supervision during camping activities. One of the more experienced coastal camping NGO operators maintains a guide to tourist ration of 1:10 during overnight camping trips.  This seems like a best management practice that could be more widely adopted.
Achieving a high level of supervision may require that the responsible guides stay awake all night to monitor the campers and ensure that the entirety of the camping trip is conducted safely with minimal environmental impact.  This again could pose logistical challenges.  These same guides are often relied upon to provide supervision the day prior to camping and the day following camping.  There may be a concern that a guide who has been awake for more than 24 hours may not be able to adequately perform their job duties.   Therefore a best management practice could be to designate overnight camping guides, and designate appropriate rest periods for them before and after camping.
Conclusion
Based on enquiries we have received, it is suggested that the interest in coastal camping is growing.   It would be helpful to have some guidance to aid in the review process and improve consistency between competent authorities in reviewing such activities.  Guidance is particularly needed in determining appropriate camp sites, appropriate human waste management practices, and ensuring adequate overnight supervision. 

Recommendations
We propose that the ATCM considers the following actions:
    1) Encourage Parties and Observers developing or revising SGVs to add an explicit statement as to whether camping is advisable to the “Landing Ashore” subsection of the “Visitors” section.  If camping is advisable, give the maximum number of campers the site can accommodate, and show the preferred camp site(s) on the map.
    2) Encourage IAATO to work with its operators that are experienced in coastal camping to generate a catalog of sites potentially suited for camping.  This catalogue should include GPS coordinates for the site, an estimate of total area suitable for camping, the typical number of campers that are accommodated at that site, and information about the presence of native birds, mammals and plants.
    3) Develop camping guidelines to aid in the review process and improve consistency between competent authorities in reviewing such activities.  This may be accomplished through a future workshop, ICG, or other working group.  Such guidelines could include, but would not be limited to:
    • Best management practices for camping site selection
    • Best management practices for human waste generated during coastal camping including:
        a. Requiring the use of full containment toilets for groups of 30 or more people (including guides and staff).
        b. Recommending a minimum of 1 toilet per 30 people ashore.
        c. Recommending that toilets have a minimum capacity of 30 liters per day.
    • Best management practices  to ensure adequate safety and supervision of campers
    a. Recommending a minimum awake guide to camper ratio of 1:10.
    b. Recommending the designation of overnight camping guides and appropriate rest periods for these individuals before and after the camping activity.

