





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 111 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 111 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands
A working paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom has undertaken a major review of the Management Plan for ASPA No.111 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands.  In submitting this revised Plan, the United Kingdom recommends that the CEP ask the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake an intersessional review and to report back to CEP XVI.
Background
The primary reason for the designation of Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands (Lat. 62o57’S, Long. 060o38’W) as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) is to protect environmental values, predominantly the breeding bird and seal populations, and to a lesser extent, the terrestrial vegetation within the Area.  Scientific values are also recognised and in particular the value of the area for future collection of telemetry data in order to explore penguin foraging behaviour.
Following a visit to the Area in February 2011, the Management Plan has been revised and updated by the UK.  The revised plan is attached for the consideration of the CEP (Annex 1). 
The Area was originally designated in Recommendation IV-15 (1966, SPA No. 15) after a proposal by the United Kingdom on the grounds that southern Powell Island and the adjacent islands support substantial vegetation and a considerable bird and mammal fauna.
Values protected include: (i) the diverse breeding avifauna typical of the South Orkney Islands region (ii) the longest known breeding site of fur seals in the Antarctic (iii) a diverse flora, typical of the region and (iv) the scientific value of the location for research to determine penguin foraging behaviour.  
The proposed revision includes some substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan including:
    • Redrafting of the text into the format recommended in the ‘Guide to the preparation of management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’ [Resolution 2 (2011)]
    • Introduction.  An introduction has been added that describes the primary reasons for the Area’s designation as an ASPA and the contribution of the Area to the Antarctic protected areas system.  The Area’s position within the framework of the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ has been described [Resolution 3 (2008)].
    • 6(i) Geographical co-ordinates and natural features. Text describing the boundary of the Area has been altered to enhance clarity.
    • Section 6(ii) Access to the Area.  This section has been added and includes information on possible access routes to the Area.  In addition, restrictions on helicopter overflights, in accordance with the ‘Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds’ contained in Resolution 2 (2004) have been added and helicopters landings have been prohibited within the Area between the period 1 November to 15 February.
    • Section 7(v) Location of field camps.  Camping is now permitted at the designated field campsite 
Recommendation
Given that the Management Plan for ASPA No.111 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands has been amended, the United Kingdom recommends that the CEP ask the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake a more detailed intersessional review of the revised Plan and report back to CEP XVI. 

