





Site Guidelines for Port Charcot, Booth Island








Site Guidelines for Port Charcot, Booth Island

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Argentina, France, Ukraine and United States, in conjunction with IAATO

Summary
Site guidelines have been prepared for Port Charcot, Booth Island.  The proponents recommend that the CEP submit the site guidelines for adoption by the ATCM.

Background
    1. At CEP XIV IAATO submitted Information Paper 105 ‘Report on IAATO operator use of Antarctic Peninsula landing sites and ATCM visitor site guidelines, 2009-10 & 2010-11 season’.  IAATO reported that most of the landings were covered by site guidelines or under National Programme management through their proximity to stations. IAATO suggested that two additional sites should adopt site guidelines for visitors in the near future, one of which is Port Charcot, Booth Island.
    2. Port Charcot (Latitude 65° 04’S, Longitude 64° 02’W) is located on Booth Island, western Antarctic Peninsula.  Port Charcot is a 2.5 km wide bay which lies on the north-western arm of the ’Y’ shore of Booth Island. There is a small cobbled bay on the north shore sheltered by two small offshore rocky islets and a series of rocky outcrops surround the bay. 
    3. The site is recognised for its historical importance and contains the remains of the base used to over-winter by the French Antarctic Expedition (1903-05), led by Dr. Jean Baptiste Charcot, in 1904 (Historic Site and Monument No. 28). The site also has important environmental values: a number of bird species breed in the area, and several seal and penguin species use the beach as a resting place. Interesting floral species are also present. 
    4. The United Kingdom, Argentina, France, Ukraine, United States and IAATO have produced Site Guidelines for Port Charcot (Annex 1).

Recommendation
The United Kingdom, Argentina, France, Ukraine, United States and IAATO recommend that the CEP submit the site guidelines for adoption by the ATCM.



