





Comandante Ferraz Station: Proposed Plan for the Demolition and Construction of Antarctic Emergency Modules









Comandante Ferraz Station: 
Proposed Plan for the Demolition and Construction of Antarctic Emergency Modules 
Working Paper Submitted by Brazil
Introduction

This Working Paper (WP) aims to introduce a plan for the construction and operation of Antarctic Emergency Modules (AEM) at the same location of the Comandante Ferraz Station (EACF). Furthermore, it proposes a plan for the demolition and removal of the main building, which was destroyed by a fire.
EACF was established in 1984 as a permanent facility. It is operated by PROANTAR, the Brazilian Antarctic Programme. The station is located at Lat. 62° 05’S; Long. 58° 23’W on the eastern shore of the Keller Peninsula, Martel Inlet, at the northern head of Admiralty Bay, King George Island.

On February 25th 2012, a fire started in the machine room and destroyed the main building of the station. One military was wounded and two other died. An investigation is being conducted to define the causes of the fire. There were 58 people in the Station during the fire. As soon as it was noticed, the 15 military from the Base Group, responsible for the maintenance and operation of the station started to fight the fire and evacuated the 30 Brazilian scientists who were working at the Station, as well as one alpinist and 12 civilian Brazilian Navy workers.

The fire soon spread into the entire station. All the fire-fighting procedures were used, but unfortunately they were not enough to extinguish the fire. The Antarctic Gasoil in the service tank, together with the wind, contributed to spread the fire. Brazil was promptly assisted by Chile, Argentina, Poland and the United Kingdom.

The station had three main and one emergency diesel generator, as well as one experimental etanol generator. At the moment of the fire one of the diesel generators was in use. Two firemen of the Base Group entered the station with fire-fighting clothes, masks, radio and oxygen to combat the fire. The two military had great experience in fire-fighting, but were not able to leave the station and died. The investigation is also trying to determine the causes of the two deaths. 

In 2005, the Report of the Antarctic Treaty Inspections, undertaken jointly by the United Kingdom, Australia and Peru, concluded that a review of fire-fighting equipment should be undertaken. Based on the Report, PROANTAR conducted a Director Plan to update many systems, including the power generation and fire-fighting systems. The modernization was concluded at the beginning of 2011. Few months before the accident, PROANTAR had started studies to build a new Station. 

From February 25th to April 8th, PROANTAR conducted an emergency plan to comply with the Madrid Protocol and mitigate all possible environmental impact. Two vessels, one C-130 airplane and many experts from Brazilian Agencies were mobilized to carry out the response actions and to investigate the accident. A representative from the Brazilian Environmental Ministry supervised the actions \ in Keller Peninsula, in order to avoid soil and sea contamination. The main building of EACF was completely closed. Many debris, liquids and chemical products were removed by ship to Brazil. The entire  perimeter of the Station and of the beach were cleaned to avoid soil and sea contamination during the winter. Four military personnel will stay in the Chilean Air Force Base “Presidente Eduardo Frei” in this period and will conduct inspections in EACF to start emergency actions, if necessary.

PROANTAR is conducting an emergency debris removing plan, which will begin early in the next summer season. Based on this plan, actions will be conducted to mitigate soil contamination during the snow melting period. The refuge stations, the laboratories, the arctic gasoil tanks, the etanol tank, the fresh water pumps, the grey water three-stage passive filtration system and the helipad were preserved. 

Description of the Proposed Activities

The transport and displacement of personnel and cargo to conduct the activities proposed in this WP will consist of approximately 50 personnel during the first summer season 2012/2013. There is no plan to carry out any activities during winter. In addition, 15 people from the Base Group personnel will be responsible for using AEM as an accommodation facility and operating vehicles to support the demolition activities in the EACF area. The maximum number of people at EACF during the next two summer seasons (2012/13 and 2013/14) will be approximately 65.

Antarctic Emergency Modules Construction 

The emergency modules will be prepared to host dining and kitchen facilities, housing units, power generators, maintenance shelters, waste platforms and medical facilities.
The place where the AEM will be installed will be defined after a study about the possible installation areas in Keller Peninsula. It will be guided by the Madrid Protocol and all the environmental concerns in order to mitigate or avoid negative impacts. Another study will be carried out to define the circulation areas among the AEM, the areas where the debris will be disposed and the place where the new Station will be built.
The existing facilities and structures from the former Brazilian Station, which were not destroyed by the fire, will continue to be used. This action will reduce the quantity of material that will be shipped to Antarctica and will also minimize the amount of waste generated by the demolition of EACF. 

The installation of the AEM will be coordinated by Brazilian Navy engineers. Shipping and vehicles will be supplied by the Brazilian Navy. The installation of the AEM will take place during the austral summer season (October 2012 to February 2013). During this period, the scientific work in land at Keller Peninsula will be reduced. The logistic vessel “Ary Rongel” will be used for the transportation of personnel and cargo. If necessary, another cargo ship will be used to remove the demolition waste. 
Demolition and removal of Old Ferraz Station
Just after the incident at EACF an Emergency Response Plan was activated. PROANTAR sent to Keller Peninsula a team of environmental and demolition specialists to remove all the debris and to prepare the EACF for the winter season (April – October 2012). The main building of EACF, made of steel, was completed closed to avoid the snow to get in. 

The response for the incident was divided in steps. The first step was the identification of the areas burned with high level contamination risk. The waste substances were removed from those areas.  Then the hazardous substances that were not burned were also removed. All the waste was put into plastic containers, classified and transferred to the Brazilian ships in the area.  A waste removal plan was established to be executed during the next summer season to avoid soil and water contamination during the snow melting. Steel debris were put into containers and removed to the Brazilian ships. The wreckages that were removed from EACF were shipped to Brazil by the Brazilian Navy ships.

Demolition will be carried out over two austral summer seasons concurrently with the construction of the AEM and planning of the New Brazilian Station. A further season may be required for the removal of any remaining waste. All the waste will be shipped to Brazil by the Brazilian Navy.
In March 2012 environmental specialists and Brazilian Navy engineers were on site for three weeks, during which they were able to:
    • Check demolition requirements;
    • Verify deconstruction methodology, sequence and timetabling;
    • Quantify the estimated amount of waste cargo for removal, and waste steel for 
recycling; 
    • Plan the storage and disposal of waste.
A demolition plan and a waste management and disposal plan are being elaborated to be executed in the next summer. All the plans will be in compliance with the Annex III to the Madrid Protocol.
Conclusion
Over its 30 years PROANTAR has always placed considerable emphasis on environmental issues and compliance with the Environmental Madrid Protocol. PROANTAR considers that the demolition of the main building of EACF and the installation of Emergency Modules will be done with the minimum possible impact on the Antarctic environment due to the implementation of preventive and mitigation measures outlined. As soon as the new Station project is prepared, Brazil will submit it to the ATCM.



