





Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 112, Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands




Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 112 
COPPERMINE PENINSULA, ROBERT ISLAND 
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS
Summary
Chile submitted the Management Plan for ASPA 112, in the format agreed upon, after Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty became effective. Chile recommends that the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans should be asked to provide a more detailed review of the proposed plan during the intersessional period.
Introduction
In 1970, Chile proposed to grant protection to the Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands, in order to protect its biological values, especially its vegetation. Through recommendation VI-10 (1970), Coppermine Peninsula was established as Specially Protected Area No. 16. The first Management Plan was approved through Recommendation XVI-6 (1991). In accordance with Decision 1 (2002), the Area came to be called Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 112.
The first version of the Management Plan in accordance with provisions of Annex V of the Protocol is described below.
Revisions
The below proposal concerns the first Management Plan for the Area following the approval of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, thus containing new information in its most part. TTTThis can then be considered as a new version of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 112. 
This Management Plan has been prepared in accordance with Resolution 2 (2011), “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.”
Recommendation
The draft Management Plan is submitted for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection. Chile recommends that the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans should be asked to provide a more detailed review of the proposed plan during the intersessional period, and report back to CEP XVI.
ASPA No. 112, COPPERMINE PENINSULA, ROBERT ISLAND
    1) Is a new ASPA proposed? 
No.
    2) Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. The Area was designated as a SPA No. 16 through Recommendation VI-10 (1970). The first Management Plan was approved by Recommendation XVI-6 (1991). In accordance with Decision 1 (2002), the Area came to be called ASPA No. 112.
    4) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 

    (i) major or minor?
Major, as this is the first version of the Management Plan in accordance with Annex V.
    (ii)  any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
    (iii) any changes to the maps?
No.
    (iv) any change to the description of the Area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
    (v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it?
No.
    (vi) • Other: - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the Management Plan in which these are located.
The first version of the Management Plan has been modified almost in its entirety. 
    5) If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
No.
    6) If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
    7) If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
    8) If the proposal is related to an ASPA, which is the primary reason for designation (that is, which section under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
The Area is protected mainly because it features a significant terrestrial ecosystem, with the presence of significant Antarctic flora and fauna colonies, which are of special interest for scientific research.
    9) Has the primary Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA been identified (refer to the "Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent" attached to Resolution 3 (2008)? 
Yes, the primary associated domain is Domain G.

