





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 115 Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 115 Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land
A working paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom has undertaken a major review of the Management Plan for ASPA No.115 Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land.  In submitting this revised Plan, the United Kingdom recommends that the CEP ask the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake an intersessional review and to report back to CEP XVI.
Background
The primary reason for the designation of Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land (Latitude 67°53'20" S, Longitude 67°25'30" W; area 1.58 km2) as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) is to protect environmental values, and primarily the terrestrial flora and fauna but also the avifauna within the Area.  
Following a visit to the Area in February 2011, the Management Plan has been revised and updated by the UK.  The revised plan is attached for the consideration of the CEP (Annex 1). 
Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land was originally designated as a Specially Protected Area through Recommendation XIII-II (1985, SPA No. 19) after a proposal by the United Kingdom.  It was designated on the grounds that the island contains a rich and diverse flora and fauna typical of the southern Antarctic Peninsula region.  These values were reiterated in Recommendation XVI-6 (1991) when a management plan for the site was adopted, and are largely reaffirmed again in the present management plan.
Values protected include: (i) the diverse flora typical of the southern Antarctic Peninsula region including an abundance of the only two Antarctic flowering plants Deschampsia antarctica and Colobanthus quitensis, (ii) the numerous mosses and lichens which form well-developed communities on the island (iii) the invertebrate fauna is rich and the island is one of the southernmost sites for the apterous midge Belgica antarctica and (iv) the colony of c. 1850 Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) and one of the farthest south colonies of a few dozen blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) at the south-east corner of the island.  
The proposed revision includes some substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan including:
    • The text has been redrafted into the format recommended in the ‘Guide to the preparation of management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’ [Resolution 2 (2011)]
    • Introduction.  An introduction has been added that describes the primary reasons for the Area’s designation as an ASPA and the contribution of the Area to the Antarctic protected areas system.  The Area’s position within the framework of the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ has been described [Resolution 3 (2008)].
    • Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features. Text describing the boundary of the Area has been altered to enhance clarity
    • Section 6(ii) Access to the Area.  This section has been added and includes information on possible access routes to the Area and restrictions on helicopter overflights, in accordance with the ‘Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds’ contained in Resolution 2 (2004).
    • Section 6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area.  Information has been included on additional structures found recently within the area and management activities to secure and partially removed the remains of a survey mast from the island’s eastern peak.
Recommendation
Given that the revised Management Plan has been substantially amended, the United Kingdom recommends that the CEP ask the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake a more detailed intersessional review of the revised Plan and report back to CEP XVI. 

