





The proposed designation of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) for high altitude geothermal areas of the Ross Sea region








The proposed designation of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area for high altitude geothermal areas of the Ross Sea region
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Introduction
In the Ross Sea region, there are three known sites where high altitude geothermal activity occurs; Mount Erebus, Ross Island and Mounts Melbourne and Rittman in Victoria Land. 

A small area on the summit of Mount Erebus (ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island) and the entire summit of Mount Melbourne, encompassing all areas with geothermal activity (ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land) are Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) designated to protect the unique biodiversity in the warm soils at these sites. The geothermal activity at Mount Rittman was recently discovered (1991/92 season) and is not currently protected.

New Zealand scientists investigating the microbial communities at the three sites in recent seasons have identified Mount Rittmann as also warranting special protection because of its unique microbial communities and assemblages of vegetation. 

The same management measures would be required to minimise impacts if working at any of these sites. Therefore, a single ASPA encompassing all three sites with the same provisions for protection was suggested. 

Working in close collaboration with scientists who have been working at these sites, New Zealand is proposing the designation of an ASPA for high altitude geothermal areas of the Ross Sea region including areas on Mounts Erebus, Melbourne and Rittman. Such an approach to ASPA designation would:

    • Represent a more strategic approach to protecting a rare environment type in Antarctica; and

    • Apply consistent measures to protect the highly sensitive and unique species assemblages to the same high standard in a single management plan.
Procedures so far undertaken
New Zealand initiated a review of the management plan for ASPA No. 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island and ASPA No. 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land, in accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 

Following a literature review, consultation with scientists and other national programmes and with reference to the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011), an initial draft management plan for high altitude geothermal areas in the Ross Sea region was drafted. 

In collaboration with New Zealand scientists, comments on the initial draft management plan were received and a site assessment was undertaken in the 2011/12 season at ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge. New boundary markers were installed. The initial draft management plan and maps were revised as a result of the site visit. The initial draft management plan is not complete, as a site visit is still required for Mounts Melbourne and Rittman.

Suggested approach forward
In order to take this proposal forward, New Zealand suggests that:

    1. During the intersessional period between CEP XV (2012) and CEP XVI (2013), the initial draft management plan for high altitude geothermal areas is considered by the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) for comment by October 2012, prior to the 2012/13 anticipated season, so that any identified issues may be addressed during the 2012/13 season. 

NOTE: Due to the remoteness of these sites and the logistic planning required to visit them, New Zealand would prefer to have SGMP comments provided prior to the site visit, in order to address any issues identified by the SGMP while on site.

    2. During the 2012/13 field season, a site assessment will be conducted at ASPA 118 (Mount Melbourne) and Mount Rittmann. The aim will be to review boundary areas and consider provisions for each site in the initial draft management plan in line with comments from the SGMP. If the SGMP provides any comments which would require a site visit to ASPA 130 (Mount Erebus), New Zealand would endeavour to undertake that work in this season also.

    3. The initial draft management plan will be reviewed after the site visit, and final maps developed in line with SGMP comments. New Zealand will also instigate a consultation process with the science community for comment when the revised draft is complete. 

    4. New Zealand will then submit the revised draft management plan for the high altitude geothermal ASPA, and a document outlining its responses to the SGMP’s advice. The SGMP will be invited to provide any additional comments. 

    5. A final draft management plan will then be submitted to the CEP in 2013.
Recommendations
This paper presents an initial and incomplete drafted management plan for high altitude geothermal areas in the Ross Sea region. Accessing all three sites is challenging, but this work is planned for the 2012/13 season. New Zealand recommends the CEP:

    1. Acknowledges that New Zealand has initiated a review of ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus and ASPA No. 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land.

    2. Considers and indicates support for the idea of a multi site ASPA encompassing ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land and Mount Rittmann.

    3. Forwards the initial draft of the multi site ASPA management plan to the SGMP for review in line with the steps outlined above.

ASPA No. YYY: High altitude geothermal areas of the Ross Sea region
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes both ASPA 130 and ASPA 118
First designation:
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
    • Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 11 Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus
ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
    • Recommendation XVI-5 (1987) as SSSI No. 24 Summit of Mount Melbourne
    • Recommendation XVI-8 (1991) as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 22 Cryptogram Ridge, Mount Melbourne
First adoption of management plan: 
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
    • Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
    • Recommendation XVI-5 (1987) as SSSI No. 24
    • Recommendation XVI-8 (1991) as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 22
Any revisions to management plan:
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
    • Measure 2 (1995) 
    • Measure 3 (1997)
    • Measure 1(2002)
    • It was reviewed without changes at CEP X (2007)
ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
    • SSSI No.24 and SPA No. 22 were given the same ASPA number but remained as separate sites and were referred to as ASPA 118a and ASPA 118b respectively under Resolution 5 (1996)
    • ASPA 118a and ASPA 118b were merged by Measure 2 (2003)
    • Measure 5 (2008)
Current management plan: 
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
    • Measure 1 (2002)
ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
    • Measure 5 (2008)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
ASPA 118a: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
ASPA 118b:Cryptogram Ridge, Mount Melbourne
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
    • The boundaries of Tramway Ridge are not to change. 
ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
    • The extent of the ASPA boundary at Mount Melbourne will be reviewed.
The geothermal area at Mount Rittman will be added to the ASPA management plan.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes
A Locations Map has been created showing the relative location of each ASPA.
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
    • Maps A, C and D have been removed. 
    • Maps B and D have been revised and renamed.
ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
    • Map A to be removed.
    • Map B to be revised with new boundaries.
    • Possible addition of a new map.
The Area at Mount Rittman will be added to the ASPA management plan.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes – to be completed.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island and ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land are to be amalgamated with Mount Rittman into a single Antarctic Specially Protected Area for high altitude geothermal areas of the Ross Sea region.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
An amalgamated revised management plan has been drafted. All sections have had editorial changes to incorporate Mount Erebus, Mount Melbourne and Mount Rittman into a single management plan.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
No
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.


