





Repeat Unauthorised Commercial Expedition: Nilaya/Berserk









Repeat Unauthorised Commercial Expedition: Nilaya/Berserk
1.0 	Summary

New Zealand proposes that action be taken against repeat unauthorised expeditions to the Antarctic, before these become a systemic threat to the Antarctic Treaty System, and that Parties consider the implications of the funding of unauthorised expeditions by third parties. 
2.0 	Background
2.1	2011 Berserk Incident

At ATCM XXXIV, New Zealand, Norway and the United States presented an information paper (IP 18) on the unauthorised expedition to the Ross Sea by the Norwegian-flagged yacht, Berserk, organised by Norwegian reality television personality, Mr Jarle Andhøy.  The paper outlined the warnings from authorities which Mr Andhøy ignored; the week-long search for the Berserk; and the confirmation of the loss of three of the Berserk’s crew.  
2.2	2012 Nilaya Expedition

On 13 January 2012, Norway wrote to inform Parties that Mr Andhøy might be planning to sail to the Ross Sea again without approval from Norwegian authorities.  
2.2.1	Further warnings from New Zealand authorities and notification of Immigration offence

Mr Andhøy was located by a New Zealand Immigration officer in Auckland on the morning of 23 January 2012 and served with a deportation liability notice due to his failure to report his 2007 deportation from Canada on his New Zealand arrival card.  The officer warned Mr Andhøy against travelling to the Ross Sea without authorisation from a Treaty Party; Mr Andhøy claimed that he had no such intention and had not purchased a new yacht.  That afternoon, based on new information, the Immigration officer approached a Russian national aboard a 54 foot yacht named "Nilaya" in Auckland’s Viaduct harbour.  The Russian national confirmed that the Nilaya was Mr Andhøy's yacht, but claimed that they were intending to travel to the Pacific.  
2.2.2	Departure without Customs’ clearance

On the night of 23/24 January the Nilaya departed from the Viaduct harbour.  The Nilaya had not submitted an environmental impact assessment to the New Zealand Government prior to its departure. In addition no Customs’ clearance was obtained for an international voyage as required under New Zealand law.  On the evening of 26 January Customs officers located the Nilaya on an aerial observation flight and made numerous attempts to hail it but there was no response.  New Zealand wrote to inform Parties of developments at this point.
2.2.3	Presence of “accidental stowaway”

On 31 January media reported statements by Mr Andhøy that there was a New Zealand citizen on board the Nilaya who had been “asleep” aboard the yacht when it left Auckland.  The New Zealand Government called for Mr Andhøy to make contact with authorities to clarify the wellbeing of the New Zealand citizen and his willingness to be on board the yacht.  The New Zealand citizen subsequently made contact with his partner and his Pastor to confirm his wellbeing.

2.2.4	Confirmation of activity in Antarctic Treaty area

On 20 February Mr Andhøy made contact with McMurdo Station and Scott Base via satellite phone.  Photographs were taken of the Nilaya in which it is identifiable as the same yacht photographed in Auckland by the New Zealand Immigration officer on 23 January and at sea by New Zealand Customs on 26 January.
2.2.5 	Information shared by New Zealand with interested Parties

In accordance with obligations under Article 13 (4) of the Environmental Protocol to “draw the attention of all other Parties to any activity which in its opinion affects the implementation of the objectives and principles of this Protocol”, in early March New Zealand shared information with Argentinean and Chilean authorities regarding the Nilaya’s unauthorised Antarctic voyage; the unflagged status of the yacht; the history of false statements made by Mr Andhøy to New Zealand authorities; and the potential arrival of an undocumented New Zealand citizen.  In response, Chile instructed its Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) and Antarctic stations to be aware of the yacht’s situation.  On 25 and 29 March, Chile informed New Zealand that the yacht had been seen near the Melchior Islands. Chile also requested its embassies in Russia, Norway and Argentina to seek further information.
2.2.6	Damage to Nilaya and assistance on the Peninsula

On 15 March media articles quoted a friend of Mr Andhøy in Norway as saying that the boom of the Nilaya had broken in a storm and that assistance would be sought from an Argentinian base on the Antarctic Peninsula, before continuing on to South America.  It appears that the Nilaya may have received some assistance at Ukraine’s Vernadsky Station (see 2.2.8 below).
2.2.7	Arrival in Chile

On the evening of 31 March, Chile reported that it had retained the Nilaya in Puerto Williams due to a lack of verifiable information about the name, registration, flag status and ownership of the yacht.  The yacht entered into Chilean waters with the name “Nilaya” deleted and replaced by the name “Berserk” written on one of its sides. Chilean authorities also noted a lack of basic safety equipment on the yacht.  For some days the crew refused to follow immigration procedures and remained on the yacht, but eventually immigration procedures were completed.
2.2.8 	Unflagged Status of the Nilaya from 24 January - 15 March

Mr Andhøy’s lawyer claimed in a press conference on 27 January that the Nilaya was flagged to Russia.  In response to New Zealand enquiries, the Russian Government confirmed in February 2012 that the Nilaya was not registered in Russia.  Photographs taken of the Nilaya revealed that only a skull-and-crossbone flag was being flown. On 7 April, the Chairman of the Sailing Federation of Kamchatka province in Russia wrote to Chilean authorities to advise that the Nilaya had been registered as “Berserk” on 15 March 2012.  The registration indicated that the Nilaya/Berserk had recently departed Ukraine’s Vernadsky Station.  
2.2.9    Departing from Chile 

After providing satisfactory information regarding the name, registration and flag of the yacht, and having met safety requirements the crew were allowed to leave Chile. On 10 April the Nilaya/Berserk sailed to Ushuaia, and on 23 April it returned to Puerto Williams. The Nilaya/Berserk was left at the Micalvi yacht club, and the crew stated that their intention was to leave Chile by commercial flight.
3.0 	Implications for the Antarctic Treaty System

Throughout the history of the Treaty System, Parties have raised the dual threats of unauthorised activities and commercial activities in Antarctica.  Mr Andhøy’s actions are unique in that they are unauthorised, commercially-driven, and repeated. In this context, New Zealand suggests that they represent a direct challenge to the authority of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
3.1 	Repeat non-compliance 

The Nilaya expedition was the second unauthorised expedition to the Ross Sea by Mr Andhøy within 12 months.  Mr Andhøy was successfully prosecuted by Norwegian authorities for non-compliance with Norwegian Antarctic legislation, including the ATCM-mandated requirement to produce evidence of insurance, and fined 25,000 Norwegian Crowns (approximately $US 4000) in November 2011.  Mr Andhøy was also previously fined by Norwegian authorities in 2002 for travelling in the Arctic without required insurance.  Mr Andhøy has been informed on a number of occasions by competent authorities about the requirements to submit an environmental impact assessment and demonstrate insurance, but has repeatedly chosen not to comply.  Given Mr Andhøy’s history of being unable or unwilling to obtain insurance for his dangerous activities, his non-compliance should not be characterised as an administrative oversight.
3.2	Commercially-driven non-compliance
  
We understand that Mr Andhøy, as a reality television personality, received significant financial backing (of approximately $US 1 million) from a private television station, TV Norge, to underwrite the unauthorised Nilaya expedition.  The commercial nature to Mr Andhøy’s activities suggests that he is personally accruing financial gain from his unauthorised activities.  The scale of this financial backing also raises questions about the appropriate level of sanctions imposed for non-compliance.  

New Zealand considers that TV Norge’s actions in providing funds to an expedition leader, who had recently been prosecuted for non-compliance, to be an “activity contrary to the Protocol”, for the purposes of Article 13 (2) of the Environmental Protocol, and should be subject to appropriate consideration by Parties.
4.0 	Preparation for Prosecution

In anticipation of a possible return of the Nilaya to New Zealand, steps were taken by New Zealand authorities to pursue a prosecution for the commission of offences by Mr Andhøy under New Zealand’s Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994.  New Zealand’s decision to seek prosecution of Mr Andhøy in the event of a return to New Zealand was influenced by Mr Andhøy’s persistent pattern of offending.  Mr Andhøy’s statements to media suggest that he decided to sail for South America to avoid prosecution in New Zealand.
5.0 	Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that:

    • Parties agree that repeated unauthorised expeditions to Antarctica are a threat to the integrity of the Antarctic Treaty System, and relevant competent authorities and prosecuting authorities should be encouraged to consider these as being at the serious end of the scale of non-compliance with the requirements of the Environmental Protocol.
    • Parties agree that, for the purposes of Article 13 (2) of the Environmental Protocol, providing funding to unauthorised expeditions is an “activity contrary to the Protocol” that should be subject to appropriate consideration by Parties.
    •  Parties agree to take action to ensure Mr Andhøy is unable to organise or engage in future unauthorised expeditions to Antarctica from their jurisdictions, including by alerting all relevant authorities to his previous failures to obtain authorisation for his expeditions in 2010/11 and 2011/12, and his contempt for the Antarctic Treaty System and Parties’ domestic legislation giving effect to it.
