





Coordination of Maritime and Aeronautical Search and Rescue (SAR) – Proposal for Considering Means to Improve Antarctic SAR Coordination









Proposal for Considering Means to Improve Coordination of Maritime and Aeronautical Search and Rescue (SAR) in Antarctica 
Working Paper submitted by the United States


Summary

	In 2008, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) convened a conference in Valparaiso Chile to discuss improved Search and Rescue (SAR) coordination (the “Valparaiso conference”).  A second COMNAP workshop was held in Buenos Aires in 2009.  In the nearly four years since these important conferences were held, SAR missions have continued to challenge the national programs operating in Antarctica.  In recent years, there have been a growing number of maritime incidents, particularly involving fishing vessels, in the Southern Ocean that have required search and rescue responses.  Recurring vessel casualties in the Ross Sea and Southern Ocean and anticipated increases in Antarctic shipping and Antarctic tourism are likely to increase burdens on SAR operations.  To the benefit of all Antarctic Treaty Parties, Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa (“SAR States”) have taken on shared responsibility for coordinating SAR operations in the Antarctic via their respective Rescue Coordination Centers.  States with national programs in the Antarctic as well as private entities operating in the Antarctic are often called upon to provide support to SAR operations on a voluntary basis, as needed and within their own respective capabilities.  Reviewing progress made on the recommendations arising from the two COMNAP workshops and considering the means to improve coordination among the SAR States and governments operating national programs in a manner consistent with existing SAR instruments could improve the efficiency and effectiveness of SAR operations in the region, promote greater cooperation and coordination among the SAR States, National Antarctic Programs and private entities, and help clarify the appropriate roles of National Antarctic Programs providing assistance to the SAR States.  This effort could be directed toward the development of best practices or potentially to developing new arrangements or instruments, including those in which governments operating national programs could elect to participate on a non-binding basis.  This effort would further complement, and not conflict with, efforts at the IMO to promote vessel safety and complete the Polar Shipping Code.  

The United States proposes that discussion of means to improve Antarctic SAR coordination be the focus of a special working group at ATCM XXXVI in Belgium.


1.  Background
The number of non-governmental maritime incidents in Antarctica in recent years has increased.  In the 2011/12 austral summer season, two fishing vessels were involved in emergencies that left three dead and required response by the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand and involved the U.S. Antarctic Program, the Korean national program, private vessels and others.  In the 2010/11 austral summer season, a Korean fishing vessel and a private yacht sank, resulting in the loss of over 20 lives, despite Search and Rescue (SAR) efforts by many parties.  Since 2007 there have been several passenger ship incidents in which passengers and crew have been evacuated to other vessels, including in one case into lifeboats.  Had any of these incidents occurred in harsher weather conditions or more difficult sea states common to the region it is likely that more lives would have been lost. These incidents highlight the dangers of operating in Antarctica and the importance of strong SAR cooperation among the Rescue Coordination Centers (RCCs) of Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa (“SAR States”), National Antarctic Programs, and private expeditions.
SAR operations in the Antarctic present numerous challenges, as highlighted most recently in Resolution 6 (2008) and Resolution 6 (2010).  Extreme environmental conditions, the remoteness and vast area of the region and comparative scarcity of operational resources, search and rescue assets and infrastructure combine to make Antarctic SAR operations difficult in even the most favourable conditions.  The recent maritime casualties and increases in tourism in the region have focused attention on the growing need for effective coordination and cooperation in SAR operations in the Antarctic.  In addition, attention needs to be paid to the burdens placed on National Antarctic Programs that are often called upon as SAR providers although their primary mandate is science.
The RCCs share responsibility for the coordination of SAR operations in the Antarctic.  The SAR States often rely on National Antarctic Programs engaged in scientific missions and other private entities operating in the region to assist in SAR missions.  Although the SAR States and National Antarctic Programs have worked closely together for many years on SAR in Antarctica, coordination and cooperation between them could be improved and that possibility should be explored.
Consideration of means to improve SAR coordination among all of the SAR States and others with established scientific or other non-governmental missions in the region could substantially improve the efficiency of SAR operations.  Means to improve SAR coordination could include the establishment of uniform communications and operational procedures, the development of best practices, or possibly the development of new arrangements or instruments for SAR coordination among all of the SAR States with opportunities for governments of national programs or others to participate on a non-binding basis.  A first step could be a review of progress made toward implementing action items arising from the two COMNAP workshops.  Discussions should proceed based primarily on existing commitments and obligations in instruments such as the 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR Convention) and the Convention on International Civil Aviation, Annex 12 – Search and Rescue (Chicago Convention).  These efforts would support, without altering or amending, existing bilateral or other agreements and understandings regarding SAR operations in the Antarctic.
The Arctic Council recognized the need for SAR coordination and mutual support based on similar challenges to effective maritime SAR operations in the Arctic Ocean.  The eight Arctic States finalized a SAR agreement and have provisionally applied the new instrument since May 2011.  While the governance structure in the Arctic is quite different from the Antarctic, there might be some lessons learned or best practices to be found in a consideration of the Arctic SAR agreement.  A discussion could review potential benefits for the Antarctic with the aim of significantly increasing the likelihood of success for SAR missions in the future while spreading the cost and burden of SAR operations equitably among participants without creating new and unfunded mandates or obligations.
2.  Potential Areas To Be Addressed 

The United States contemplates that discussions could address guidelines for maintaining effective command and control of SAR operations among the SAR States and supporting entities.  This could be particularly valuable in cases in which multiple National Antarctic Programs provide support to one or more SAR States and when individual SAR cases cross areas of responsibility for multiple RCCs.  This approach is also consistent with recommended action following the Valparaiso conference.
Discussions might also address additional topics to improve overall SAR operations in the region beyond measures designed to improve SAR response in individual cases.  Participants could also establish guidance for information sharing and exchange and the generation of joint lessons learned based upon SAR exercises and actual operations.  The participants could further discuss a framework to collaborate on projects and initiatives to improve operational safety in the Antarctic in other international bodies such as the International Maritime Organization and the International Civil Aviation Organization.
Discussions could also include specific guidance with respect to the roles of National Antarctic Programs in providing operational assistance to and requesting assistance from the SAR States in individual SAR cases.  The intent would be to promote a greater degree of predictability to SAR support operations and not to attempt to establish new SAR obligations of any of the participants or alter or amend the existing areas of SAR responsibility of the five Antarctic SAR States under existing arrangements.
Finally, discussions could further address the circumstances under which government owned and non-government assets and personnel may be deployed in support of SAR operations.  Participants could discuss the establishment of specific and clear instruction for the processes by which assistance is requested among the participants, criteria that should be included in requests so that entities from which assistance is requested can more effectively evaluate and respond to requests, and clear points of contact and lines of communication to ensure that coordination of SAR operations among the SAR States (via their respective RCCs) and other entities that provide support to operations is most effective.
As noted above, the five SAR States have established areas of responsibility and obligations for the coordination of SAR cases through the RCCs that they maintain and operate in the Antarctic.  The SAR States also have existing agreements and understandings with each other and have established formal and informal arrangements and relationships for SAR support among some of the National Antarctic Programs.  The proposed discussions would not seek to modify or amend those arrangements, but would support existing bilateral agreements and potentially formalize many of the existing  arrangements for SAR support that are not memorialized in any instrument.
3.  Benefits of Improving SAR Coordination

Challenges to Antarctic SAR operations are not new, nor are proposals for improving SAR operations in the Antarctic.  As noted above, the Valparaiso conference offered proposed means to improve SAR operations based upon the output of that important workshop.  (See ATCM XXXI WP47.)  Among the recommendations were suggestions for improved linkages between the RCCs and the National Antarctic Programs, guidance for improved communication and information sharing and consideration of the establishment of a limited single regional SAR agreement among the five Antarctic SAR States with additional guidance for increased collaboration in SAR operations between the SAR States and the National Antarctic Programs using the Arctic SAR Agreement, which was only in draft form at that time, as a guide.
The United States believes that it is time to further consider exploring various means to improve SAR coordination through, for example, the establishment of best practices or other arrangements that include participation by both the SAR States and those other States that have an interest in cooperating with respect to Antarctic SAR (because their National Programs conduct SAR operations there or otherwise) as an appropriate vehicle for addressing well recognized challenges to SAR operations in the Antarctic and that positive results are achievable in the short term.  Once finalized, improved lines of communication and command and control will improve the efficiency and success of SAR operations.  Discussions among Treaty Parties may provide much needed clarity regarding the circumstances under which the SAR States should seek assistance from National Antarctic Programs and others engaged in scientific or other missions in specified areas of operation.  This process would also promote more equitable burden sharing among the various entities providing voluntary support to SAR operations.  
4. Way Forward

The United States proposes that the idea of proceeding with efforts to improve Antarctic SAR coordination be discussed by a special working group at ATCM XXXVI.  Consultative Parties would have the opportunity to bring relevant SAR experts to the working group meeting to assist with the discussion.  On the basis of such discussions, the Consultative Parties could determine future steps related to SAR.


Annex

Resolution X (2012) 
Resolution on Improved Coordination of Maritime and Aeronautical Search and Rescue (SAR) 

The Representatives, 
Concerned about the tragic loss of life in several vessel casualties in the Ross Sea and Southern Ocean in recent years;
Mindful that anticipated increases in human activity in the Antarctic including shipping, fishing and tourism, will add substantially to the challenges and risks associated with Antarctic SAR operations;
Recalling the commitment of Parties to the 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue and the Convention on International Civil Aviation, Annex 12 – Search and Rescue to cooperate in the execution of Search and Rescue (SAR) missions and activities; 
Desiring to increase the success and efficiency of SAR operations in the Antarctic; and 
Believing that discussions by the Consultative Parties of means to improve Antarctic SAR coordination could promote marine and aeronautical safety in Antarctica.  
Recommend that the Parties: 
1.  convene a special working group at ATCM XXXVI to discuss means of improving SAR coordination in Antarctica and to evaluate whether further work on this topic should be undertaken by the ATCM, and what the nature of that work would be;  
2.  include experts on Search and Rescue and National Program operators in their delegations participating in the working group.  




