





ATCM interests in international climate change discussions – options for enhanced engagement









ATCM interests in international climate change discussions – options for enhanced engagement
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In anticipation of further discussion of Recommendations 1 to 3 from the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Climate Change and Implications for Antarctic Management and Governance, Australia has identified several options for the Antarctic Treaty Parties to collectively pursue enhanced engagement in international discussions on climate change, in furtherance of their shared objectives under the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol. These include: registering the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat as an observer organisation to United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) negotiating sessions; issuing a joint statement on Antarctic issues to the UNFCCC Conference of Parties (COP) or a subsidiary body; engaging in the Nairobi work programme of the UNFCCC’s Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice as a Partner organisation; and hosting a Side Event on Antarctic issues during the COP. Pursuing closer engagement with the UNFCCC would be consistent with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, and with the practice of establishing effective working relationships with other international organisations where necessary to advance the protection and management of the Antarctic region. Australia recommends that the Meeting consider these options when discussing how best to advance the ATME recommendations. 
Background
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have generally acknowledged that the causes of climate change cannot be addressed by actions taken within the Antarctic region. At the same time there is increasing recognition of the implications of a changing Antarctic climate for the Parties’ shared objectives under the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol. The findings of the 2009 Antarctic Climate Change and Environment (ACCE) report prepared by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) make it clear that climate change is having, and will continue to have, a bearing on the Antarctic environment, on the scientific values of Antarctica, and on the conduct of Antarctic activities.
The 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Climate Change Implications for Antarctic Management and Governance examined the ACCE report and identified 30 recommendations for consideration by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). The majority of the recommendations related to actions that could be taken by the Parties in Antarctica and within the scope of the Antarctic Treaty system, but several recognised the importance of conveying information about Antarctic climate change to international bodies discussing and climate change:
Recommendation 1: The ATME recommends that the ATCM acknowledge and welcome the SCAR ACCE report as an important resource for its own deliberations and as an input to the wider global climate negotiations, e.g. the UNFCCC. 
Recommendation 2: The ATME recommends that the ATCM considers developing an Antarctic climate change communication plan to bring the findings of the ACCE report to the attention of other decision makers, the general public and the media.
Recommendation 3: The ATME recommends that the ATCM consider how best to provide information about Antarctic climate change to fora discussing and negotiating global climate change.
Accordingly, the Parties have begun to contemplate the scope of their role in addressing the implications of climate change for management of the Antarctic Treaty area, possibly including opportunities for enhanced engagement with international organisations discussing climate change action.
Options for enhanced engagement in international climate change discussions
Scientific research carried out in the Antarctic plays a vital role in understanding the global climate system and the global climate record. Climate change will have a range of implications for the Antarctic Treaty Parties’ activities and shared objectives under the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol. It is possible that the adaptation and response actions that are possible within the scope of the Antarctic Treaty system will be insufficient to ensure the long-term advancement of these objectives. Despite these clear connections between the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty Parties and the work of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), there is currently no direct or formal interaction between the two groups.
In Australia’s view it would be consistent with the ATME recommendations for the Antarctic Treaty Parties to play a more active role in delivering information on Antarctica into UNFCCC mechanisms, while still recognising that UNFCCC is the primary avenue for negotiating international action on climate change. More direct engagement in international climate change discussions could assist the Antarctic Treaty Parties to:
    • advocate for their shared objectives under the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol, highlighting the implications of climate change for the Antarctic region as a further motivation for global action to minimise future change; 
    • promote international collaboration on Antarctic science in the fields of greatest relevance to both the protection and management of Antarctica, and to broader international efforts to understand and address climate change;
    • utilise UNFCCC processes and networks to share knowledge and lessons learnt on the Antarctic region to the benefit of the international community and build on experiences from other regions, particularly the Arctic.
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have established effective working relationships with other international organisations where necessary to advance the protection and management of the Antarctic region (e.g. the ATCM has supported the work of the International Maritime Organisation to develop a mandatory shipping code applicable to Antarctic waters). Pursuing closer engagement with the UNFCCC would be consistent with Article III of the Antarctic Treaty, which establishes measures to promote international cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica, and states that ‘every encouragement shall be given to the establishment of cooperative working relations with those Specialized Agencies of the United Nations and other international organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica.’ Similarly, Article 7.2(l) of the UNFCCC mandates the COP to ‘seek and utilize, where appropriate...information provided by competent international organisations’. In addition, Article 8.2(e) requires the UNFCCC Secretariat to support institutional cooperation by ensuring ‘the necessary coordination with the secretariats of other relevant international bodies.’ 
Australia has identified the following options which may assist the Parties to pursue enhanced engagement in international climate change discussions. 
    1. Antarctic Treaty Secretariat as an observer to the UNFCCC
The UNFCCC provides for intergovernmental organisations (IGOs) and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) qualified in matters covered by the Convention to attend sessions of the Conference of the Parties (COP) as observers. SCAR has status as an NGO observer at the COP. Given the ATCM’s status as a meeting, rather than an organisation, the ATCM could not become an observer. However, several treaty organisations are registered as IGO observers to the UNFCCC, and are represented by the respective secretariats. The ATCM could direct the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to seek observer status at the COP, with a view to presenting the agreed views of the Consultative Parties.
    2. A statement or further formal correspondence from the ATCM to the UNFCCC COP or the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA)
Under Decision 4 (2010) the Parties agreed to write to the UNFCCC and IPCC to highlight the relevance of the ACCE report to the work of those organisations. The Parties could consider opportunities to convey in writing to the UNFCCC further information about Antarctica. An alternative or complementary action to highlight the Antarctic aspects of the climate change issue would be to present a statement from the ATCM to the High-Level Segment of the COP. If the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat obtained observer status to the COP it could request to deliver a statement on behalf of the Consultative Parties. This is established practice and there are many precedents among IGOs and other international organisations. 
Alternatively, there may be scope for one of the Consultative Parties to make a statement to the COP on behalf of all Consultative Parties. This type of approach was used for the Arctic Council’s statement to COP 16 in 20101, which highlighted the local, regional and global implications of climate change in the Arctic and urged immediate global action, and which was presented by Denmark on behalf of the members of Arctic Council.  A statement from the Consultative Parties could highlight, as appropriate, the implications of climate change for the Antarctic region, and the Antarctic Treaty Parties’ shared responsibilities and objectives.
The UNFCCC’s Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technical Advice (SBSTA) has a standing agenda item on cooperation with other international organisations which implements Article 7.2(l). This provides an opportunity for UNFCCC Parties to consider cooperative activities undertaken by the UNFCCC Secretariat with relevant international organisations. Representatives of international organisations have, on occasion, made statements to SBSTA under this item.
    3. Engagement in  the Nairobi work programme
The Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (NWP) is undertaken under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA)2. Its objective is to assist all Parties to:
    • improve their understanding and assessment of impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change; and 
    • make informed decisions on practical adaptation actions and measures to respond to climate change on a sound scientific, technical and socio-economic basis, taking into account current and future climate change and variability. 
The Arctic Council Secretariat is a partner organisation to the NWP, with a regional focus on the Polar Regions. The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat could similarly register as a partner organisation, which would help increase the visibility of Antarctic climate change-related issues, research, major reports, and projects.
    4. Presentations to UNFCCC meetings
There is a full program of Side Events at all UNFCCC negotiating sessions3. Side Events were established as a platform for observer organisations to highlight diverse climate change issues, and could provide a valuable opportunity to raise the profile of Antarctic issues with a key target audience. 
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the Meeting consider the abovementioned options for enhanced engagement in international climate change discussions when discussing how best to advance Recommendations 1 to 3 from the 2010 ATME on Climate Change.


