





Technology for investigating the water layer of subglacial Lake Vostok through the ice borehole 5G at the Russian Antarctic Vostok station









Technology for investigating the water layer of subglacial Lake Vostok through the ice borehole 5G at the Russian Antarctic Vostok station
One of the main objectives of the Lake Vostok studies is the investigation of its water column by direct observations and sampling. It will be possible to start this activity as early as in the season of 2014–15.
In order to do so, the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring – lead body of the Federal Executive Power of Russia, responsible for the governance and control of RAE activities set up  an open competition in 2008 to design and produce a measuring system prototype with the necessary auxiliary engineering equipment for investigating Lake Vostok water layer. The Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute of the National Research Centre “Kurchatov Institute” was the winner. Beside its significant scientific potential in the area of physics, this institute has a comprehensive design department and industrial experimental facilities able to develop and produce a variety of measuring and engineering systems  under extreme environmental conditions.  There have been no analogues of such equipment in the national engineering practice until now. Devices developed at US NOAA research centres were never tested under conditions similar to those found at subglacial Lake Vostok and would therefore not be suitable to study the lake.
The general design approach for this technical task was to create a set of measuring and sampling systems constructed on a modular basis, which will include ready-to-use units, various cameras, and sensor assemblies that perform well under the extreme conditions of the Global Ocean, land areas and outer space. The measuring systems were split into separate units (hydrophysical and hydrobiochemical probes and a water sampler) in order to increase their reliability and collect representative results of measurements. Combining these complex systems within a single unit would have significantly complicated its design and increased the risk of failure of some of the  sensors and working units. Another important task in the design of these systems was the sterilisation of the probes and sampling unit. A special hermetically sealed transport unit was designed, which will house the previously decontami­nated measuring instruments. The transport unit, by its size, shape, and control system, is somewhat similar to an electrical mechanical drill, in that it is connected to the control panel of the drilling complex by the electrical cable of the drilling winch. This approach enables the delivery of sterile measuring systems to the interface between the drilling fluid and the lake water, as well as raising the  systems without them making contact with the drilling fluid in the borehole.
The unit consists of a steel pipe, the length of which varies between 3 and 13 m depending on the task. It is made up of separate sections 3000 mm long with an internal diameter of 127 mm, which can be hermetically connected with each other. The transport unit is equipped with a system to melt the ice during its ascent and descent. Its  internal space is heated in order to prevent lake water samples from freezing. The hermetically sealed upper part of the pipe contains an electric motor which lowers and raises the measuring instruments. The power supply of the system hull and electrical motor heating is provided from the surface via the electric cargo carrying cable of the drilling winch. One of the measuring instruments inside the unit (hydrophysical and  hydrobiochemical probes or a water sampler) is lowered to lake water column to carry out the planned observations. Once a sensor detects that the unit has reached the drilling fluid/lake water interface, the operator releases the hermetically sealed lid at the bottom of the unit.
The internal part of the unit is decontaminated with two different types of ozonators.
The choice of measuring instruments and the character of the study parameters used (sounding  and sampling horizons) depend on the specific  program. The measuring instruments are in self-contained units with their own controls, memory and power supply system. The drill winch control panel also includes the transport unit winch control and the control for  its lower sealable lid.
In order to sample in different horizons of the Lake Vostok water column, the water sampling device has its technical basis in samplers used in studies of deep oil wells. A survey of existing technical devices showed that samplers with the best technical characteristics are produced by the Russian “Grant” Company (Ufa). These have a reinforced casing and an extended set of sensors. The sampler consists of three units: end-to-end relay, sampling compartments and built-in  pressure and temperature converters.
Decanting water from the sampler will be by means of devices preventing contact with the environment during transfer under conditions equivalent to a class 1000 clean laboratory. Such a laboratory will be assembled inside the Vostok Station drilling complex prior to beginning the investigations. The sampler will be operated by a micro-processor.
The hydrophysical module for investigating Lake Vostok water, has been designed using a standard oceanographic probe  capable of recording the maximum number of water parameters. The probe chosen for the study is the SBE 19 plus V2 SEACAT PROFILER with a reinforced housing and an extended set of sensors, manufactured by Sea-Bird Electronics. The maximum operating range for standard profilers is 4000 m (dissolved carbon dioxide) whereas the sensors will be mostly used for operations down to a depth of 6000–7000 m. This standard oceanographic device has been adjusted to fit inside the transport unit in order to be delivered to the sounding place.  The layout of sensors was rearranged, and a unified single-board computer was included in the final assembly to control its operation and record information via an autonomous power supply system. All measuring units and sensors were placed in a solid titanium casing, so that they can be deployed down to a depth of 7000 m. Its external diameter is 108 mm which means it can be accommodated inside the Unit.
The hydro-biochemical sounding unit  used to investigate Lake Vostok water column is a two-module structure encased in a titanium pipe with an external diameter of 110 mm. It includes three video cameras (attached to the front, side, and rear aspects) and the necessary lighting. The instrument was developed taking into account its operational capacity at low temperatures (up to −70° C) and high pressures (400 dbar).
One of the modules contains a power supply unit consisting of six separate recharge  battery assemblies with a voltage of 14.5 V and a capacity of 55 A/h. Each of the mass-type plates presents a set of four series-connected lithium-ion electric batteries.
The second unit contains a fluorimeter which uses laser-induced fluorescent spectroscopy to measure complex organic compounds. Two laser sources are used to measure tryptophan, tyrosine flavones, NADH and PAHs. Excitation of these organic compounds in biological organisms by the two lasers is used to measure their stationary fluorescence spectra.
The spectrometric module is available in two interchangeable designs, which can be replaced without replacing the other parts of the hydrobiochemical unit. The first configuration uses the Hamamatsu C10082CA or Oceanoptics USB4000 mini-spectrometers. The second configuration uses an optical array similar to the Hamamatsu С10082 СА mini-spectrometer, but uses a CCD S 7031-1008 N matrix rather than a linear array, using “back-thinned” technology. The use of the matrix and its cooling function increases the instrument sensitivity by an order of magnitude.
A single computer with a hard disk memory controls the data collection. A small СМ-i АМ single-board processor with low power consumption and extended temperature range was chosen for the task, with universal functions to control the operation of both the sampler and the hydrophysical and hydrobiochemical probes.
The developed software package ensures the autonomous performance of all the measuring and sampling instruments, as well as data control, management, storage and working protocols, using changeable data storage disk of Micro SD standard.
In the future this set will be supplemented with the following instruments:
    • sediment core sampler from the lake bottom;
    • sonar for measuring irregularities of the under-surface of the ice above the lake and of the lake bottom in the area of the deep ice borehole 5G;
    • hydrological probe for measuring the characteristics of the horizontal structure of the lake water column;
    • sensors for measuring temporal variability of the glacier thickness at its bottom surface.
The technology of investigation of the subglacial Lake Vostok water layer will involve the following operations:
    1) “Ice cork” drilling to a thickness of 5-10 m at the borehole bottom with simultaneous injection of additional drilling fluid into the borehole. This cork is preserved until the end of the drilling operations (2012–13 season or if necessary 2013–14 season).
    2) Drilling through the last meters of the ice cork using the thermal heaters of the Unit to a depth of 3 769.3 m.
    3) After contact of the unit’s lower part with the surface water of the subglacial lake, the lower lid is opened and measuring or sampling devices are launched according to the research programme.
    4) Upon completion of the work in the lake water, the devices are raised back into the unit’s internal space and the lower lid closed using an electrical-magnetic lever.
    5) After the end of this operation the unit is recovered at the surface and the measuring and sampling devices are extracted from it. This operation is performed in the clean room at Vostok station.
    6) After the end of the work in the lake water layer, some of the drilling fluid from the upper part of the borehole is removed to ensure that the lake water rises by 5–10 m in order to form the next “ice cork”.
The technology and design of the transport unit are illustrated in Figure 1. The special technology and engineering designs used for the measuring, sampling and transportation devices were presented at the AGU Chapman Conference in March 2010 in Baltimore, the USA. They are also published in: Valery Lukin, Sergey Bulat “Vostok Subglacial Lake: Details of Russian Plans/Activities for Drilling and Sampling”.
Figure 1 – The scheme of research technology and design of the transportation unit 
At present the EIA of the studies of Lake Vostok water layer is at the stage of report preparation and materials are being prepared to obtain a permit for the activity in compliance with the RF Law.

