





Proposals on preparation of revised management plans of Antarctic Specially Protected and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas









Proposals on preparation of revised management plans of Antarctic Specially Protected and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
The XXXIV ATCM WP57 On the need of constant monitoring of the values of Antarctic Specially Protected and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, presented by the Delegation of Russia under Agenda Item CEP 7f considered different statistical evidence on the existing Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA) and Historic Sites and Monuments (HSM). The analysis showed the protected objects in these regions to mainly include 50 values of living nature and 9 complex values of living and non-living nature whereas there are 20 protected values of non-living nature.
It is well-known in biological science that the Antarctic biodiversity, numbers of the population and other flora and fauna characteristics primarily depend on the changes of external environmental characteristics (climatic characteristics in the atmosphere, ocean and on the continent, catastrophic natural phenomena, different epidemics, which agents ingress to the environment by means of trans-boundary transport in the atmosphere and the ocean and some other factors), and not only due to hazardous anthropogenic impact. In this regard the Russian document proposed to the Antarctic Treaty Parties, which designated such areas, to periodically monitor the state of living nature values that are subject to special protection measures and present the results of these studies as the information papers attached to the revised ASPA management plans. These proposals were not supported among all participants to the meeting. At the same time in parallel with this process the Thirtieth Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), which was held from 19 October to 7 November 2011 in Hobart, Australia, considered in detail the issue of adopting a conservation measure “General Framework for the Establishment of CCAMLR Marine Protected Areas”.
In discussing this draft measure for conservation determining the order of designating the marine protected areas (MPAs) in the Antarctic it was proposed to include a clear time frame for revising the management plan and the plan of research and monitoring connected with each MPA, and a clear time frame for revision of the MPA status based on the information collected in accordance with these plans.
The Commission has further approved the general system for establishment of CCAMLR MPAs. General actions and requirements for MPA designation, administrative support and management were defined in compliance with the international legislature, and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. The conservation measure 91-04 (2011) “General Framework for the Establishment of CCAMLR Marine Protected Areas” was adopted. Adoption of this measure confirms the desire of CCAMLR to establish the MPA system in the area of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). This measure stipulates that each proposal for NPA designation in the Antarctic should include formulation of objectives of the given MPA and the period for its establishment, as well as the plans for its management, monitoring and study, based on the stated objectives. All plans should have precise time frame with periodical reporting. Any Party to the Convention shall have the right to carry out scientific studies in accordance with the plan of monitoring of the established MPA. The scientific data collected in the course of these studies are submitted to the CCAMLR Secretariat to be included to the MPA database. Access of the countries-parties to the Convention to these data is provided in accordance with the CCAMLR rules for data access and use, so that these countries could have a possibility to assess on their own the implementation of the management, monitoring and research plans for a specific MPA.
If the Commission does not decide otherwise, the countries-parties to the Convention undertaking activity in accordance with or in connection with research or monitoring plan will prepare every five years a report on this activity, including any preliminary results for their consideration by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee.
The Commission will revise the status, boundaries and management plans of each MPA every 10 years, unless otherwise agreed in designating a specific MPA.
So, the Commission adopted a general order of establishment, implementation and periodical revision of MPAs in the Antarctic, which is ultimately transparent and based on scientific data and recommendations of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee. These data are based on the results of mandatory scientific monitoring and special studies.
It is quite possible that participants in the CCAMLR session in considering this issue took into account experience of application of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Area Protection and Management”. In our opinion the CCAMLR methodology of MPAs designation and regular revision of their status and boundaries should be taken into account in the activity of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) and can be recommended to ATCM parties as a Measure “Need for monitoring the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas in preparing their revised management plans”.
The draft of the given Measure is attached in the Annex.
Measure X (20XX)
Need for monitoring the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas in preparing their revised management plans
The Representatives,
Recalling  Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Area Protection and Management” that any area, including any marine area, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research, 
Mindful that the state of the value of living Antarctic nature is significantly dependent on the change of environmental characteristics, conditions of trophical relationships, natural catastrophic phenomena and virus diseases, determined by trans-boundary transports in the atmosphere and the ocean,
Considering that organization and implementation of monitoring is most efficient for determining the state of living Antarctic nature values,
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with Article 12, Annex V “Area Protection and Management” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection and Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty.
In preparing a 5-year review of the ASMA management plan (revised plan), in which representatives of living Antarctic nature are designated as the main values, the Treaty Party, which has prepared its management plan, should submit to the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) information report and materials with the results of monitoring of the state of values of living Antarctic nature, that were the cause of designating this Specially Protected area.
Any Party to the Treaty desiring to conduct monitoring of the state of the values of living Antarctic nature in the Antarctic Specially Protected Area that were the cause of designating such area, should inform the Treaty Party that has designated such area, about its intention to conduct monitoring in compliance with the procedures adopted by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and obtain a corresponding permission for performing this activity. The results of such monitoring should be submitted to the Treaty Party that has designated this Specially Protected Area and reported at the next CEP session.
The CEP shall encourage monitoring of the state of natural values in Antarctic Specially Protected and Specially Managed Areas and set up with the help of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat the database with the results of monitoring of the state of natural values in these Areas.
The results of monitoring make it possible to revise the existing status of the Specially Protected or Specially Managed Area, the inventory of Antarctic living nature values in these Areas that are subject to protection and the geographical boundaries of the Specially Protected or Specially Managed Area.
In compliance with Paragraph 2, Article 12 “Amendment or Modification” of Annex V “Area Protection and Management” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, any amendment or modification of Annex V shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.

