





Prioritisation of Issues in an ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan









Prioritisation of Issues in an ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan
1.0 Summary

At past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings many Parties expressed support for the development of a multi-year strategic work plan for the ATCM.  Australia, Belgium, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, United Kingdom, and the United States have submitted a Working Paper: The Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting proposing that Parties develop a work plan using a format drawn from that of the Committee for Environmental Protection.  In support of this initiative, New Zealand further proposes that the ATCM: (i) consider prioritisation of issues in three thematic groupings; and (ii) use a risk-based approach to assigning relative priority to issues.  As a possible starting point for discussion, a table illustrating how such an approach might work is provided in New Zealand’s supporting Information Paper: Prioritisation of ATCM Issues: Illustrative Table. 
2.0 Background

The concept of a multi-year strategic work plan (‘work plan’) for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) has been discussed by Parties since ATCM XXXI in Kyiv (2008).  Many Parties have expressed their support for the concept noting the success of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) in implementing its own Plan since CEP XI.  Australia, Belgium, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, United Kingdom, and the United States have submitted a Working Paper: The Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting proposing that Parties develop a work plan using a format drawn from that of the CEP.  

The Antarctic Treaty area is facing a series of pressures including the implications of a changing Antarctic climate and increasing human activity and associated impacts.  The Antarctic Treaty System, with its growing membership, must prove capable of responding to these pressures.  If the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the values of Antarctica as a “natural reserve devoted to peace and science” are to be maintained, the management of such pressures demands urgent and rigorous attention.  The development of a prioritised work plan is therefore both timely and necessary.
3.0	Proposal

This Working Paper sets out a possible approach as to how priorities might be assigned under the proposed ATCM work plan.  This approach is illustrated in the supporting Information Paper: Prioritisation of ATCM Issues: Illustrative Table. 
3.1	Thematic Grouping of Priorities

A review of the ATCM’s current agenda, the recent 50th anniversary declarations (Baltimore and Buenos Aires) and the issues identified in discussions at ATCM XXXII and XXXIV (listed in Australia’s Topic Summary Information Paper) suggests that the issues demanding the attention of the Treaty Parties could fall into three distinct thematic areas, notably: 

    i) Effective protection of the changing Antarctic environment; 
    ii) Effective management of human activities in Antarctica; and 
    iii) Effective operation of the Antarctic Treaty System.  

New Zealand suggests that these three thematic areas could be useful in assigning priorities under a work plan, but could also positively contribute to discussions around the agendas and structure of future Consultative Meetings, as well as facilitate improved dialogue between the CEP and the ATCM.

On this last point New Zealand suggests that, in developing a work plan for the ATCM, it should not be seen as mutually exclusive to that of the CEP.  There could be significant benefits to be gained from improved alignment of the two work programmes and agendas, and in ensuring that the work of the Committee is fully integrated into the work of the Consultative Meeting.  The CEP has a significant role to play in contributing advice and recommendations with respect to themes i) and ii), for example.
3.2	Identification of Issues

As noted in Australia’s Topic Summary Information Paper, in discussions under the agenda item “Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM” at ATCM XXXII in Baltimore and ATCM XXXIV in Buenos Aires, the following issues have been raised by Parties (note: similar issues which have been raised more than once have been merged): 

    a) climate change
    b) scientific cooperation and role of scientific research
    c) ecosystems
    d) promotion of the use of renewable energy
    e) biological prospecting
    f) coordination with other international bodies and agreements and addressing new developments
    g) expanding Antarctic outreach programmes to general public and other international bodies 
    h) coordination by ATCPs of their activities in those other forums in pursuing common objectives
    i) implementation of and compliance with the obligations of the Treaty and ATCM measures 
    j) liability (implementation of Annex VI and addressing issues beyond response action)
    k) shipping and aviation
    l) tourism 
    m) development of a joint monitoring and compliance mechanism
    n) marine protected areas, including interface between CCAMLR and ATCM 
    o) challenges associated with increase of human activities in Antarctica
    p) better use of Electronic Information Exchange System

This list highlights the thematic span of Consultative Parties’ interests and likely captures the majority of issues that the ATCM needs to attend to in the foreseeable future.  However, New Zealand suggests that some of the issues on the list require improved definition and expansion so as to provide clarity on the work that needs to be undertaken.  In the table in New Zealand’s supporting Information Paper, New Zealand has attempted to revise this list (expanding on it where appropriate).  In developing this list it is also noted that certain issues will be a regular feature of the ATCM’s agenda and can be regarded as “ongoing ATCM business”.  These might include:

    • reports on inspections
    • reports from Observers
    • Antarctic Treaty Secretariat budget and work plan
3.3	Applying Risk-Based Methodology to the ATCM’s Issues

The development of a work plan provides the ideal opportunity to give early attention to those issues considered to pose a greater or more urgent risk to the Antarctic Treaty Area, whilst delaying attention to lower risk issues to outer years.  In developing the multi-year strategic work plan, New Zealand suggests that using a risk assessment approach will greatly assist in determining the relative priorities of issues facing the ATCM.

Risk-based methodologies are routinely used in many business, financial, health, safety and environmental situations.  

In conducting environmental impact assessments, risk matrices are commonly used to determine the likelihood of an impact occurring and the consequence of the impact if it did occur.  Such matrices set out the “consequences” and “likelihood” of risks on opposing axes.  Each axis of the matrix is rated between 1 (low) and 5 (high).  The overall risk score is achieved by multiplying the likelihood rating by the consequence rating with the maximum possible risk score being 25. 

In the context of ATCM’s work plan, the “likelihood” dimension might refer to the likelihood of an event with negative consequences occurring (such as a major marine incident) or the likelihood of delays/inaction which could produce negative consequences (such as failing to implement Treaty decisions in good time).  The “consequence” dimension might encompass the negative effects that could result for Antarctica or for the effective operation of the Antarctic Treaty System.

Recalling the CEP’s preference not to use risk ratings of “high”, “medium” and “low” (so as to avoid implying that certain “low priority” matters were un-important), New Zealand proposes classifying the risk scores using a numbered priority rating as follows: 

Risk Score		Priority Rating

25				1
15 – 20 			2
9 – 12 				3
5 – 8 				4
1 – 4 				5

A table illustrating how issues a) – p) might be prioritised by applying this methodology is shown in New Zealand’s Information Paper: Prioritisation of ATCM Issues: Illustrative Table.  New Zealand notes that the list of issues included in the table is not meant to be exhaustive. The assessments of priority levels are also only meant to be indicative to illustrate how the methodology might work. The table is intended to be a starting point for further discussion by Parties in the development of a Plan.
4.0	Recommendation

New Zealand recommends that the ATCM:

    • Discuss the proposed approach to how priorities might be assigned under the proposed ATCM multi-year strategic work plan;
    • Forward this Working Paper, and the associated Information Paper: Prioritisation of ATCM Issues: Illustrative Table, as inputs for consideration at the intersessional workshop on the development of a multi-year strategic work plan.



