





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on 2011/12 Intersessional Work









Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on 2011/12 Intersessional Work
Working Paper submitted by Australia on behalf of the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans
Summary
During the 2011/12 intersessional period the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP), in accordance with its Terms of Reference #1 to #3, reviewed one draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) management plan referred by the Committee for intersessional review. The SGMP recommends that the Committee approves the attached revised management plan prepared by the United Kingdom for ASPA 140 Parts of Deception Island. The SGMP had no tasks relating to its Terms of Reference #4 and #5 during the period. In accordance with the arrangements agreed by ATCM XXXI (2008), the Committee may wish to consider appointing a new SGMP convener to serve in the role on the conclusion of CEP XV.
    1. Background
During the 2011/12 intersessional period the SGMP operated in accordance with the work plan agreed by CEP XIV (Final Report, Appendix 1), and the Terms of Reference adopted by CEP XIII (Final Report, Appendix 1):
    1) Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan to consider, in consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
    • whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5, and with relevant CEP guidelines;
    • its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness;
    • whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation; and
    • whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole.
    2) Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.
    3) Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing so. The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans and the information required by the ATCM’s Legal and Institutional Working Group.
    4) Provide advice to the CEP as necessary for the purpose of improving Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review.
    5) Develop and suggest procedures that would assist in achieving a long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA management plans contain adequate content, and are clear, consistent and likely to be effective.
The SGMP was convened by the CEP first Vice-Chair, Ewan McIvor from Australia. Representatives from Argentina, ASOC, Brazil, Chile, China, Germany, IAATO, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Netherlands, Norway, Romania, SCAR, South Africa, United Kingdom and United States were registered to participate. Discussions took place by correspondence, using the CEP Discussion Forum and email.
    2. Review of the revised draft management plan for ASPA 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
At CEP XIV (2011) the United Kingdom presented WP 23 Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands. As reflected in paragraph 115 of the Final Report, the Committee noted that substantial changes were proposed and decided to refer the management plan to the SGMP for intersessional review. The SGMP’s review of the management plan was coordinated by the SGMP members from India.
In addition to the SGMP’s review, the SGMP convener wrote to all CEP contact points on 11 August 2011 to invite comments on the draft management plan. No comments were received.
In November 2011 the SGMP provided its initial advice to the proponent, recommending minor modifications to the draft revised management plan submitted to CEP XIV in ATCM XXXIV - /WP23. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the Discussion Forum. In particular, the group suggested that the proponent provide further details and clarification regarding:
    • the full range of values for which the Area is designated, including as a site for ongoing monitoring;
    • the location (including on maps, as appropriate) of preferred routes for access to and within the Area; 
    • the location of landing sites and campsites that may be used by persons accessing the Area; 
    • arrangements for liaison between relevant national Antarctic programs on implementation of the plan;
    • the boundaries of all sub-areas within the Area, including geographical coordinates where possible; 
The SGMP advised that, with these and other minor modifications, the plan would adequately address the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines, and was likely to be effective in achieving the stated aims and objectives for management of the Area.
In March 2012 the United Kingdom provided an updated draft management plan and a separate document explaining its responses to the SGMP’s advice. The SGMP concluded that the updated draft management plan was well written, of high quality, and adequately addressed the key points raised in its earlier advice. The United Kingdom made further changes to the text and maps to address minor outstanding issues.
The resulting final revised draft management plan is presented in Attachment A to this Working Paper. Introductory comments and a coversheet prepared by the proponent are presented at Appendix 1.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the revised management plan prepared by the United Kingdom for ASPA 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands (Attachment A).
    3. Terms of Reference #4 and #5 on improving management plans and the process for their intersessional review
The SGMP work plan for the 2011/12 intersessional period included no specific tasks relating to its Terms of Reference #4 and #5. The SGMP notes that CEP XIV supported the recommendations of the 2011 Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, and encouraged interested Members ‘to review the provisions of existing ASMA management plans, with a view to preparing a suggested work plan and supporting materials to support work by the SGMP to develop guidance for establishing ASMAs and for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans.’ 
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP would welcome advice from the CEP regarding work to develop guidance for establishing ASMAs and for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans.
    4. SGMP convener
ATCM XXXI (2008) approved the Committee’s proposal to establish a Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (Final Report paragraph 86). Regarding the convener of the group, the proposal (Appendix 3 to the Final Report of CEP XI) stated that:
‘The convener of the SGMP may be either one of its elected Vice Chairs or a CEP Representative elected as convenor under the same conditions as set out for the Vice Chairs in Rule 16 of the Rules of Procedure as applicable. The convenor may, but is not required to, provide technical contribution to the SGMP’s activities.’
Mr Ewan McIvor (Australia) was elected as Vice-Chair at CEP XI and was also appointed as SGMP convener; he has served as the SGMP convener since that time. Under the CEP’s Rules of Procedure, CEP XV is Mr McIvor’s last meeting as Vice-Chair. 
Advice to the CEP
In accordance with the arrangements agreed by ATCM XXXI, the Committee may wish to consider appointing a new SGMP convener to serve in the role on the conclusion of CEP XV.
    5. SGMP work plan
The SGMP has prepared the following suggested work plan for the 2012/13 intersessional period. 
Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToR 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional review and provide advice to proponents
ToR 4 and 5
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of management plans overdue for five-yearly review

As appropriate, consider actions arising from ASMA workshop

Review and update SGMP work plan
Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP XV against SGMP ToR 1 to 3

Prepare report for CEP XV against SGMP ToR 4 and 5
Advice to the CEP
The CEP is invited to consider the suggested SGMP work plan for the 2012/13 intersessional period, presented, and to instruct the SGMP accordingly.
Appendix 1. Introductory comments by the United Kingdom
Draft Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
    1. The primary reason for the designation of Parts of Deception Island, (Lat. 62o57’S, Long. 60o38’W), South Shetland Islands, as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) is to protect environmental values, predominantly associated with the terrestrial flora within the Area.  
    2. Five small Sites around the coast of Port Foster were adopted under Recommendation XIII-–8 (ATCM XIII, Brussels, 1985) as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 21.  Following an extensive scientific survey, protection of the island’s botanical values were enhanced through Measure 3 (2005) when the number of Sites of botanical interest included within the ASPA was increased to 11. 
    3. Substantial changes have been made to the provisions of the existing Management Plan, which include:
    i. Introduction. An introduction was added to outline key features of the Area, including the contribution to the Antarctic protected areas system, the reasons for designation and information on the protection of the Areas since 1985.
    ii. Description of values to be protected.  This section has been revised and values relating to scientific research and monitoring have been added.
    iii. Management activities.  Addition activities have been added including the removal of wind-blown debris from the Area and that existing monitoring experimental sites should be maintained.  Parties are encouraged to work closely to prevent oversampling of some of the rare flora.
    iv. Description of the Area. A general description has been added.  The biogeography of the ASPA has been put in context and the Environmental Domains encompassed by the Area have been described.
    v. Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features. In this section, each site has been described under three headings: Area encompassed, Boundaries and Scientific value.  Various changes to the boundaries have been made to account for changes in the coastline (particularly around Telefon Bay) and to facilitate easier understanding of the Site boundaries when using GPS to navigate to the Site.   A Table showing the co-ordinates of the Site boundaries has been added to the management plan (Annex 3).  New place names have been incorporated into the management plan and, in particular, Site C un-named hill southern end of Fumerole Bay is now named Site C Caliente Hill.
    vi. Access to the Area. This section has been added to the Management Plan.  In particular, aircraft access guidelines have been clarified in line with the ‘Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds’ contained in Resolution 2 (2004).  Helicopter landing sites outside the Area have been described.
    vii. Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area. The location of the research stations and HSMs close to the Area have been described.  Information concerning the experimental apparatus monitoring long-term ground temperature variations on Caliente Hill have been added.
    viii. Special zones within the Area. None
    ix. Access to, and movement within or over, the Area.  Aircraft access guidelines have been moved to the section on Access to the area.  A requirement has been added that activities be managed to ensure minimum impact upon vegetation, specifically on Caliente Hill.
    x. Location of field camps.  The locations of designated field camps outside the Area have been added.
    xi. Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area.  The requirement has been added that release of radio-nuclides or stable isotopes directly into the environment in a way that renders them unrecoverable is to be avoided.  The biosecurity requirements have also been updated, including the need to take precautions to prevent the accidental introduction of animals, plant material, micro-organisms and non-sterile soil from other biologically distinct regions (within or beyond the Antarctic Treaty area).  
    xii. The collection or removal of materials not brought into the Area by the Permit holder.  Information has been added concerning the removal from the Area of wind-blown debris of potential historic value.
    xiii. Disposal of waste. It has been stated that ‘All wastes shall be removed from the Area in accordance with Annex III (Waste disposal and waste management) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998)’.
    xiv. Maps. Figure 1 and Figure 1a, b, c and d have been revised to show new features including the new ASPA site boundaries, new coastline, designated campsites and designated helicopter landing site. 
    xv. Requirements for reports.  This section has undergone general revision, including the inclusion of the request that the national authority should also forward a copy of the visit report to the Parties that proposed the Management Plan, to assist in managing the Area and reviewing the Management Plan.
    xvi. The management plan has been reformatted to conform with the revised ‘Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’ and to maintain consistency with wording in plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
    xvii. Supporting information. The references have been updated. 
    xviii. Annexes.  Annex 2 has been added showing photographs of the Sites comprising ASPA 140.  Annex 3 shows the boundary coordinates for the Sites that comprise ASPA 140.  Annex 4 describes recommended access to the Sites that comprise ASPA 140.
Appendix 2. Coversheet prepared by the United Kingdom

ASPA No. 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 21 through Recommendation XIII–8 in 1985
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation XIII–8 in 1985
Any revisions to management plan:
Res. 7 (1995) (E) 
Measure 2 (2000) (E) 
Measure 3 (2005)  
Current management plan: 
Measure 3 (2005)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands 
Other relevant measures:

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes in captions and graphics to all maps.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The description has been updated to reflect new boundaries.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
ASPA 140 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands is included within ASMA 4 Deception Island
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See the introductory comments for a listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A



