





Improving the Functioning of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) for Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica

Updated version only in English





Improving the Functioning of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) for Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica
Updated version only in English

Summary
The development of human activities in Antarctica generates inherent risks to environment and safety. Considering that these risks result most often from breaches of the Treaty, Protocol and ATCM recommendations, more adequate information is needed. Indeed, the lack of information provided to the Parties facilitates the practice of "forum shopping" by operators, which has already led to serious accidents in Antarctica. Considering the precautionary and proactive approaches, proposal is made to improve the functioning of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) in order to provide the Parties with a faster and more complete information.  
Introduction
The development of non-governmental activities in Antarctica is a long-standing ATCM issue. To limit this phenomenon, and in order to complete the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection, the ATCM adopted Recommendations, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions - even if all of them are not yet into force1.
However, it remains difficult for competent national authorities to assess the impacts, risks and changes linked to these activities other than from the information provided by the EIES. Therefore, proposal is made ​​to improve its functioning in order to give Parties a more complete and readily accessible information concerning non-governmental activities conducted in Antarctica, particularly from ships. 
    1- Improvement of the EIES and its widespread use are becoming a necessity in view of the development of non-governmental activities

The only known impacts from non-governmental activities are primarily identified in the EIES in the application of the environmental impact assessment procedure (Annex I of Protocol). The development of non-classified activities in the EIES – i.e., neither identified nor assessed according to the rules of the Antarctic Treaty System – increases the risks for safety, environmental protection and preservation of Antarctic values. 

In order to limit these risks, the ATCM, in its Resolution 7 (2009), called upon
 "Antarctic Treaty Parties (to) implement all existing instruments relating to tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica and aim to ensure, as far as practicable, that they continue to proactively develop regulations relating to tourism activities that should provide for a consistent framework for the management of tourism".
Parties are therefore required to use existing instruments to exchange available information with all other Parties concerning non-governmental activities, in order to know their scope and characteristics, and so as competent national authorities can take appropriate decisions when facing different situations.

The EIES meets the obligation of information exchange between the Parties formulated under Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty and the need for transparency of the activities. It is originally made to enhance mutual trust between the Parties. This instrument was created to make up for the limits of an information exchange form difficult to manage, i.e. "paper" reports. The computerisation of data was decided during ATCM XXXI2.

The functionality and performance of the computer tools is undeniable, when information is delivered in a logical and useful structure, and when each Party contributes to it in a comprehensive manner and on a regular basis.

In order to improve the functioning of the EIES, the Secretariat has identified during the intersessionnal periods, the proposals submitted by the Parties that may be integrated into the mechanism functionalities.
    2- Measures Likely to Improve the Functioning of the EIES

a)	Decision 5 (2008) only settles an obligation for the Secretariat to operate the EIES, but no obligations on the Parties, which are therefore required to use the EIES to exchange information that the Antarctic Treaty System requires to disseminate. None of the Measure, Decision or Resolution of the ATCM concerning the EIES adopted since then, establish a formal obligation to deliver the information required via the EIES. It is therefore essential that the use of the EIES by the Parties be mandatory, in order to ensure full completeness of the database and thus guarantee, on the one hand, the reliability and effectiveness of the tool and, on the other hand, improve the information of all users of the EIES.

b)	If an authorisation has been refused to an operator, this information should be known by all other Parties – to the extent that this is made possible by the law of the Party responsible of the refusal. Thus, the competent authorities may have knowledge of a refusal by a Party and draw conclusions to improve monitoring requirements for the environmental impact assessment in the Treaty area. For example:
    • When it is requested by the operator having been refused from obtaining authorisation, the competent authority involved may approach its counterpart that objected the refusal, to obtain any useful clarification to examine the case.
    • Any operator observed in the Treaty area after a refusal decision, shall be reported to the competent national authority responsible for the refusal or the nationality of the operator, who may take sanctions according to its national regulations. 

c)	At the moment, if operators who have sought and received authorisation for an activity from a competent national authority, ultimately decide to cancel the activity, the latter is deleted from the EIES. There is no current way to track such deleted activity in the System. However, a "memory" of these activities could be valuable for competent national authorities in the case of a subsequent confrontation with a similar request. Maintaining these data in the EIES would keep and make available the history of activities of an operator and, if the operator is no longer observed in the Treaty area for one or more seasons, to not deduce that he is in breach of the regulations, but consider that he simply interrupted its activity.

d)	To enhance the credibility and the value of information available on the site, it seems essential that updates be performed regularly by each Party throughout the year. The site actually remains frozen much part of the year, as the Parties have completed it at a given time. However, several changes may occur between the periods at which information is required.

e)	The practice by the Parties of creating links to web pages or to documents outside of the EIES prevents the comprehensive view of published data and, especially, prevents complete research on the entire databank that supposedly constitutes the EIES. It therefore seems necessary that the Parties post information online by directly inputting into the EIES and not by including hypertext links. Computing tools make it easy to sort through data. Publishing this information in documents or sites outside of the EIES instead of grouping them into a single database prevents the use these data via sorting and researching tools. A single Party not using the online data entry is enough to make the research incomplete, and thereby limits the reliability of the tool.

At the moment, no provision in the recommendations adopted by the ATCM on the EIES ensures the implementation the elements outlined above.
    3- Recommendations to the ATCM

As a result, France proposes that the ATCM adopts the Decision contained in Annex A, and thus ensure that:

        a) The use of the Electronic Information Exchange System be made mandatory for the Parties ;
        b) the EIES be modified in order to give Parties the option to include the refusal of authorisations to operators ;
        c) the authorised activities  finally cancelled by the operators remain identified as such in the EIES ;
        d) different sections of the EIES be updated regularly throughout the year by the Parties so that such information be made known nearly in real time by the other Parties ; and
        e) the required information shall be entered directly and completely in the EIES, rather than in the form of links to websites or to files outside of the EIES.
Annex A

Decision XX (2012), Electronic Information Exchange System

The Representatives, 

Recalling the obligation of the Parties on information sharing under a) of paragraph 1 of Article III and paragraph 5 of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty as well as Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and its annexes;
Recalling particularly Recommendation VIII-6 (1975), Recommendation XIII-3 (1985) and other improvements that have been made by the Parties to keep each other informed through regular or occasional exchanges;
Recalling Decision 10 (2005) on the creation of an Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) and Resolution 6 (2010) on Improving the co-ordination of maritime search and rescue in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Emphasising that a prompt, easily accessible and complete information for all Parties ensures better supervision of human activities in Antarctica and reduces the risks to the environment and safety;
Noting the development and operation of the EIES by the Secretariat, which takes into account observations made ​​by the Parties during the trial period;
Desiring to ensure that the exchange of information between the Parties takes place in the most efficient and timely possible manner, and that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee on Environmental Protection have access to the most complete and reliable information on Antarctica ;

Decide:
    1. That the use of the Electronic Information Exchange System be mandatory for the Parties as part of their obligations on information exchange ;
    2. that the EIES be modified in order to give Parties the option to include the refusal of authorisations to operators ;
    3. the authorised activity finally cancelled by an operator remains identified as such in the EIES ;
    4. that different sections of the EIES be updated regularly throughout the year by the Parties, in order that such information be known and accessible nearly in real time by the other Parties ; and
    5. that, wherever possible, required information shall be entered directly and completely in the EIES, rather than in the form of links to websites or files outside of the EIES.

