





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 133 Harmony Point 





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 133 
 HARMONY POINT

Submitted by Argentina and Chile

Summary
Argentina and Chile have conducted the review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area  No. 133, Harmony Point, pursuant to Art. 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Argentina and Chile request that the CEP assesses the need to refer this Plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans for intersessional consideration, or, should this be considered unnecessary, that it proceeds to the adoption of this revised version of the Management Plan.  

Background
The Area was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 14 under Recommendation XIII-8 (1985). Its Management Plan was adapted to the requirements of Annex V through Measure 3 (Christchurch, 1997). The Area was later renumbered pursuant to Decision I (Warsaw, 2002) as ASPA No. 133 and, and a first revision was adopted through Measure 2 (2005). 
During this new revision process, pursuant to the provisions established in Art. 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, detailed consideration was given to the values of the Area, and an assessment of the measures necessary to their protection was made, upon prior consultation with the principal researchers conducting activities in the Area, and the analysis of relevant Visit Reports. During the summers of 2010 and 2011, field visits were made to ASPA No. 133, which allowed for verification of the information contained in this revision. The main proposed amendments to the current Management Plan are not significant, and are summarised in the following cover note.  They are largely based on the provisions established in Resolution 2 (2011) “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas”.


COVER NOTE FOR WORKING PAPER ON THE REVISION OF ASPA No. 132, POTTER PENINSULA 
1) Is a new ASPA proposed? 
No. 
2) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? 
ASPA No. 133, Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands.
Original designation: 
Designated as SSSI No. 14 under Recommendation XIII-8 (1985).
The expiry date was extended through Resolution 7 (1995) 
First adoption of the Management Plan: 
Measure 3 (1997) 
Revisions to the Management Plan: 
Measure 2 (2005)
Current Management Plan: 
Measure 2 (2005)
Extensions of Management Plan expiry dates: 
None
New name and number under Decision 1 (2002) 
ASPA No. 133, Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands.
3) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing Management Plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 
(i) major or minor? 
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates? 
Minimum adjustments to the boundaries and co-ordinates were made for accuracy purposes. 
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics? 
The Map was drawn in a CAD environment such as “DraftSight” http://www.draftsight.com, in DXF format. The field data used to make the map was collected during austral summer 2010-11 by the National Direction of the Antarctic (Dirección Nacional del Antártico) (Argentina). Such data was referenced to the WGS84 Reference System, and the co-ordinates were expressed according to the UTM zone 21 projection (60°W - 64°W). Model IGRF-11 of IAGA (International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy) was implemented. The estimated value for the magnetic declination by 1-1-2012 for the Area and the estimated annual variation rate of 0° 3' to the West. The Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 133 was delimited, interpreting the satellite image, taking as a limit the line of the visible coast line and the glacier limit. 
(iv) any change to the description of the Area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries? 
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this Area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site. 
No.
(vi) Other: brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the Management Plan in which these are located.
The description of the values of the Area was updated, together with the specific data related to each value. Two new sections were added (1. Introduction and 8. Supportig Documentation), in response to the provisions established in Resolution 2 (2011) “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas”. Finally, changes were made to both the style and wording of some paragraphs for purposes of clarity. 


