





Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 146, South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago




Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 146
SOUTH BAY, DOUMER ISLAND 
PALMER ARCHIPELAGO
Summary
Chile submitted the Management Plan for ASPA No. 146, in the agreed-upon format, following entry into force of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Chile recommends that the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans should be asked to provide a more detailed review of the proposed plan during the intersessional period.
Introduction
Under Recommendation XIV-5 of 1987, in view of the proposal submitted by Chile, the South Bay in Doumer Island was designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest, SSSI No. 28. The designation of the Area aimed at protecting the existing marine biological values, mainly for the development of scientific activities. The site then came to be called ASPA 146, in accordance with Decision 1 (2002).
The period of designation of the Area has been extended twice (Resolution 3 (1996) and Measure 5 (2009)).  
The first version of the Management Plan in accordance with provisions of Annex V of the Protocol is provided below.
Revisions
The below proposal concerns the first Management Plan for the Area following the approval of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, thus containing new information in its most part. This can then be considered as a new version of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 146. 
This Management Plan has been prepared in accordance with Resolution 2 (2011), “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.”
Recommendation
The draft Management Plan is submitted to consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection. Chile recommends that the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans should be asked to provide a more detailed review of the plan proposed during the intersessional period, and report back to CEP XVI.
ASPA No. 146, SOUTH BAY, DOUMER ISLAND
    1) Is a new ASPA proposed? 
No.
    2) Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. The Area was designated through Recommendation XIV-5 (1987). In accordance with Decision 1 (2002), the Area came to be called ASPA No. 112.
Resolution 3 (1996) and Measure 4 (2005) extended the effectiveness of the protection to the Area.
    4) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 

    (i) major or minor?
They are major, as this is the first version of the Management Plan in accordance with Annex V.
    (ii)   any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
    (iii) any changes to the maps?
No.
    (iv) any change to the description of the Area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
    (v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it?
No.
    (vi) • Other: - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the Management Plan in which these are located.
All the information contained in the original plan has been modified.
    5) If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
It is not a new Area, but it is a marine area.
    6) If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Although no activities are currently being conducted on this site within the framework of CCAMLR, consideration by CCAMLR is required.
    7) If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
No. It is being submitted for consideration by CCAMLR in the 2012 discussions.
    8) If the proposal is related to an ASPA, which is the primary reason for designation (that is, which section under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
The Area is primarily protected due to its value as a marine ecosystem, of special interest for scientific research.
    9) Has the primary Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA been identified (refer to the "Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent" attached to Resolution 3 (2008)? 
Yes, the primary associated domain is Domain G.


