





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands









ASPA No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) through Recommendation XVI-2 (1991, SSSI No. 34)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-2 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Current management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
no
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
no
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, captions and graphics
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
no
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
no
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for a complete list of changes
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a


Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Summary
Poland has conducted a review of the management plan for ASPA No 151, Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands and has determined that only minor amendments are required. Poland recommends that the CEP approves the revised management plan attached to the Working Paper.
Introduction
Lions Rump was originally designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 34 through Recommendation XVI-2 (1991, SSSI No 34) after a proposal by Poland on the grounds that it contains diverse biota and important geological features, and is a representative example of the terrestrial, limnological, and littoral habitats of the maritime Antarctic. In accordance with Decision 1 (2002), the Area was redesignated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA 151). A revised Management Plan was adopted through Measure 1 (2000).
The original goals for designating the Area are still relevant.
Revisions
No substantial changes were made. Amendments to the text are summarised below:
    • A brief paragraph was added in Section 1 outlining monitoring programme of birds and pinnipeds conducted in the Area since 2007. Paragraph detailing the Area history (e.g. initial designation, modifications) was updated.
    • Amendments were made in Section 6 (i) reflecting new data from monitoring programme of birds and pinnipeds, as well as from geological and botanical research conducted in the period since last revision.
    • Map A and B showing the location of the Area were compiled in one Map 1. Map C was redrawn into Map 2 reflecting changes in location of structures within and outside the Area. Map D (vegetation map) and Map E (geological map) were redrawn reflecting new data collected since last revision. 
    • Section 6 (iii) was rewritten to reflect changes in location of structures within the Area (removable caravan functioning as a field laboratory was dismantled according to the previous Management Plan, wooden refuge was built outside the Area).
    • Section 6 (iv) was updated to reflect the new naming and numbering system of Protected Areas.
    • Minor revision was made in Section 7 and 7 (ii) to ensure consistency in wording used in other management plans recently adopted by ATCM.
    • Access guidelines in Section 7 (i) were clarified.
    • Section 7 (iii) was rewritten to reflect changes in location of structures within the Area (removable caravan functioning as a field laboratory was dismantled according to the previous Management Plan). Requirement has been added that installation, maintenance, modification or removal of structures in the Area shall be done in such a way as to minimise disturbance to fauna and flora.
    • Section 7 (iv) was rewritten, prohibiting camping in the Area. A four-berth wooden refuge constructed by Poland is located on a flat marine gravel terrace adjacent to the Area.
    • A requirement that visitors take precautions against the introduction of alien species to the Area was added to Section 7 (v).
    • Minor editorial improvements were made throughout, including for consistency with wording in management plans recently adopted by ATCM and with the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Recommendation
Poland recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.

