





Compiling yacht guidelines to complement safety standards of ship traffic around Antarctica








Compiling yacht guidelines to complement safety standards of ship traffic around Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Germany and UK
Summary
During the past intersessional period, the German-led ICG on yacht guidelines discussed several items to improve safety issues for yacht expeditions. First, the checklist of yacht specific items proposed in WP 37 (ATCM XXXIV) was thoroughly reviewed and, finally, an improved version presented. In addition, established guidelines for yachts travelling in open seas or polar regions were compiled to yield the attached yacht guidelines for Antarctic travellers. These guidelines are complemented with the checklist as well as the contact list for national authorities and for the emergency centres.
Introduction
Within the last decade, ATCM and IMO have made several attempts to improve safety regulations for sea-based activities within the Antarctic Treaty area. Recent comprehensive guidance provided by IAATO for small boat operations (ATCM XXXIII, IP 61 IAATO Further Recommendations to Tourism Vessel Operators to Enhance Marine Safety and Guidelines for Small Boat Operations in the Vicinity of Ice) and enhanced information by poster and pamphlets for ‘Sailing to Antarctica’ were highly welcomed. 
The checklist proposed in WP 37 (ATCM XXXIV) Yacht guidelines to complement safety standards of ship traffic around Antarctica was intended to be the basis for developing more formal yacht guidelines. During the ATCM 2011 in Buenos Aires, Treaty Parties agreed to establish an ICG for the preparation of Antarctic yacht guidelines and data sharing.
Process and Results
Within the discussion rounds, twelve Treaty Parties actively participated: Argentina, Australia, Chile, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom, and the United States of America. The invited experts of IAATO and ASOC also submitted comments. 
First, the focus was on the presented checklist of yacht specific items (WP 37, ATCM XXXIV) and its amendments. During three rounds (from October to December 2011), the parties commented on specific and general items necessary for a safe trip on a yacht to Antarctic seas. In the course of this, both technical and personal preparation became more and more a focus of attention. Due to numerous suggestions, the revision of the checklist continued parallel to the compilation of guideline topics for the Antarctic yacht guideline draft until the end of March 2012. 
Based on the comprehensive guidelines from UK, Germany considered several text modules from rules of IAATO, ISAF, and IMO for the draft guideline. Specific regulatory requirements as well as the Antarctic environmental conditions and the necessity of comprehensive technical and personal preparation were taken into account. Five Parties plus the invited experts contributed to a final version of guidelines until the beginning of April 2012. The attached Yacht guidelines draft shall be discussed within a wider forum at the ATCM. 
Open questions and outlook
Similar to the discussions at ATCM XXXIV (see final report), it was emphasized in the ICG that the information exchange between Parties should be enhanced to increase both the awareness of actual yacht activities in Antarctic seas and the transparency whether a yacht expedition was authorised. Actually, there was low response to the request of collecting and sharing data within the ICG. However, IAATO proposed to gather data within the ATS system instead of relying on IAATO system registrations. The ATS EIES database should be more actively used to collect pre-season data on authorised yacht expeditions. In addition, a platform could be helpful to record observations of extraordinary incidents as an information source for all Parties’ vessels.
Recommendations
In order to bring forward safety issues for yacht operators and private sailors, to promote good practice and to further protect the environment, Parties are invited to:
    1) discuss the value of the presented guidelines including attachments.
    2) consider the checklist for Antarctic yacht items (Annex A) for its additional potential use during the assessment of Antarctic yachting expeditions by competent authorities.
    3) fill in missing information in Annex B “Contact details of national competent authorities” and Annex C “Marine Rescue Co-ordination Centres”, where applicable.
    4) decide on the concerted advancement and application of the proposed yacht guidelines for Antarctic yacht expeditions by adoption of these guidelines or further revision in another ICG period.

