





Establishing a Working Group on Antarctic Cooperation 





Establishing a Working Group 
on Antarctic Cooperation


Summary
This documents aims at establishing a Working Group on Antarctic Cooperation in the framework of Antarctic Consultative Treaty Meetings. Its purpose is to discuss, analyse and identify possible ways to respond to the multiple challenges faced by Member States in their Antarctic activities.
This Working Group shall aim at promoting an Antarctic Cooperation system, which will strengthen and empower Parties at an early or intermediate stage of development in the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS).
The Group shall further aim at implementing mechanisms for the creation of Antarctic international cooperation networks that will promote and consolidate the System, by establishing relationships between countries with a high Antarctic development, and those at an early or intermediate stage of development in the implementation of the ATS. 
In essence, it will involve the sharing knowledge, experience and technical support in order to develop the human resources necessary to move forward in the implementation of the ATS. Such an initiative is expected to have a positive impact on the development of countries at an earlier stage in their Antarctic progress, on other Antarctic aspects besides scientific cooperation. 
The complexity involved in the ATS makes the establishment of a cooperation mechanism for the management and preservation of the southernmost continent an urgent matter, especially for generations to come. 
Introduction
The ATS is an unprecedented example of international cooperation in the joint management and harmonious coexistence throughout one single continent.  The legal duty to share information and the annual consultative meeting system have helped create a positive work environment, which should be preserved and furthered.
This Antarctic community is made up of Member States having reached different stages of Antarctic development, from early and medium to highly developed. Such differences become apparent in the way each Party has implemented the Treaty through their own regulations. We believe that this effort, dissimilar at times, should be facilitated in order to ensure a more positive and transparent development.
Scientific cooperation and research, together with the furtherance of peace and the environmental protection, are the fundamental pillars of the Antarctic Treaty. The spirit of scientific cooperation, mainly embodied in the exchange of information, research programs and scientific and technical staff programs, as well as in the free access to research outputs and the existence of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) make up a solid system that should be systematically expanded to other Antarctic aspects.
Areas such as tourism, yacht regulation in Antarctic waters, search and rescue (SAR) operations, standards for the construction of research stations and progress in the legal enforcement of ATS standards, to name but a few, justify a broader and more comprehensive effort concerning other items in the Antarctic cooperation agenda.
 Even if scientific and logistic cooperation aspects are, to a higher or lesser extent, addressed in forums like COMNAP, SCAR or other, this is done in a fragmented way, not always benefiting from a global vision, and without emphasising the international cooperation aspect from a global perspective.
We believe that the creation of a Working Group on international Antarctic cooperation in the framework of Consultative Meetings would be a suitable space for discussion, analysis, channelling a establishing the needs of ATS Member Countries. TThe aim is to widen the scope of traditional scientific cooperation to other Antarctic aspects, so as to provide answers to the multiple challenges we are faced with in the 21st Century.

International Cooperation
International cooperation can be understood as the relationship between two or more countries, international bodies or institutions and their related activities, aimed at collaboration in the pursuit of explicit or implicit mutually agreed-upon development objects.
This effort proves highly beneficial to the ATS, given the various parties involved and objects sought to be achieved. In this regard, the Member State providing cooperation should be understood not only as the State financing the entire initiative or its most part, but also as the State providing the greater knowledge, experience, technical support and/or technological resources. 
Given the number of Member States that are part of the ATS, we believe that bilateral or multilateral cooperation efforts could be strengthened or multiplied, in support of statements made in the Declaration on Antarctic Cooperation, approved on the occasion of the 50th Anniversary of entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty in 2009 and reaffirmed in the Buenos Aires Declaration in 2011. Among other aspects, these Declarations highlight the example of scientific cooperation in the framework of the ATS, its operation and the global importance of research programs in Antarctica, a proactive attitude towards future environmental, scientific, management and operational challenges, and the achievement of a coherent approach within the System.
The consensus principle at ATCMs has generated a permanent spirit of cooperation among the Parties. Integration of Acceding States to Consultative Meetings is highly valued by all its members. However, such involvement has not reflected a strong base that will promote development and increase international cooperation.
Sources of international cooperation 
International cooperation for the development of the different countries has experienced great structural and operational changes.
Apart from bilateral cooperation, triangular and multilateral cooperation are increasingly used international cooperation modalities, and good practical alternatives to be used among Member States with a higher Antarctic development and those facing greater difficulties in the application of the ATS.
Proposal
In view of the above, Chile suggests that a Working Group be created to analyse different ways of cooperation at ATCMs, and promote, manage and be the main administrator of a cooperation network system, allowing for the effective transfer of knowledge, experience and/or technology to countries with a lower Antarctic development, through the generation of a triangular and/or multilateral cooperation procedure among Member States, international bodies and non-governmental organizations.
It shall work to establish a triangular and/or multilateral system or modality that may strengthen the ATS through dedicated efforts involving projects in specific areas, establishing cooperation between, for example, countries with a high Antarctic development, international or non-governmental organisations and those with a weaker presence in Antarctica.

