





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 129 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island









Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 129 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
A working paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom has undertaken a review of the Management Plan for ASPA No.129 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island.  In submitting this revised Plan, the United Kingdom recommends that the CEP ask the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake an intersessional review and to report back to CEP XVI.
Background
The primary reason for the designation of Rothera Point, Adelaide Island (Lat. 68o07’S, Long. 67o34’W), South Shetland Islands, as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area is to protect scientific values, primarily that the Area would serve as a control area, against which the effects of human impact associated with the adjacent Rothera Research Station (UK) could be monitored in an Antarctic fellfield ecosystem.  The Area itself has little intrinsic nature conservation value, but does have value as a biological research site.
Rothera Point was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 9) after a proposal by the United Kingdom. Following a visit to the Area in February 2011, the Management Plan has been revised and updated by the UK.  The revised plan is attached for the consideration of the CEP (Annex 1). 
The proposed revision includes changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan including:
    • Redrafting of the text into the format recommended in the ‘Guide to the preparation of management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’ [Resolution 2 (2011)]
    • Introduction.  An introduction has been added that describes the primary reasons for the Area’s designation as an ASPA and the contribution of the Area to the Antarctic protected areas system.  The Area’s position within the framework of the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ has been described [Resolution 3 (2008)].
Recommendation
       Given that the Management Plan for ASPA No.129 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island has been amended, the United Kingdom recommends that the CEP ask the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake a more detailed intersessional review of the revised Plan and report back to CEP XVI. 

