





Revised Management Plan 
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 132 (Potter Peninsula) 






Revised Management Plan for ASPA 132, Potter Peninsula 

Presented by Argentina

Summary
Argentina has conducted the review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 132, Potter Peninsula, pursuant to Art. 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Argentina requests that the CEP assesses the need to refer this Plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans for intersessional consideration, or, should this be considered unnecessary, that it proceeds to the adoption of this revised version of the Management Plan.  

Background
Specially Protected Antarctic Area No. 132 was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 13 under Recommendation  XIII-8 (1985). Its Management Plan was adapted to the requirements of Annex V through Measure 3 (Christchurch, 1997). The Area was later renumbered pursuant to Decision I (Warsaw, 2002) as ASPA No. 132 and, and a first revision was adopted through Measure 2 (2005). 
During this new revision process, pursuant to the provisions established in Art. 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, detailed consideration was given to the values of the Area, and an assessment of the measures necessary to their protection was made, upon prior consultation with the principal researchers conducting activities in the Area, and the analysis of relevant Visit Reports. During the summers of 2010 and 2011, field visits were made to ASPA No. 132, which allowed for verification of the information contained in this revision. The main proposed amendments to the current Management Plan are not significant, and are summarised in the following cover note. They are largely based on the provisions established in Resolution 2 (2011) “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas”.

COVER NOTE FOR WORKING PAPER ON THE REVISION OF ASPA 132, POTTER PENINSULA 
1) Is a new ASPA proposed? 
No. 
2) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? 
ASPA 132, Potter Peninsula, King George Island (isla 25 de Mayo), South Shetland Islands
    • Original designation: 
Designated as SSSI No. 13 under Recommendation XIII-8 (1985).
Its expiry date was extended through Resolution 3 (1996). 
    • First adoption of the Management Plan: 
Measure 3 (1997) 
    • Revisions to the Management Plan: 
Measure 2 (2005)
    • Current Management Plan: 
Measure 2 (2005)
    • Extensions of Management Plan expiry dates: 
None
    • New name and number under Decision 1 (2002) 
ASPA 132, Potter Peninsula, King George Island (isla 25 de Mayo), South Shetland Islands
3) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing Management Plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 
(i) major or minor? 
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates? 
Minimum adjustments to the boundaries and co-ordinates were made for accuracy purposes. 
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics? 
The new Map was drawn in a CAD environment such as “DraftSight” http://www.draftsight.com, in DXF format. It uses field data surveyed during the 1999 / 2000 / 2001 Antarctic Summer Campaigns, published in the 2001 “POTTER PENINSULA, KING GEORGE ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS - ANTARCTICA” Map by the National Direction of the Antarctic (Dirección Nacional del Antártico) – Argentine Antarctic Institute and the Institut für Allgemeine und Angewandte, Geologie München. Such data was referenced to the WGS84 Reference System, elevations were relative to the OSU91a geopotential model, and the co-ordinates were expressed according to the UTM zone 21 projection (60°O - 64°O). Elevations relative to the OSU91 model were converted to the EGM96 model using the http://icgem.gfz-potsdam.de/ICGEM/ICGEM.html calculation service. Average difference for the Area: OSU91a - EGM96 = 0.18m
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 132 boundaries were set using GPS data surveyed in the field by the Direction of the Antarctic during the 2010 Antarctic Summer Campaign. 
(iv) any change to the description of the Area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries? 
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this Area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site. 
No.
(vi) Other: brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
The description of the values of the Area was updated, together with the specific data related to each value. Two new sections were added (1. Introduction and 8. Supporting Documentation), in response to the provisions established in Resolution 2 (2011) “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas”. Finally, changes were made to both the style and wording of some paragraphs for purposes of clarity. 

