





An Antarctic Clean-Up Manual








An Antarctic Clean-Up Manual
Working Paper submitted by Australia and the United Kingdom
Summary
Australia and the United Kingdom propose that the Committee agrees to develop a Clean-Up Manual containing guidance to assist Parties to address their obligations under Annex III to the Environmental Protocol to clean up past waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of past activities. A manual would also assist with the clean-up of fuel spill sites. This paper suggests content for the initial components of a manual. We propose a similar form to that used by the Non-Native Species Manual adopted under Resolution 6 (2011). Australia and the United Kingdom further propose that the Committee encourages interested Members and Observers to develop practical guidelines and supporting resources for inclusion in the Clean-Up Manual.
Background
Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty outlines waste management requirements which are intended to ‘minimise impact on the Antarctic environment and to minimise interference with the natural values of Antarctica, with scientific research and with other uses which are consistent with the Antarctic Treaty’. Historically, the conduct of Antarctic expeditions and the operation of Antarctic facilities involved practices that are now prohibited under Annex III, including the disposal of waste on land or onto sea ice, and the abandonment of facilities that were no longer required. In recognition of the ongoing environmental risks associated with such past practices, Article 1.5 of Annex III provides that:
‘Past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities shall be cleaned up by the generator of such wastes and the user of such sites. This obligation shall not be interpreted as requiring:
    a) the removal of any structure designated as a historic site or monument; or
    b) the removal of any structure or waste material in circumstances where the removal by any practical option would result in greater adverse environmental impact than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location.’
Considerable effort has been made by the Parties, particularly since the entry into force of the Protocol, to minimise the environmental impacts of current and planned activities in Antarctica. Additionally, as summarised in the Australian Information Paper 6 Topic Summary: CEP Discussions on Clean-Up, many Parties have reported to CEP meetings on clean-up activities undertaken in compliance with the requirements of Annex III. However, there is no central and readily accessible guidance to assist Parties with further efforts to clean-up past waste disposal sites and facilities that are no longer in use. Similarly, while the 2008 COMNAP Fuel Manual provides important guidance on preventing and containing fuel spills, there is as yet no guidance to inform appropriate clean-up and restoration actions.
The environmental risks associated with past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites are likely to increase over time, as structures and containers degrade. Also, as noted by the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance, climate changes create the potential for localised release of contamination from past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites through increased melting (ATME report, para 52).
At CEP XIV (2011), the Committee decided that ‘Clean-up of sites of past activity’ should be addressed as part of its work on ‘Environmental repair and remediation’. The related actions ‘Establish Antarctic-wide inventory of sites of past activity’ and ‘Consider guidelines for repair and remediation’ were incorporated under this issue, which was identified in the CEP Five Year Work Plan as a top priority for the Committee’s attention (CEP XIV Final Report, Appendix 3). The Committee advised the ATCM that it had discussed in detail the issue of wastes and clean-up of sites of past activities, and had decided to give higher priority to such issues in the future (ATCM XXXIV Final Report, para 92).
An Antarctic Clean-Up Manual
Australia and the United Kingdom consider that it would be beneficial to build on Parties’ experience with clean-up activities by developing a manual containing recommendatory (non-binding) guidance to assist Parties to undertake clean-up activities in a cost-effective and environmentally beneficial manner. Drawing on the format of the Non-Native Species Manual adopted under Resolution 6 (2011), a ‘Clean-Up Manual’ could:
    • represent a central resource for practical guidance that operators could refer to and apply, as appropriate, to assist with addressing clean-up obligations under Annex III; 
    • present key guiding principles for Parties’ clean-up activities; and
    • be made available via the ATS website in the official Antarctic Treaty languages.
A suggested first version of a Clean-Up Manual is annexed to the draft Resolution presented at Attachment A, comprising: 1) Introductory text; and 2) Key guiding principles. Similar to the Non-Native Species Manual, the Clean-Up Manual could be further developed to incorporate practical guidelines and supporting resources developed by Members and Observers, as available.
Recommendations
Australia and the United Kingdom recommend that the CEP:
    1) agrees on the utility of a Clean-Up Manual, similar to the Non-Native Species Manual adopted under Resolution 6 (2011), as a central resource for practical guidance to assist Parties’ efforts to address clean-up obligations under Annex III;
    2) considers and endorses the first version of a Clean-Up Manual annexed to the draft Resolution presented at Attachment A; 
    3) encourages Members and Observers to develop practical guidelines and supporting resources for inclusion in the Manual; and
    4) agrees to convey the attached draft Resolution and attached initial components of a Clean-Up Manual to the ATCM for approval.

Attachment A
Draft Resolution XX
Antarctic Clean-Up Manual

The Representatives,

Reaffirming the commitment of Parties to the Environmental Protocol to reduce as far as practicable the amount of wastes produced or disposed of in the Antarctic Treaty area, so as to minimise impact on the Antarctic environment and to minimise interference with the natural values of Antarctica, with scientific research and with other uses of Antarctica which are consistent with the Antarctic Treaty;
Recalling the requirement under Article 1.5 of Annex III to the Environmental Protocol that past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities shall be cleaned up by the generator of such wastes and the user of such sites, provided that such actions shall not require the removal of any structure designated as a historic site or monument, or the removal of any structure or waste material in circumstances where the removal by any practical option would result in greater adverse environmental impact than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location;
Recalling also the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance, which noted that climate changes create the potential for localised release of contamination from past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites through increased melting;
Noting the actions taken by Parties since the entry into force of the Environmental Protocol to effectively handle waste and to clean up past waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites;
Noting also the efforts of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs to develop and formulate best practice procedures for waste management, including through the workshop on Waste Management in Antarctica held in Hobart in 2006;
Welcoming the development by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) of a Clean-Up Manual that Parties can apply and use, as appropriate, to assist with meeting their obligations under Article 1.5 of Annex III to the Environmental Protocol; 

Recommend that Parties:
    1) disseminate and encourage the use, as appropriate, of the Clean-Up Manual annexed to this Resolution to assist Parties to address their clean up obligations under Article 1.5 of Annex III to the Environmental Protocol; and
    2) encourage the Committee for Environmental Protection to continue to develop the Clean-Up Manual with the input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs on scientific and practical matters, respectively.
Annex 
Committee for Environmental Protection
CLEAN-UP MANUAL
    1. Introduction
    a) Objective
The overall objective for Parties’ actions to address environmental risks posed by past waste disposal sites on land, abandoned works sites of Antarctic activities, and sites contaminated by fuel spills is:
To minimise impact on the Antarctic environment, and to minimise interference with the natural values of Antarctica, with scientific research and with other uses of Antarctica which are consistent with the Antarctic Treaty, by cleaning up past waste disposal sites on land, abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities, and sites contaminated by fuel spills. Such clean-up actions shall not require the removal of any structure designated as a historic site or monument, or the removal of any structure or waste material in circumstances where the removal by any practical option would result in greater adverse environmental impact than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location.
This objective reflects requirements outlined in Annex III (Waste Disposal and Waste Management) to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Environmental Protocol). 
    b) Purpose and background
The purpose of this manual is to provide guidance to Antarctic Treaty Parties in order to meet the objective above. The manual includes key guiding principles and links to practical guidelines and resources that operators can apply and use, as appropriate, to assist with addressing the requirements of Annex III to the Environmental Protocol. The practical guidelines are recommendatory and not all guidelines will be appropriate to all operations, or to all sites. The manual is intended to be updated and added to as new work, research and best practice emerges. 
The guidance provided here is focussed on the repair and remediation of past waste disposal sites on land, abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities, and sites contaminated by fuel spills. It does not address contaminants generated outside the Antarctic, such as persistent organic pollutants which are transported via atmospheric circulation, which can only be controlled at the source. 
With regard to sites contaminated by recent or ongoing activities, this manual is not intended to duplicate the important measures for spill prevention and containment outlined in the COMNAP Fuel Manual. Instead, it is primarily intended to provide guidance on appropriate clean-up and restoration actions, which the COMNAP Fuel Manual indicates should be addressed as part of the Operational Plans to be prepared for individual facilities or relevant geographic areas.
In practice, it will not be practicable to clean up all contaminated sites immediately or concurrently, so the manual also aims to provide guidance on identifying priorities for clean-up activities, and on remediating or removing contaminated materials to a level where ongoing environmental risks are mitigated.
    c) Context
In 1975 the Antarctic Treaty Parties adopted Recommendation VIII-11, which contained the first agreed guidance for the appropriate management and disposal of waste generated by expeditions and stations, with a view to minimising impacts on the Antarctic environment. As awareness of the potential environmental impacts of the disposal of waste in the Antarctic region increased, in parallel with improvements in logistics and technology, the Parties identified a need for improved on-site treatment of wastes and for the removal of some wastes from the Antarctic Treaty area.
Through Recommendation XV-3 (1989) the Parties adopted more stringent waste disposal and management practices, based on recommendations from a SCAR Panel of Experts on Waste Disposal in the Antarctic, with the aim of minimising impact on the Antarctic environment and minimising interference with scientific research or other legitimate uses of the Antarctic. These practices not only addressed requirements for the management of wastes associated with present and future activities, but also called for programs to clean up existing waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites, and for an inventory of locations of past activities.
Many elements of Recommendation XV-3 are closely reflected in the current provisions for waste disposal and management, contained in Annex III to the Environmental Protocol. Among other requirements Annex III provides, in Article 1.5, that: 
‘Past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities shall be cleaned up by the generator of such wastes and the user of such sites. This obligation shall not be interpreted as requiring:
    c) the removal of any structure designated as a historic site or monument; or
    d) the removal of any structure or waste material in circumstances where the removal by any practical option would result in greater adverse environmental impact than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location.’
Prior to these instruments, waste management at Antarctic facilities often involved the open burning and disposal of waste in tips. Similarly, it was commonplace to abandon disused facilities and leave them to deteriorate. Many past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites require ongoing management today. Such sites are frequently characterised by a mix of physical debris (e.g. building materials, machinery, vehicles, general rubbish) plus chemical contaminants, some of which may be in containers and some of which may have been released into the environment. Seepage and runoff from abandoned sites, and from more recent spill sites, can result in contamination spreading to other parts of the environment. In general such contaminants degrade very slowly in Antarctic conditions.
Based on extrapolation from a few well documented sites, it has been estimated that the volume of abandoned, unconfined tip materials in Antarctica may be somewhere between 1 to 10 million m3 and that the volume of petroleum-contaminated sediment may be similar. Although this is a relatively small volume compared to the situation in other parts of the world, the significance of the associated environmental impacts is magnified due to the fact that many Antarctic contaminated sites are located in the relatively rare coastal ice-free areas that provide habitat for most of the terrestrial flora and fauna.
Reasons to undertake timely clean-up action in accordance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol include:
    • many abandoned waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites contain potential contaminants in containers (e.g. drums filled with fuel, oil, chemical), and there is a limited time before they deteriorate, causing contamination and making clean-up much more difficult; 
    • as noted by the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change and Implications for Antarctic Management and Governance, climate changes could accelerate localised release of contamination from past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites through increased melting;
    • the harmful effects of chemical contaminants on the environment and ecosystem can increase with increasing exposure time, and increase the chance of cumulative impacts from exposure to other environmental stressors; 
    • dispersion processes, such as entrainment with melt water, can cause the total area contaminated to increase with time; and
    • some sites may otherwise be lost to the ocean or covered by ice/snow where they may continue to have detrimental impacts but will be much more difficult and costly to manage.
    d) Glossary
The practice of environmental clean-up uses some technical terminology. Additionally, some words that are commonly used in everyday language have a specific meaning when used in the context of environmental clean-up. To help ensure a common understanding, this glossary will be expanded as part of the development of the manual. 
CLEAN-UP: the removal and/or on-site remediation of past waste disposal sites on land, abandoned work sites and sites contaminated by fuel spill.
    2. Key Guiding Principles
Information management 
Record keeping is important throughout the clean-up process and should commence well before any activities occur on site. 
    1) Record keeping should be designed so that information on individual sites is easily accessible and so that information on actions and events at each site can be added over time.
    2) The record of information should be kept up to date and should include the status of contaminated sites, the clean-up actions that have occurred, the reasons why key decisions were made and the lessons learned. 
    3) The type of information to be recorded should reflect its intended use, including:
    • site assessment and prioritisation;
    • supporting operational decisions;
    • ensuring compliance to environmental impact assessment / permit conditions;
    • evaluating the effectiveness of a clean-up process; and 
    • facilitating the exchange of information between Parties and with other stakeholders.
    4) Record keeping should be designed so that it can also be used as the foundation for the Antarctic-wide inventory of locations of past activity.
Site assessment / characterisation
An assessment of the features of the site that will influence how contaminants behave, and the environmental values that may be impacted, should be undertaken before considering how best to clean-up a site.
    5) The site assessment should consider:
    • the nature and extent of contamination, and the landscape (e.g. geology, geomorphology, glaciology) of the site and surrounding area, with particular emphasis on slope, aspect and water flows;  
    • the environmental values of the site and surrounding area, including the range of values protected under the Environmental Protocol; and
    • likely changes at the site including deterioration of containers (such as rusting fuel drums), changes in chemical compositions (e.g. through natural weathering processes) and transport of the contaminants (e.g. from wind or water flow).
    6) All available information should be used to assess the current impact and potential future threat to the environment from the contamination.
Environmental risk assessment
Environmental risk assessment is the process of determining the inherent risks posed by the site to the environmental values.
    7) The environmental risk assessment should use the information gained during site assessment and should inform the decisions taken throughout the clean-up process. 
    8) The environmental risk assessment should assist to prioritise which site(s) should be cleaned up first, to decide among the various clean-up options (see below) and to set realistic targets for clean-up (see below).
    9) The environmental risk assessment should be regularly reviewed and confirmed or modified during the clean-up process.

Environmental quality targets for clean-up 
In some cases, the complete removal of all traces of contamination would be impractical, or would result in greater adverse environmental impact. Environmental quality targets for clean-up are the concentration of contaminant that may remain within the environment without creating unacceptable impacts on the environmental values of the site. 
    10) Environmental quality targets for clean-up should be determined on a site specific basis taking into account the characteristics of the site and the environmental values present.
    11) For protecting biodiversity values, environmental quality targets should be based on the sensitivity of relevant species to the specific contaminants (such as from ecotoxicology studies).
    12) Environmental quality targets are just one factor when considering the options for clean-up (see below). 

Consideration of clean-up options
At the highest level the range of possible clean-up options may include: do nothing; containment on site to reduce dispersion; in situ remediation to enhance attenuation processes; removal from the site with treatment in Antarctica; and removal from the Antarctic Treaty area. Within each of these options there are further choices of possible clean-up actions (see below). 
    13) A risk assessment should be undertaken for all clean-up options being considered, with a focus on ensuring that greater adverse environmental impact does not occur as a result of the clean-up process.
    14) Options analysis should consider the environmental quality targets, risk of additional adverse impacts arising from the clean-up activity, feasibility, practicality, and cost-effectiveness. 
Clean-up actions
Clean-up actions are the operational activities that happen at the site and / or elsewhere on material that has been removed from the site.
    15) Wherever appropriate, plans and environmental impact assessments for new activities in Antarctica should consider the nature and scale of any clean-up activity which will be subsequently required. Actions to clean-up sites of past activities should also be subject to environmental impact assessment in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol.
    16) Clean-up techniques developed for contaminated sites in other regions of the world may have some value in Antarctica but are likely to require modification to make them suitable for local conditions.
    17) All clean-up options, including the ‘do nothing’ option, may require some commitment of resources, such as monitoring (see below) to confirm the environmental risk assessment.
    18) In some cases containment on site to reduce dispersion will be identified as the best means of protecting environmental values. Techniques for containment should be designed for:
    • the types of contaminants present (the principal distinction being organic (e.g. fuel) or inorganic (e.g. metals from waste dumps); and
    • the characteristics of the environment (principally the freeze/thaw process and the highly seasonal presence of free water). 
    19) In situ remediation to enhance attenuation processes can be cost-effective and is likely to be less disturbing to the environment than options requiring extraction, but techniques must be appropriate for the types of contaminants and the characteristics of the environment (as above).
    20) Removal from the site with treatment in Antarctica creates more disturbance than in situ remediation but has the potential advantage of relocation to a site that is more easily managed such as close to a station.
    21) As above, removal from the Antarctic Treaty area creates more disturbance than in situ remediation, and also has the disadvantage of removing rare soil from Antarctica. This option is also likely to be the most costly, is dependent on the availability and capacity of shipping, and may raise biosecurity or contaminated material concerns for the receiving country.
    22) Monitoring and evaluation (see below) should be designed as an integral part of clean-up activities. 
    23) Clean-up should be considered complete only once the environmental quality targets have been met.
Monitoring and evaluation
Monitoring and evaluation are both used to characterise and record the quality of the environment but have specific and distinct roles in clean-up.
    24) Monitoring should be undertaken to identify and provide early warning of any adverse effects of the clean-up activity that may require modifications of procedures, and to assess and verify predictions identified in the environmental impact assessment. 
    25) Evaluation refers to determining whether the clean-up activity has achieved the desired environmental quality targets.
    26) Both monitoring and evaluation should focus on the vulnerable environmental values of the site and take into account the final use of the data.
    3. Guidelines and resources to support clean-up
As the manual is developed, this section will be expanded to contain voluntary guidelines and resources to assist Parties to address their clean-up obligations under Annex III to the Protocol.
References
This list of references will be expanded to list further papers as the manual is developed.

ATCM XXXV – IP 6 (Australia) 2012. Topic Summary: CEP Discussions on Clean-Up (contains links to electronic versions of papers on the subject of clean-up submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection between 1998 and 2011)
Aronson, R.B., Thatje, S., McClintock, J.B., & Hughes, K.A. 2011. Anthropogenic impacts on marine ecosystems in Antarctica. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1223, 82-107.
Filler, D., Snape, I., & Barnes, D., Eds. 2008. Bioremediation of Petroleum Hydrocarbons in Cold Regions. Cambridge. 288 pp.
Poland, J.S., Riddle, M.J., & Zeeb, B.A. 2003. Contaminants in the Arctic and the Antarctic: a comparison of sources, impacts, and remediation options. Polar Record, 39(211), 369-383.
Riddle, M. 2000. Scientific studies of Antarctic life are still the essential basis for long-term conservation measures. In Davison, W., Howard-Williams, C., & Broady, P. Eds. Antarctic Ecosystems: Models for Wider Ecological Understanding.  New Zealand Natural Sciences, Canterbury University, 497-302.
Snape, I., Riddle, M.J., Stark, S., Cole, C.M., King, C.K., Dubesque, S., & Gore, D.B. 2001. Management and Remediation of contaminated sites at Casey Station, Antarctica. Polar Record, 37(202), 199-214.
Stark, J.S., Snape, I., & Riddle, M.J. 2006. Abandoned Antarctic waste disposal sites: Monitoring remediation outcomes and limitations at Casey Station. Ecological Management and Restoration, 7(1), 21-31.
Tin, T., Fleming, Z.L., Hughes, K.A., Ainley, D.G., Convey, P., Moreno, C.A., Pfeiffer, S., Scott, J., & Snape, I. 2009. Impacts of local human activities on the Antarctic environment. Antarctic Science, 21, 3-33.


