





RACER1  - ‘Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience’: a tool from the Arctic to assess ecosystem resilience and areas of conservation importance, and its possible application to Antarctica








RACER1  - ‘Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience’: a tool from the Arctic to assess ecosystem resilience and areas of conservation importance, and its possible application to the Antarctic

Working Paper submitted by UK and Norway 


Summary

The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change (Svolvær, Norway, 2010) recommended that the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) should  ’remain alert to the development of climate change related conservation tools elsewhere in the world that may also have application in an Antarctic context’. This paper introduces WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) - a new tool for identifying and mapping places of conservation importance on the basis of ecosystem resilience across the Arctic, and recommends that further work be carried out to test the RACER methodology on a trial area in Antarctica to assess its applicability. This would allow the CEP to determine whether or not RACER could help to identify terrestrial areas in Antarctica that might serve as local sources of region-wide ecosystem resilience in a changing climate. 

Background

Recommendation 29 of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change (Svolvær, Norway, 2010) stated that the CEP should ’remain alert to the development of climate change related conservation tools elsewhere in the world that may also have application in an Antarctic context (e.g. climate change adaptation plans, risk assessment tools and mechanisms for assisted translocation of endangered species)’ [2] 
WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience – RACER (www.panda.org/arctic/racer) is a new tool for identifying and mapping places of conservation importance in the context of a climate-altered Arctic. The UK and Norway are bringing RACER to the CEP’s attention to highlight it as one possible approach to identify areas in the Antarctic that may be of strategic conservation importance because they are and will continue to be sources of ecosystem resilience in a changing climate. As such, RACER might assist to underpin ecosystem-based management approaches for Antarctic environments in the context of climate change. 

Current approaches to managing often vulnerable polar habitats and species are not necessarily keeping pace with accelerating climate change. RACER is a new approach which locates sources of ecological strength and durability in today’s Arctic ecosystems – known as ecosystem resilience - and tests their persistence in a climate-altered future. Focusing conservation attention on these enduring sources of resilience is important for the continued functioning of Arctic ecosystems, including the ecological services people receive from them. 
The RACER methodology

RACER is an innovative ecosystem-based method that identifies and evaluates the local sources of current ecological productivity and diversity that confer the functioning of the larger-scale representative ecological regions (ecoregions) now and assesses how well they are expected to function into the climate-affected future. The relationship between the ecoregions and the most productive and ecologically diverse features they contain is central to the RACER method. 

RACER assessments test ecosystem resilience (using best available knowledge) for entire ecoregions. This allows RACER to make conclusions that are relevant to planning and management at places which are representative of ecological communities, biodiversity, and natural values and services across the circumpolar Arctic. The fifty representative ecoregions3,4 found within the boundaries of the circumpolar Arctic5 are shown in Appendix 1.

Stage 1. 
The first part of the RACER method identifies and maps the current location of key land or sea features, that are home to exceptional levels of biological productivity and diversity, the two main engines of ecosystem functioning. Productivity and diversity are driven by the physical and ecological characteristics that make up features on the landscape (e.g. mountains) or in the sea (e.g. ocean polynyas). RACER describes the key features as the unique combination of drivers (Fig.1) that creates their exceptional productivity and/or diversity. Although the same ecological drivers are at work across the entire ecoregion, RACER’s assessment is concerned only with their performance (now and into the future) at the places of locally exceptional productivity and diversity. It is the exceptional productivity and /or diversity at these key features that confers resilience to the functioning of the ecoregion.

To detect and map places where the ecosystem engines of productivity and diversity are working exceptionally well, RACER gathers and analyses information from three general sources: remote sensing data, literature reviews and evaluations by scientific and local experts familiar with the regional ecology.
Stage 2. 
The second part of the RACER method looks ahead to anticipate whether Arctic ecosystems with a capacity for resilience today will continue to exhibit the same ecological strength in a future altered by climate change. 

RACER uses regional forecasts of climate variables from Global Circulation Models (GCMs) to allow experts to assess whether key features will persist. They persist if the climate-altered drivers still produce exceptional productivity and/or diversity that helps to confer region-wide ecosystem resilience. 
Fig  1 The connection between drivers, key features, exceptional productivity and diversity



One of the novelties of the RACER method is this use of ecological-relevant drivers as a quantitative link between climate change and the continued functioning of regional ecosystems. This link - missing from many other methods attempting to forecast climate-related ecological change - takes advantage of the close relationship between the ecological drivers of productivity and diversity and the climate-affected environmental variables for which forecasts are available. Local experts play an important role in evaluating how forecasted climate changes to the region-wide environment can affect the drivers of productivity and diversity at key features. 

Table 1 summarises the staged approach to the RACER methodology

Table 1.  RACER Methodology (Analytical Framework)


STAGE 1: MAPPING RESILIENCE

Step 1. Map places of exceptional productivity and diversity

    • Uses literature and remote sensing analysis to identify places with exceptional productivity and diversity within each ecoregion.

Step 2. Identify key features

    • Describes the unique combinations of drivers considered responsible for the exceptional local-scale productivity and diversity. 
    • Identifies these driver combinations as “features” that confer ecoregion-wide resilience and shows these features on a map.



STAGE 2: ASSESSING PERSISTENCE

Step 1. Assess the impact of climate change on the ecoregion

    • Identifies the Global Circulation Model variables that are relevant to the ecoregion and describes the GCM-projected change of these variables through to 2100.

Step 2. Estimate how drivers of exceptional productivity and diversity of key features are affected by climate change

    • Estimates how projected changes in GCM variables affect the ecoregion-scale drivers and interpret their impact on the drivers of the exceptional productivity and diversity at the scale of key features.

Step 3. Assess the persistence of the capacity of key features to confer resilience on the ecoregion affected by climate change

    • Assesses the likely persistence of a key feature’s continued ability to confer resilience by interpreting whether feature-scale drivers will continue to support exceptional productivity and diversity for identified key features.


Conclusion 

By mapping key features and evaluating their likely persistence in our future climate, RACER focuses conservation and management attention on the importance of minimizing environmental disturbance to places that are - and will be for the remainder of this century - sources of ecosystem resilience. In particular, RACER’s ecosystem-based method equips resource managers and conservationists with new targets and leverage points for their efforts - managing not just from a species and habitats perspective, but including the combinations of geographical, climatic, and ecological characteristics, or drivers, that are behind ecosystem functioning. Identifying the sources of resilience in polar ecosystems will be critical for achieving effective ecosystem-based management in the context of a changing climate. The opportunity now exists for the CEP to assess the RACER methodology in an Antarctic terrestrial context, possibly drawing upon the Environmental Domains Analysis 6,7 as the basis for the larger-scale representative ecoregions. 

Recommendations

Recalling the conclusions of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change (2010) and the Priority 1 status given to climate change in the CEP Five Year Work Plan, the UK and Norway invite the CEP to:

    • Note RACER as a new climate change resilience tool which is being successfully applied in the Arctic, and which could have scope for application in Antarctica. 
    • Endorse further work during the intersessional period by the UK, Norway and other interested Parties to test the RACER methodology on a trial area in Antarctica. Existing work by the CEP (specifically the Environmental Domains Analysis), and SCAR’s Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment report8 could serve as appropriate foundations on which to base such an analysis. 
    • Note that this analysis could also help to focus substantive discussion at CEP XVI on whether RACER might have a wider application across the Antarctic Treaty Area, in line with Recommendation 29 of the ATME on Climate Change.  
Appendix 1. Arctic Ecoregions

Fifty representative ecoregions 3, 4 are found within the boundaries of the circumpolar Arctic5  These ecoregions are home to diverse biological communities and unique arrays of flora and fauna.  

Figure 2. RACER Study Units 


References 
    1. Adapted from :Martin Sommerkorn1*, Hussein Alidina2, Peter Christie3, Susan Evans2, Peter Ewins2, Miriam Geitz1, Alfonso Lombana4, James Snider2, Vassily Spiridonov5, and Mikhail Stishov5 (2011) Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER): A tool for identifying and mapping land and sea features that guide ecosystem conservation in a climate-changed Arctic. Unpublished poster presented to Convention on Biological Diversity Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice 15, November 2011
    2. Norway and UK (2010) Report from Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance.  Co-chairs’ executive summary with advice for actions. ATCM XXXIII, WP63
    3. CAVM Team. 2003. Circumpolar Arctic Vegetation Map. Scale 1:7,500,000. Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF) Map No. 1. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Anchorage, Alaska.
    4. Spalding, Mark D.; Fox, H.; Allen, G.;  Allen, G.; Davidson, N.; FERDAÑA, Z.; Finlayson, M.; Halpern, B.; Jorge, M.; Lombana, A.; Lourie, S.; Martin, K.; McManus, E.; Molnar, J.; Recchia, C.; and Robertson, J. 2007. Marine Ecoregions of the World: A Bioregionalization of Coastal and Shelf Areas. BioScience , Vol. 57, No. 7 (July/August 2007), pp. 573-583. 
    5. Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF) (2007). Circumpolar Biodiversity Monitoring Program: Five-Year Implementation Plan. CAFF, Norway.
    6. Morgan, F., Barker, G., Briggs, C.,Price, R., and Keys, H. (2007). Environmental Domains of Antarctica Version 2.0 Final Report. Landcare Research Contract Report LC0708/055.

    7. SCAR (2010). Biodiversity-based Evaluation of the Environmental Domains Analysis. Working Paper 3m XXXIII ATCM

    8. Turner, J., Bindschadler, R.A., Convey, P., di Prisco, G., Fahrbach, E., Gutt, J., Hodgson, D.A., Mayewski, P., & Summerhayes, C., S., Eds. 2009. Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment. SCAR.


       

