





New records of the Presence of Human Associated Microorganisms in the Antarctic Marine Environment








New Records of the Presence of Human Associated Microorganisms in the Antarctic Marine Environment
Summary
Chile informs about new records of presence of human associated microorganisms in the Antarctic marine environment and suggests the CEP to recommend COMNAP to develop monitor activities to study the presence of these microorganisms in the vicinity of the stations and to evaluate the existing precautions and the sewage treatments that the National Programs have established to avoid the incidental introduction of microorganisms due to human activities in the Antarctic environment.
Background
During the first CEP meeting in 1998 (Tromsø, Norway), the CEP agreed on a priority agenda and actions, where “Introduced alien species” was one of the topics. At that opportunity, Australia informed its intention to host a Workshop on the Introduction of Diseases to Antarctic Wildlife, to support that topic. The workshop was held in Hobart in August 1998 with the objectives of identifying the potential for disease introduction into Antarctica’s wildlife; developing recommendations to reduce such a risk; limit the consequences of any disease establishment and spread, and report to the XXIII ATCM.
The workshop focused on diseases of birds and seals breeding within the Antarctic Treaty area and considered both endemic and exotic diseases. As the full report states, there has not yet been a disease outbreak in Antarctica that could positively be attributed to human activity. However, it was recognized that human activities have been an agent in the spread of diseases in other parts of the world. It would therefore be advisable to increase the awareness and scientific knowledge about diseases in Antarctic wildlife. 
As a result of the discussions, during the CEP II an open-ended contact group was formed to present an initial report on matters arising from the workshop. During the CEP III, the Committee stressed that it would be advisable to increase awareness and scientific knowledge about diseases in Antarctic wildlife, aimed at identifying possible risks so that appropriate measures could be taken to prevent them. 
In 2001, Australia coordinated the report of an Intersessional Contact Group to present it in CEP IV in two parts: Review and risk assessment and Practical measures to diminish risk. The ICG identified the next human activities as priorities for practical measures to diminish risk: Feeding of wildlife; actions following discovery of unusual mortality events; research that involves handling of Antarctic animals, particularly research on disease; import of food, particularly poultry products; waste disposal and sewage treatment; use of equipment and clothing before departure to Antarctica, and, finally, serial visits to wildlife aggregations. 
The main conclusions of the ICG stated that the activities undertaken before going to Antarctica, including precautions, would determine whether people bring infectious diseases with them. It also stated that activities in Antarctica most likely to cause disease introduction or spread are those involving close contact with wildlife or those that allow wildlife to come in contact with waste generated from human activities. The group invited the Parties to take precautions, prioritising the most likely pathways of disease introduction or spread.
With those reports, the work of the group finished.
At CEP VIII, Australia introduced the Working Paper 28 on Measures to address the unintentional introduction and spread of non-native biota and disease to the Antarctic Treaty Area, noting that no formal assessment has been undertaken of the risks associated with non-native species in the Antarctic context, and that increasing visitation and a changing climate in certain parts of the Antarctic are likely to be increasing those risks. The CEP discussed the issue in some detail and many members agreed that there were several matters of concern with regard to the broad issues of quarantine and the introduction of non-native species, which warranted further detail consideration.
At that meeting, New Zealand indicated that they would be prepared to host a workshop on these issues ahead of CEP IX, taking account of the matters raised by the Australian Working Paper. 
The “Non-native Species in the Antarctic” Workshop was held 10 – 12 April 2006 in Christchurch, New Zealand, in order to foster increased understanding and awareness of i) the relevance of non-native species introductions to conservation of Antarctic environment and other values; ii) pathways for intentional and unintentional introductions of non-native species; iii) best practice and management tools available (practical as well as legal); iv) identification of gaps (knowledge, methods, regulatory procedures), and v) requirements to address these gaps (including research, implementation, regulatory controls, awareness raising, etc.). This workshop showed that, in the terrestrial environment, our understanding is poor for most invertebrates, lower plants and the microbial community. In the marine environment our understanding of biodiversity and species distribution is extremely patchy. 
The document presented six key recommendations to the CEP, which were strongly supported, including that the issue of non-native species should be given the highest priority consistent with the high environmental standards set out in the Protocol (a “zero tolerance approach”); that particular research attention needs to be given to microbial communities and marine ecosystems, and that a set of comprehensive and standardised guidance and/or procedures should be developed, aimed at all operators in the Antarctic, based on a “Prevention, Surveillance, Response” approach. 
New records of presence of human associated microorganisms in the Antarctic marine environment 
During the 2010-2011 Antarctic season, two Chilean scientific projects joined efforts to study the impact of the human presence on the Antarctic environment. They collected marine water samples in Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay), King George Island (Isla 25 de Mayo), in Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, and in Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula, and fresh faecal droppings from Gentoo penguins from the colonies close to the study areas. The results were presented by Jorge Hernández et al., with the paper “Human-associated Extended Spectrum β-Lactamase (ESBL) in the Antarctic”, published on line in Applied and Environmental Microbiology (January 2012), paper also referred on line by the NewScientist Magazine in January 2012.
In the paper, the researchers reported the presence of human associated Enterobacteriaceae with extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) producing Escherichia coli in the samples they collected, providing a new case of ESBL in the Antarctic Peninsula region. They also reported the existence of E. coli resistant to antibiotics. 
Although none of the sampled penguins were positive for ESBL-producing bacteria, and only one E. coli exhibited antibiotic resistance, the researchers proposed to study more opportunistic feeders, such as flying birds in the same study area, to determine if they would be exposed to human-associated bacteria.
In 2008 the research group led by Dr. Gerardo Gonzalez-Rocha from the University of Concepcion, Chile, studied the resistance to third generation cephalosporin (C3G) in samples of Gram-negative bacilli (GNB) collected from sediments and fresh water in the Fildes Peninsula. The results showed the production of extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) in two of the tested strains. Both strains were identified as Acinetobacter lwoffii using Microscan®, and both were also resistant to aminoglycoside antibiotics and chloramphenicol. Moreover, in 2009, the same group investigated the presence of blaCTX-M genes in the same group of bacteria. Two of the strains showed an amplicon corresponding to blaCTX-M-2, which were identified with 99% similarity as the uncultivated Protobacteria OCS7 (AF001645) and 98% as Pseudomonas chlororaphis (D86004).
Whereas these researchers have shown the existence of native and non-native (human-associated) ESBL in the Antarctic Peninsula region, the real impact of these findings should be appropriately considered. Moreover, it is known that many Antarctic bacteria produce antibiotic substances, and perhaps the presence of ESBL-producing bacteria in Antarctica is a natural phenomenon that occurs in any environment, as part of the interaction between the microorganisms. For instance, unpolluted Alaskan soil has revealed a unique and ancient β-lactam resistance determinants. These findings show that remote soil microbial communities are potential reservoirs of antibiotic resistance genes, but these reservoirs have rarely been studied. Therefore, more research is needed to identify the real origin of these microorganisms and its impacts.
As some of the microorganisms have been identified in the marine environment, Chile is concerned with the effectiveness of the existing precautions and sewage treatments at scientific stations in the study area.
Recommendations
1.- Chile recommends that Parties strengthen their precautions monitoring microbial activity in the areas near Sewage Treatment Plant discharges.
2.-  On the basis of the new scientific information presented and due to innovative technologies now available in the area of waste disposal and waste management, Chile recommends that the CEP requests COMNAP to review its information from the Waste Management Workshop 2006 and the COMNAP Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica 2005; and that COMNAP and SCAR review the Environmental Monitoring Handbook 2000 in order for the Parties to evaluate their existing precautions and established sewage treatments.
Reviewed papers
Alegría, K. J.I. Sepúlveda, G. González-Rocha, H. Bello, M. González and M. Domínguez. 2008. Beta-Lastamasas tipo TEM en bacterias aisladas en Meseta Norte, península Fildes, isla Rey Jorge (TEM beta-lactamases in bacteria isolated in North Meseta (Davies Heights), Fildes Peninsula, King George Island). Proceedings of the IV Latin American Simposium on Antarctic Research and VII Chilean Meeting of Antarctic Research, Valparaiso, Chile, September 3-5, 2008. http://marcopolo.inach.cl/datos/mon/libro/txt/061_1480.pdf.

Alegría, K. J.I. Sepúlveda, M. Domínguez, H. Bello and G. González-Rocha. 2009. Primera descripción de β-lactamasa de espectro extendido CTX-M en bacterias aisladas en península Fildes, Territorio Antártico Chileno (First description of CTX-M extended spectrum β-lactamase in bacteria isolated from Fildes Peninsula, Chilean Antarctic Territory). Proceedings of the XXXI Chilean Congress of Microbiology, Santa Cruz, Chile, December 1-4, 2009. http://www.somich.cl/documentos/congresos/libro_resumen_CCM_2009_final.pdf.

Allen HK, Moe LA, Rodbumrer J, Gaarder A and  Handelsman J.  2009. Functional metagenomics reveals diverse beta-lactamases in a remote Alaskan soil. ISME J. 3(2): 243-251.

Hernández, J., J. Stedt, J. Bonnendahl, Y. Molin, M. Drobin, N. Calisto-Ulloa, C- Gomez-Fuentes, M.S. Astorga-España, D. González-Acuña, J. Waldenström, M. Blomqvist and B. Olsen. 2012. Human-associated Extended Spectrum β-Lactamase (ESBL) in the Antarctic. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., doi:10.1128/AEM.07320-11.

MacKenzie, D. 2012. Superbugs spied off the Antarctic coast. NewScientist Magazine, issue 2849. http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21328494.200-superbugs-spied-off-the-antarctic-coast.html.

Sepúlveda, J.I., G. González-Rocha, H. Bello, K. Alegría, M. González and M. Domínguez. 2008. Bacterias Gram negativas productoras de β-lactamasa que inactive cefalosporinas de tercera generación asiladas en el Territorio Chileno Antártico (Gram-negative bacteria-producing β-lactamase inactiving third-generation cephalosporin isolated from Chilean Antarctic Territory). Proceedings of the XXX Chilean Congress of Microbiology, Concepción, Chile, December 4-6, 2008.

Smith, J. and G.A. McFeters. 1993. Survival and recoverability of enteric bacteria exposed to the Antarctic marine environment. Antarctic Journal of the United States 28 (5): 120-123.

Smith, J., J.P. Howington and G.A. McFeters. 1993. Plasmid maintenance and expression in Escherichia coli exposed to the Antarctic marine environment. Antarctic Journal of the United States 28 (5): 123-124.


