





Final Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Supervision of Antarctic Tourism 










Final Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on 
Supervision of Antarctic Tourism 

Presented by Argentina
Summary 
The present document contains the Final Report of the ATCM Intersessional Contact Group, convened by Argentina, tasked by ATCM XXXIV (Buenos Aires, 2011) to refine the work carried out by this ICG during the intersessional period 2010-11. This Working paper reflects the different views of this ICG’s participants during the intersessional debate and proposes a draft checklist aimed to support inspections to the on-ground conduct of visitor’s activities, under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol, for consideration of the XXXV ATCM (Hobart, 2012). 
Background
After the presentation of WP 48 Supervision of Antarctic Tourism, by Argentina, the XXXIII ATCM decided to establish an open-ended ICG based on the ATCM Discussion Forum on the Secretariat website. Argentina agreed to be the convenor of the ICG and to submit a report to the ATCM XXXIV (Buenos Aires, 2011). As a result, Argentina presented WP 48 Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Supervision of Antarctic Tourism to the XXXIV ATCM (Buenos Aires, 2011). 
After due consideration of this paper, the Meeting agreed on the need to continue working on these issues for an additional intersessional period. 

The Terms of Reference for an ICG were agreed as follows:
• To further elaborate a checklist covering visitors’ activities at landing sites, taking as a model the draft checklist produced by the ICG during the intersessional period 2010-11, to support inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol.
• To consider the development of further checklists to cover other types of visitors’ activities in Antarctica.
• To submit a report to ATCM XXXV (Hobart, 2012). 

It was further agreed that Argentina would act as convener, and would report to ATCM XXXV (Hobart, 2012) on the progress made in the ICG. The ATCM invited interested Observers and invited experts to the ATCM, to submit information documents to the ICG (para 268-270 ATCM XXXIV Final report).
The following Parties and observers have actively contributed with comments to this ICG during this second intersessional period 2011-2012: Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, IAATO and ASOC. 
Summary of Discussions’ outputs
First Term of Reference: “To further elaborate a checklist covering visitors’ activities at landing sites, taking as a model the draft checklist produced by the ICG during the intersessional period 2010-11, to support inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol”.
Attached to this Working Paper (Attachment A) is a checklist aimed to support inspections to the on-ground conduct of visitor’s activities, under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol for consideration of the XXXV ATCM (Hobart, 2012)
In addition, there was an interesting debate on the likely need to define the target of the draft checklist attached to this document. Some participants thought this checklist should primarily be used to inspect the activities of commercial operators that regularly transport passengers to the Antarctica, including the activities of one-off private expeditions. These views excluded the recreational activities of National Antarctic program staff, based on the fact that these had a substantively different pattern than tourism activities. However, others thought that this checklist should be capable of assessing the activities on land or ice shelves by all visitors, defined as tourists and non-governmental personnel, and governmental personnel partaking in activities outside their working duties. 
Participants acknowledged that both could be valid approaches, and in principle, none of them should be disregarded. However, no matter which approach is used, the ICG participants coincided on the need to remain flexible to understand that this checklist is primarily aimed to help guiding inspections. Likewise, participants recognized that checklists are non-mandatory, restrictive, nor do they imply matters listed are necessarily requirements. This checklist may therefore be adapted and modified by observers, as appropriate; to suit any particular needs in different contexts.  

Second Term of Reference: “To consider the development of further checklists to cover other types of visitors’ activities in Antarctica”.
In relation to this second Term of Reference, it was suggested that other types of visitors’ activities could be covered by future checklists, although no specific references were made to any of these. 
In a general way, it was noted that any further checklist should include similar topics to the present checklist, but considering the very different nature of these other types of visitors’ activities, it should be discussed if and how such inspections could practically proceed. 
It was also expressed that any likely new checklist would assist observers to ask the right questions and focus their attention on issues relevant to different modalities of tourism. 
In summary, participants thought that having further checklists to help guiding inspections to other types of visitors’ activities would certainly be useful. 
Conclusions 
The ICG recognized the importance of relying on adequate guidance from the ATCM to support inspections to the on-ground conduct of visitor’s activities, under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol. The ICG acknowledged that information obtained in this way will supplement (but not be a substitute for) that obtained from environmental assessment processes, information exchange, reports by Parties and Experts to the ATCM and CEP, and from documented industry practices and procedures (where applicable). 
The ICG also recognizes that inspection checklists are useful as guidelines for those planning and conducting inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and in assessing implementation of the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, while noting that inspection checklists should be used as guidance only, as their use is neither mandatory nor restrictive. 
The ICG finally noted that the proposed checklist would help to facilitate inspections on the on-ground conduct of visitor’s activities under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol, and whose application would contribute to make them more effective in the future. 


Attachment A: Checklist for visitors’ in-field activities 
The following checklist is aimed to support inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol. 
The issues included in this checklist are to supplement (but not be a substitute for) information obtained from environmental assessment processes, information exchange, reports by Parties and Experts to the ATCM and CEP, and from documented industry practices and procedures (where applicable). 
Except where indicated, all the information needed to reply to these questions will be obtained from on site sources (e.g. interviews + field observation)
SECTION A. INSPECTION DETAILS
    1. Location (name of the site inspected)
    2. Date and time of inspection visit
    3. Mode of transport to the site (by sea/ by air/land)
    4. Name and flag of vessel (if appropriate) 
    5. Does the vessel comply with agreed restrictions on the number of passengers carried onboard at the site in question (in relation to Measure 15, 2009 and applicable Site guidelines for Visitors)
    6. Tour/ Non-Governmental Organization/ other operator (name, nationality)
    7. Any other company involved in the operation (e.g. vessel operator, tour operator, sub-charterer, providers of other services).
    8. Affiliation to IAATO (yes/no)
    9. Name of Expedition leader (or person in charge of disembarking visitors)
    10. Duration of visit
    11. Persons conducting inspection (name, nationality)
SECTION B. ADVANCE NOTIFICATION AND OTHER LEGISLATION REQUIREMENTS
    12. Has the activity undergone authorization / permit / environmental assessment procedures, and is a copy of the EIA available?
    13. Identify if it has been single-year or multiyear, and if it covers the activities of a single-ship or company, or multiple ships and companies.
    14. Which Party provided the authorization / permit / or administered the environmental assessment procedures?
    15. Was the activity notified in advance to the appropriate Treaty Party?
SECTION C. SITE MANAGEMENT 
    16. Is the area subject to particular management requirements, like Site Guidelines for Visitors, ASPA/ASMA Management Plan/Codes of Conduct, Facility’s internal policies, or similar? 
This information should be collected prior to the deployment of the inspection team, from off site sources, such as the ATS, IAATO and National Programs’ websites. 
SECTION D. INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
    17. Did the expedition party (cruise ship/aircraft/other) contact the facility (station, refuge, hut, field camp) prior to arrival in order to coordinate the visit? (if appropriate) 
    18. Was the Expedition leader (or person in charge of disembarking visitors) aware of the general provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection?
    19. Did visitors receive, prior to their arrival at the site, information on: 
    • the values present in the area, and on ways to avoid their degradation?; and on
    • the contents of relevant guidelines and management instruments on Antarctic tourism? (e. g. Site Guidelines for Visitors, General Guidelines for Visitors of the Antarctic, behavior rules and commitments of Rec. XVIII-I, or ASPA/ASMA-Management Plan) 
Describe ways on which this information was transmitted (board presentation, a briefing prior to landing, a briefing immediately after landing)
SECTION E. VISIT DESCRIPTION
    20. Total number of visitors landed during the visit
    21. Was there more than one tourist vessel at the landing site at any one time?
    22. For vessel landings, what was the maximum number of passengers landed ashore at any one time? (Noting that the limit should be 100, unless a lower number is otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures or Site Guidelines) 
    23. Was the minimum ratio staff: passenger of 1:20 (unless otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures or Site Guidelines) maintained during visit?
    24. What types of activities were carried out by visitors during their visit to the site? (e.g. walks ashore, sea baths, swimming, kayaking, diving, trekking, hiking, climbing, camping, marathons, races, snowboard, skiing, hand gliding, wildlife watching, etc). 
    25. Provide details of any on-ground visitor management or environmental protection measures implemented during visit (eg. temporary area markers to guide visitors, additional guides)
    26. Describe in situ safety measures implemented during the visit (for example, in the event that the vessel/aircraft is not able to collect the visitors at the expected time)?
    27. Were the provisions set out in any applicable ASPA/ASMA Management Plan/Codes of Conduct, Facilities internal policies, or similar, adhered to in full?
    28. Were the provisions set out in any applicable Site Guidelines for Visitors (e.g. preferred landing sites, zoning schemes, behavior ashore, precautionary notes, etc.) adhered to in full?
SECTION F. ON SITE IMPACTS / CONDUCT OF VISIT
    29. Have you identified during visit any incident or evidence of direct impacts caused by visitors on the: 
    • site’s flora and fauna?
    • the landscape and wilderness values present in the site? (e.g. trampling on pristine surfaces, digging bathing pits, building a cairn, graffiti on rocks, etc)
    30. Describe in-situ waste management procedures implemented during visit.
    31. Where appropriate, and not otherwise covered in site specific guidelines or management plans, describe how visit was managed in order to avoid impacts on historic sites and monuments (including immobile and mobile historic features) present in the site?
    32. Describe procedures implemented during visit to avoid causing any disturbance to science and/or logistic operations (only applicable to visits to, inter alia, stations, refuges, huts, field camps). 
SECTION G. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES TO ENSURE SAFETY AND/OR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
    33. Were industry standard practices or operating procedures used (specify if so)? 
    34. Were guides / expedition personnel accredited according to any specific training standards? (Please, specify)


