





Final Report of the Informal Discussions on Historic Sites and Monuments 









Final Report of the Informal Discussions on Historic Sites and Monuments 
By Argentina

Summary
The present document contains the final report of the informal discussions on Historic Sites and Monuments, held during the intersessional periods 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 at the CEP web-based forum, under Argentina’s leading. 

    1. Introduction
At the XIII CEP Meeting (Punta del Este, 2010) Argentina presented Working Paper 47 “Proposal for the discussion of aspects related to the management of Historic Sites and Monument”, which was complemented by IP 22, “Additional information for the discussion of issues associated with the management and operation of HSMs”. The Committee welcomed Argentina’s offer to lead informal discussions on these issues in the intersessional period, supported by the CEP web-based forum, with a view to reporting to CEP XIV, Buenos Aires, 2011 (para 203 CEP XIII Final Report). During the XIV CEP meeting, Argentina presented WP 27 “Report of the Informal Discussions on Historic Sites and Monuments”, which summarized the work carried out during the first inter-sessional period 2010-11. The Committee agreed that the informal discussions on Historic Sites and Monuments had been useful and should continue (para 127 CEP XIV Final Report).
The following Parties and Observers have actively contributed with comments to these informal discussions during the two intersessional periods: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Germany, India, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, ASOC and IAATO.

    2. Overview of the results of the first intersessional period
During the debates of this initial period, work focused on two main lines: a) the different ways Parties define and apply the concept of "historic heritage" and on the existing agreed definitions on the Antarctic context, and b) the adequacy of the existing mechanisms available in the Antarctic Treaty system for the protection of historic sites. Concerning the former, the informal discussion group had concluded that a wide range of definitions existed on what can be considered a HSM, while in reference to the latter, some participants considered that the existing criteria are broad enough to accommodate different views on heritage, while others saw this flexibility as a limitation to define the historic character of a site (para 123 CEP XIV Final Report). 

    3. Results of the second intersessional period
During the second intersessional period, discussions focused on two main lines of debate: 
a. Exploring the possibility to make a wider use of “Site Guidelines for Visitors” (SGVs) not only to improve protection of cultural heritage but also to help ensuring its dissemination (i.e. educational measures intended to communicate the messages contained in this heritage).
In this sense, there was general agreement that Site Guidelines for Visitors (SGV) may be an appropriate tool for managing activities at landing sites where there are HSMs present, as SGVs can contribute to protect the historic or cultural value of sites. However, it was also noted that the effectiveness of SGV to protect historical heritage has not been fully assessed by the Parties yet. 
Bearing this in mind, SGVs for sites where visitor activities might result in interaction with HSMs should incorporate recommendations for avoiding disturbance and damage. In such circumstances, SGVs can also usefully serve as a readily accessible tool for education and outreach, presenting basic information about historic values present, and hopefully promoting compliance. 
Most participants thought that any review and revision of an existing SGV should seek to ensure that the guidance addresses the need to protect any historical or cultural values present at the site. It was also noted that relevant guidance for sites not covered by SGVs was contained in the “General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic” (Resolution 3, 2011).
It was noted that those Parties responsible for management of each HSM should play the primary role in doing the first order assessment of whether the HSM is sufficiently protected, or whether an SGV needs to be revised. Despite of this, the right of any Party to make such assessments for any HSM was also pointed out. 
The following criteria on how to deal with SGVs -in relation to HSMs- were raised in the discussion: 
a) The presence of an HSM in a heavily visited area could be a strong motivation to consider the development and adaptation of SGV for the site;
b) The presence of a particularly vulnerable HSM in an area less visited could also potentially be a motivation for developing and adopting an SGV for the site;
b) There could be merit in considering whether existing SGVs provides sufficient protection to the HSM Parties are responsible for (and if not, initiate review in cooperation with other relevant/interested Parties, as appropriate).

b. Discuss the convenience of providing HSMs with Management plans, or an equivalent management tool. 
Most participants felt that the existing provision to designate an HSM as an ASPA or ASMA is an appropriate option for HSMs requiring more detailed protection and management. Thus, those HSMs that justify a management plan should, in principle, be proposed for ASPA or ASMA status. It was also noted that other applicable mechanisms also exist, such as a Conservation Strategy, like the one prepared for Whalers Bay HSM within the framework of the management plan for ASMA # 4 (Deception island). In this sense, other proposed to simply endow those HSMs which required for a more complex management, with a management plan, in order to standardize some basic information and to stimulate and facilitate the exchange of information on the management activities that are being carried out by different Parties, and also to improve its conservation and dissemination, without necessarily restricting access to visitors. There were also references to the more general provisions aimed to protect HSMs included in the Annex V of the Madrid Protocol as well as in the “General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic” (Resolution 3, 2011). The latter also aim to protect those sites with historic values not yet designated as HSMs. 
Another issue that was subject for discussion had to do with making the HSM list more transparent and accessible to a wider audience. In this sense, it was noted that there could be some room for improvements. For instance, it was proposed that having a standardized core set of information about each HSM in the list would be very useful. It could also be of merit to consider whether the list also could clearly identify whether the HSM in itself is a historic site or monument, or whether it is simply a commemoration of an event that once happened or existed in this location, and what this implies with respect to management of the site. 
Therefore, it would be important to agree on different sets of information that should be part of any HSM description included in the list.  The ‘Cover sheet for a Working Paper on a Historic Site or Monument’ adopted under Resolution 5 (2011) requires that some of the following information be provided (as marked *), and notes that ‘if it is desired to keep any additional background information on the record, this material may be annexed to the report of the CEP for inclusion in the Final Report of the ATCM’. Examples of additional information that would help to better describe the HSM could include, inter alia, those following items not marked as *: 

INTRODUCTION 
    • HSM number and name*
    • Original proposing Party*
    • Party undertaking management*  
    • Type (historic site or monument/commemorative)
 DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE
    • Location* 
    • Physical Features & Local/Cultural Landscape 1
    • Historical / Cultural Features
DESCRIPTION OF THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT
SITE GUIDELINES FOR VISITORS (link, if applicable)
PHOTOS AND MAPS 
ASPA Designation (if applicable)
    • Management Plan link

Finally, the role of specialists and external expert sources was highlighted. As Antarctic Heritage includes great material diversity and highly heterogeneous situations, it was noted that the complexity and particularity of certain HSMs should be considered when preparing Management plans specifically tailored to them, in order to make appropriate decisions for the preservation and management of a historic site. Input from researchers and specialists who are well acquainted with the particular features of the different types of Antarctic Historic Heritage as well as previous studies providing concrete information about each site would prove essential at that stage. Input from external expert bodies (e.g. the ICOMOS International Polar Heritage Committee) could also be useful to consult when it comes to particularities relating to Antarctic HSMs. The CEP could invite members to engage with Heritage specialists, and/or with national representatives to external expert bodies, so as to ensure that the adequate knowledge and expertise be involved and duly considered when issues connected to HSMs are approached. 

    4. Conclusions 
Debating issues on the management of historic heritage for two consecutive intersessional periods has led to a clear progress in the understanding of this issue, and allowed for raising likely alternative views on it. 
Discussions have reflected the fact that, as the nature of HSMs are very diverse; there will not be a "one size fits all" option to their management. Parties should then be creative and flexible to consider different mechanisms that suit their particular management needs. 
It also stemmed from the discussions that an enhanced dissemination of the existence and meaning of Antarctic HSMs is very much desirable. In particular having a standardized core set of information on HSMs would be very useful to make the HSM list more transparent and accessible to a wider audience. 
Finally, the role of science to contribute to the preservation and management of Antarctic HSMs has been emphasized. Heritage specialists should therefore not only be closely involved in the undertaking of scientific research on these sites, but also on the design of management policies of Antarctic HSMs. 
The ample participation of Parties and Observers in this informal, but very fruitful debate on issues related to Antarctic heritage actually proves that this issue has potential to be revisited in the future, once these initial ideas might accommodate throughout all actors involved.   

