





Guidelines to minimise the risks of non-native species and disease associated with Antarctic hydroponics facilities








Guidelines to minimise the risks of non-native species and disease associated with Antarctic hydroponics facilities
Working Paper submitted by Australia and France
Summary
This paper presents suggested Guidelines to minimise the risks of non-native species and disease associated with Antarctic hydroponics facilities. Australia and France recommend that the guidelines be included in the CEP Non-Native Species Manual for reference, as appropriate, by those using or planning to use hydroponics facilities.
Background
Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty establishes measures to prevent the unintended introduction of non-native species to the Antarctic region. It also provides for permits to be issued to allow the importation of ‘cultivated plants and their reproductive propagules for controlled use’. In practice, this allows for the importation of plants and seeds for the purpose of growing fresh produce, which might otherwise be unavailable for lengthy periods due to logistics constraints on access.
Growing some fresh vegetables on station in a secure hydroponics facility (i.e. without the use of soil), reduces the known risks of non-native species and disease associated with imported produce1. However, if not managed appropriately, the use of hydroponics facilities carries the risk of introducing non-native invertebrates, plants and plant diseases.
The Australian Antarctic program grows food plants (e.g. vegetables and herbs) in hydroponics facilities to supplement imported fresh produce and, further, to contribute to the health, morale and psychological wellbeing of station personnel. These activities are managed in accordance with a hydroponics manual.
Following intersessional work led by New Zealand and by France, CEP XIV endorsed the Non-Native Species Manual, which was adopted by the ATCM under Resolution 6 (2011). The Resolution encouraged the CEP to further develop the manual with the input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs on scientific and practical matters, respectively. At CEP XIV the Committee also agreed that work during the intersessional period and at CEP XV should focus on ‘further preventive measures for inclusion in the NNS manual’ (CEP XIV Final Report, Appendix 3).
Proposed guidelines for hydroponics facilities
It was noted at CEP XIV that it could be useful to discuss the development of guidelines for the use of hydroponics at Antarctic stations. The Guidelines to minimise the risks of non-native species and disease associated with Antarctic hydroponics facilities presented at Attachment A draw on Australia’s practices, and may be useful as a reference for use by other Parties as appropriate. 
Recommendation
Australia and France recommend that the CEP:
    • endorses the Guidelines to minimise the risks of non-native species and disease associated with Antarctic hydroponics facilities at Attachment A for inclusion in the CEP Non-Native Species Manual; and
    • encourages those using or planning to use hydroponics facilities in Antarctica to have reference to the guidelines as appropriate.
Attachment A. Guidelines to minimise the risks of non-native species and disease associated with Antarctic hydroponics facilities
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) provides for the importation of fresh food into the Antarctic. It can be difficult to keep imported fresh plant produce, particularly leafy green or salad vegetables, in good condition for long periods in storage. Furthermore, research and operational experience have shown that such items can harbour non-native species and disease. If appropriate steps are taken, growing fresh plant produce from ‘clean’ seed in a secure hydroponics facility (i.e. without soil) reduces the risk of introducing non-native species and diseases and can provide health benefits for station personnel. 
The following guidelines are provided for application, as appropriate, to minimise the risks of non-native species and disease associated with the use of hydroponics facilities in Antarctica. For those planning to use hydroponics facilities, the guidelines may be a useful reference when conducting a prior assessment of environmental impacts.
    1) High levels of hygiene should be maintained in hydroponics facilities, to minimise the risk of establishing non-native species (e.g. invertebrates and microbes):
        a. All personnel accessing/using the facility should be given training in hydroponics and cultivation hygiene, and guidelines for use of the facility should be readily available.
        b. Only sterilised seeds and sterile growing media/nutrients should be used. Cuttings or seeds from imported fresh produce should not be used.
        c. All persons accessing the hydroponics facility should have clean hands, footwear and clothing. Handling of fresh, imported produce prior to entering the facility should be avoided. 
        d. No food should be taken into the hydroponics facility.
        e. Non-fruit bearing plants such as herbs should not be allowed to flower and go to seed. Flowers from such plants should be removed and incinerated, autoclaved and/or sealed appropriately for removal from Antarctica.
        f. Insect traps (e.g. sticky strips), including floor-level traps, should be placed inside the facility and monitored regularly.
        g. Monitoring for disease (e.g. fungal patches on leaves) should also occur regularly.
        h. The facility should be cleaned and sterilised once each year and with plants, media and nutrients being replaced and the interior of the hydroponics facility (including walls, lighting systems, fittings and containers) thoroughly cleaned and swabbed with a sterilising agent (e.g. isopropyl alcohol or 10% diluted bleach).
        i. Old plants and growing media should be incinerated, autoclaved and/or sealed appropriately for removal from Antarctica.
    2) In the event that plants are found to have infestations or disease the facility should be closed temporarily and:
        a. All plant material and growing media removed, incinerated, autoclaved and/or sealed appropriately for removal from Antarctica.
        b. The interior of the hydroponics facility (including walls, lighting systems, fittings and containers) thoroughly cleaned and swabbed with a sterilising agent.
        c. All plants, media and nutrients replaced before the facility is reopened.
        d. Infestations recorded, reported and investigated to help identify the source of the introduced species or disease.

