





A guide for Secretariat systems and information sources 








A guide for Secretariat systems and information sources 
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Australia proposes that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat be requested to develop and maintain a concise and factual reference document, made available electronically, to inform Parties and participants in the ATCM about the systems and information sources administered by the Secretariat. This would assist existing and new participants to effectively interact with the Secretariat and to draw the greatest benefit from the resources it provides.
Background
Since its establishment (originally on a provisional basis) in 2004, the Secretariat has developed a range of useful systems and information resources to support the Parties and participants in the ATCM. Among its responsibilities, the Secretariat maintains databases of key documents (e.g. Measures, Decisions, and Resolutions of the ATCM, Final Reports, meeting documents and management plans), online forums to support intersessional work, guidance documents on preparing for and participating in meetings, an electronic system for complying with information exchange requirements, and a system for maintaining details of official contact points. 

The information resources and services offered by the Secretariat make a significant contribution to the effective conduct of the meetings and intersessional work, to facilitating communication between the Parties, and to helping Parties to address obligations under the Treaty and Protocol. The Secretariat has traditionally provided advice about these information services and systems via Secretariat Circulars and Secretariat Papers, which are not always readily accessible to new participants. At present there is no single reference document to bring these resources to the attention of officials of the Treaty Parties and meeting participants.
Proposal
Australia proposes that the Secretariat be requested to develop a concise and factual reference document or ‘guide’, to assist with accessing and using its systems and information sources. The guide could be made available electronically, and could provide guidance to resources that assist to explain the practical aspects of participating in meetings, and systems for interacting with the Secretariat and other Parties. This type of document would be of particular assistance to officials and delegates who have not previously used these systems, including representatives from new Parties. Australia understands that the development of such a reference would require little to no additional resources for the Secretariat. 
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the Consultative Parties request the Secretariat to produce, in electronic format, a reference document to provide delegates and officials with information and instructions on the use of the systems and information resources administered by the Secretariat, and maintain and update it as required.  

