





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 145, Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
Summary
Chile submits the first review of the Management Plan for ASPA 145, after Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty became effective. In view of the vast modifications proposed to be made to the revised plan, Chile recommends that the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans should be asked to provide a more detailed review of the revised plan during the intersessional period.  
Contents
In 1987, following the submission of a proposal by Chile, two sites of Port Foster were originally designated as SSSI No. 27, through Recommendation XIV-5. These sites were intended to protect the benthic values associated with two types of seafloors, between 50 and 150 m deep (sub-site A), and between 100 and 150 m deep (sub-site B). Afterwards, the site came to be called ASPA 145, in accordance with Decision 1 (2002).
Following two extensions of the Management Plan (Measure 2 (2000) and Measure 5 (2009)), a revised version was approved and incorporated into the package related to Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 4, Deception Island, under Measure 3 (2005). 
The first review of the Management Plan is described below.
Revisions
The proposal below has changed the format of the Management Plan in accordance with Resolution 2 (2011), "Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas".
The main changes to the original plan cover the following sections:
Section 2. Two new objectives have been added to the original plan. 
Section 3. Management activities for the Area have been modified; two of the activities originally proposed have been eliminated, and four new activities have been added.
Section 4. The period of designation for the Area has been modified.
Section 6(i). The description of the Area has been redrafted for clarity purposes, providing a detailed description of the limits of the Area, its hydrographic features and the main species present in the Area.
Section 6(ii) The way to access the Area is specified. 
Section 6(iii). Structures located around the Area are described.
Section 6(iv). The indication of ASPAs located close to the Area has been improved.
Section 7 - This section summarizes the list of activities for which a Permit may be granted.
Section 7(i). The description of Permit conditions has been improved, adding two new conditions.
Section 7(ii). The information of access to and movement within the Area has been improved. 
Section 7(iii). The activities permitted to be conducted in the Area are described in detail. 
Section 7(iv). The activities to be performed in the Area are described in detail.
Section 7(vi). The description of restrictions related to materials and organisms that may be brought to the Area has been improved and supplemented.
Section 7(vii). Information on the taking of flora and fauna has been improved. 
Section 7(viii). The information on material collection or removal has been improved.
Section 7(ix). Information on waste disposal in the Area has been improved.
Section 7(x). Measures to ensure compliance with the objectives of the Management Plan have been improved and supplemented.
Section 7(xi). Information on report requirements has been improved and supplemented.
Section 8. The bibliographical review has been supplemented with information about Port Foster.
Recommendation
The draft Management Plan is submitted to consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.  In particular, the CEP is requested to consider the above-mentioned revisions. However, and in view of the vast modifications proposed to the revised plan, Chile recommends that the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans should be asked to conduct a more detailed review of the revised plan during the intersessional period and report back to CEP XVI. 
ASPA No. 145, PORT FOSTER, DECEPTION ISLAND
    1) Is a new ASPA proposed? 
No.
    2) Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. The Area was originally designated as SSSI No. 27 under Recommendation XIV-5 (1987). The site came to be called ASPA 145, in accordance with Decision 1 (2002). Following two extensions of the Management Plan (Measure 2 (2002) and Measure 5 (2009)), a revised version was approved under Measure 3 (2005), and the Area was incorporated into ASMA 4 (Deception Island).
    4) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 

    (i) major or minor?
Major and minor, depending on the point addressed.
    (ii)   any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
    (iii) any changes to the maps?
No.
    (iv)  any change to the description of the Area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
    (v)  any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it?
No.
    (vi) • Other:  - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the Management Plan in which these are located.

    5) If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
It is not a new Area, but it has a marine area.
    6) If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Although no activities are currently being conducted on this site within the framework of CCAMLR, consideration by CCAMLR is required.
    7) If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
No. It is being submitted for consideration by CCAMLR in the 2012 discussions. 
    8) If the proposal is related to an ASPA, which is the primary reason for designation (that is, which section under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
The area is primarily protected due to its value as a unique marine ecosystem, of special interest for scientific research.
    9) Has the primary Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA been identified (refer to the "Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent" attached to Resolution 3 (2008)? 
Yes, the primary associated domain is Domain G.


