





Penguin monitoring via remote sensing








Penguin monitoring via remote sensing

Working Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
Picking up the calling of the ATCM XXXIV to the Treaty Parties to intensify their efforts in using remote sensing techniques for improved monitoring of environment and climate changes in the Antarctic, Germany currently carries out a feasibility study on penguin monitoring using such techniques. Additionally, CEP representatives and scientists discuss on an informal level the need and the general possibilities of a penguin monitoring in the Antarctic Treaty area based on remote sensing techniques. In order to stimulate and formalize this discussion, Germany proposes to open an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on penguin monitoring via remote sensing on the CEP Discussion Forum on the Secretariat website.
Introduction
Encouraged by the recent initiative of the United Kingdom (WP 015 ATCM XXXIV) and the following invitation by the ATCM to the Treaty Parties to intensify their efforts in using remote sensing techniques for improved monitoring of environment and climate changes in the Antarctic (see Final Report part 1 ATCM XXXIV, CEP Agenda Item 9 http://www.ats.aq/devAS/ats_meetings_meeting_draftreports.aspx), Germany started a feasibility/pilot study on the technical possibilities of an Antarctic wide penguin monitoring using remote sensing techniques. An Information Paper (IP 46) and the final report of this project will be submitted to CEP XV. 
Background and outlook
Apparent climate change in maritime areas of Antarctica led, in some places, to a large-scale shifting of penguin populations and possibly to the endangerment of certain species. Adélie and Emperor Penguins being adapted most to extreme Antarctic conditions tend to retreat further south while more “Subantarctic species” like Gentoo and Chinstrap Penguins partly succeed from the north. Numerous occurrences document this phenomenon, however intensive efforts are still necessary to prove that this development takes place on a large scale. Therefore, the question should be answered, whether environmental monitoring by remote sensing - i.e. the regular observation of penguin populations by satellite imagery -, may be a suitable, cost effective and efficient –method in order to build up an (Antarctic wide) monitoring system.
Based on the recent scientific studies (e.g. Fretwell et al. 2009 & 2011, Lynch et al. 2012, Barber-Meyer et al. 2007, Trathan et al. 2011) the German feasibility study is expected to give answers to the above question. The long-term objective could be the introduction and realization of an international monitoring program jointly carried out, applied and supported by many Antarctic Treaty Parties to regularly observe penguin colonies. 
Besides an ongoing informal email discussion between CEP representatives and scientists about the need and the general possibilities of a penguin monitoring in the Antarctic, a small informal meeting is scheduled for May 2012 in Germany. This meeting will give experts a forum for the exchange of experiences on the usage of remote sensing techniques. The outcome of this meeting should find its way into further discussions. 
Recommendations
In order to bring forward the discussion on the need and possibilities of a penguin monitoring, Parties are invited to:
    1) discuss a large-scale approach to this issue by establishing a corresponding Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) at CEP XV,
    2) consider the results of the German feasibility study (see IP 46 to CEP XV by Germany) and the outcome of the expert meeting.

References
Fretwell, P.T. et al. 2011 Detecting and mapping vegetation distribution on the Antarctic Peninsula from remote sensing data. Polar Biol., 34. 273–281
Fretwell, P.T.; Trathan, P.N. 2009 Penguins from space: faecal stains reveal the location of emperor penguin colonies. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 18 (5). 543-552.
Lynch, H. et al. 2012 Detection, differentiation, and abundance estimation of penguin species by high-resolution satellite imagery. Polar Biol. in press.
Barber-Meyer, S.M., Kooyman G.L., Ponganis P.J. 2007 Estimating the relative abundance of emperor penguins at inaccessible colonies using satellite imagery, Polar Biology, Volume 30, Number 12, Pages 1565-1570
Trathan, P.N., Fretwell P.T., Stonehouse B. 2011 First Recorded Loss of an Emperor Penguin Colony in the Recent Period of Antarctic Regional Warming: Implications for Other Colonies. PLoS ONE 6(2): e14738. doi:10.1371/journal.pone. 0014738
United Kingdom. Remote sensing techniques for improved monitoring of environment and climate change in Antarctica 2011, ATCM XXXIV, Buenos Aires, submitted by U.K., WP015.

