





Proposed Modification to Historic Site Nº 37





Proposed Modification to Historic Site Nº 37

Background

Originally, Historic Site No. 37, which number is proposed to be maintained, is described as: “Statue of Bernardo O'Higgins, erected in 1948 at the General Bernardo O’Higgins Base (Chile), Trinity Peninsula. Bernardo O'Higgins was the first ruler of Chile to envisage the importance of Antarctica. This monument is representative of pre International Geophysical Year (IGY) activities in Antarctica and has a symbolic meaning in the history of Antarctic exploration, since it was during O’Higgins’ government that the vessel Dragon landed on the coast of the Antarctic Peninsula in 1820. Lat. 63°19’S, Long 57°54’W”. Adopted by Rec. VII-9 and updated through Measure 3 (2003). A photograph is included in Annex 1.

The proposed modification to Historic Site No. 37 involves keeping the monument referred to in this site, and adding the new elements listed below:

    1. The structure of former Capitán General Bernardo O´Higgins Riquelme Base (No 1 of Annex 2), unveiled on 18th February, 1948 by the then President of the Republic of Chile, Gabriel González Videla. The building, with features of a base from the decade prior to the International Geophysical Year, is in good condition and shall be subject to a restoration process to bring it back to its original identity and features. The set of facilities and structures from the International Geophysical Year period shall also be subject to restoration. Photographs of the O´Higgins Base in 1948 and nowadays are included in Annex 3.

The modification proposes to use areas of the former base building to house a Base History Museum. The whole set of structures to be protected shall be renamed as “O´Higgins Historic Site”.  

    2. Commemorative plaque to those who perished in service; in memory of Lieutenants Oscar Inostroza Contreras and Sergio Ponce Torrealba, (No. 13 of Annex 2), who perished on the Antarctic Continent for the sake of peace and science, on 12th August, 1957. It commemorates the first martyrs of O´Higgins Base, who carried out inland exploration and reconnaissance operations on the Antarctic Continent. A photograph is included in Figure 1 of Annex 4.

    3. Virgin del Carmen Grotto, built approximately forty years ago. It has served as a place of spiritual withdrawal for the staff of the different Antarctic stations and expeditions. A photograph is included in Figure 2 of Annex N° 4.

Grounds
 
The operating, logistics and scientific activities currently underway on the Isabel Riquelme Islet have preserved the structure of the former O´Higgins Base and other protected areas, to allow for appreciation of the original features of a pioneering base of the modern period of geographical exploration. 

New and old facilities coexist on this islet, such as the modern O´Higgins Base building; the German Antarctic Receiving Station (GARS) with its satellite antenna; fuel tanks; shelters for machinery, Zodiac boats and snow vehicles.

Paragraph 4 of Resolution 3 (2009), “Guidelines for the designation and protection of Historic Sites and Monuments”, adopted at the Thirty-second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, held in Baltimore, states that “The Party or Parties proposing and/or charged with the management of a Historic Site or Monument should assess whether the description of the site or monument should be amended or updated as necessary”.

In this regard, it should be noted that the former Capitán General Bernardo O’Higgins Riquelme Antarctic Base was the second Chilean station in Antarctica, built in 1948 on the Covadonga Bay, Cape Leugopil, Antarctic Peninsula, and that, from the beginning, it has provided continuous support to environmental, meteorological, maritime positioning and safety studies, striving to adapt both human and technological resources to an inhospitable territory.  

The building proposed to be included under Historic Site No 37 was designed by architect Julio Ripamonti Barros, who had been charged with the construction of the Arturo Prat Antarctic Base in 1947. It comprises two structures: the metal house, a semicircular galvanized iron structure, with an outer petroleum paint coating, and the wooden house, a prismatic wooden structure protected with an insulation canvas and an outer tar paint coating. Both have a zinc cover.  
             
Also, the “Commemorative plaque to those who perished in service; in memory of Lieutenants Oscar Inostroza Contreras and Sergio Ponce Torrealba” and the “Virgen del Carmen Grotto” evidence the devotion and strong faith of staff from different stations and expeditions in science and Antarctic knowledge.
 
It is important to note that on 11th May 2011, the National Monument Council of the Republic of Chile [Consejo de Monumentos Nacionales de la República de Chile], chaired by the Education Minister and composed of authorities and representatives from the fields of culture, architecture, art and literature, adopted by unanimous vote the “Designation of the elements mentioned in this working paper (WP) as a National Monument”, still pending administrative approval. 


In view of the above and considering the historical, religious and architectural value of the site, modification of Historic Site No. 37 is proposed as per the following text: 

No. 37: Historic Site located on the Cape Legoupil, Antarctic Peninsula and comprising the following structures of historical value:

    • “Capitán General Bernardo O´Higgins Riquelme” Bust, erected in 1948 opposite the Base known under the same name. General O´Higgins was the first ruler of Chile to recognise the importance of Antarctica. It has a symbolic meaning in the history of Antarctic exploration since it was during his government that the vessel Dragon landed on the coast of the Antarctic Peninsula in 1820. This monument is also representative of pre-IGY activities in Antarctica. (63°19’14.3” S / 57°53’53.9”W)

    • Former “Capitán General Bernardo O’Higgins Riquelme” Antarctic Base, unveiled on 18th February, 1948 by the President of the Republic of Chile, Gabriel González Videla, the first President in the world to visit Antarctica. It is considered as a model pioneering base in the modern period of Antarctic exploration. (63°19’ S / 57°54’W)

    • Plaque in memory of Lieutenants Oscar Inostroza Contreras and Sergio Ponce Torrealba, who perished in the Antarctic Continent for the sake of peace and science, on 12th August, 1957. (63°19’15.4” S / 57°53’52.9”W)
    •  Virgen del Carmen Grotto, located in the surroundings of the base, built approximately forty years ago. It has served as a place of spiritual withdrawal for the staff of the different Antarctic stations and expeditions. (63°19’15.9” S / 57°54’03.2”W)


The following annexes are attached:
         
Annex 1.  	Photograph of the bust of Capitán General Bernardo O’Higgins.
Annex 2.  	Tachymetric Survey, Capitán General Bernardo O´Higgins Antarctic Base, 1978-1979.
Annex 3.  	Photographs of the Capitán General Bernardo O´Higgins Base in 1948 (Figure 1) and nowadays (Figure 2).
Annex 4.  	Photographs of the Plaque in memory of Lieutenants O. Inostroza and S. Ponce, and of the Virgen del Carmen Grotto.




ANNEX 1:   Photographs of the O’Higgins Monument.






ANNEX 2. 	Tachymetric Survey, Libertador General Bernardo O´Higgins Riquelme Base, 1978 - 1979.

ANNEX N° 3:   Photographs of the O’Higgins Base.

Figure 1.   Photograph of the O’Higgins Base in 1948.


Figure 2.   Photograph of the O’Higgins Base nowadays. The facilities of the former base 
                  are shown in the foreground. The central structure of this facility 
     corresponds to the base opened in 1948.



ANNEX 4.

Figure 1.  Photograph of the Plaque in memory of Lieutenants O. Inostroza and S. Ponce





Figure 2.  Photograph of the Virgen del Carmen Grotto.

 


