





COMNAP Practical Training Modules: Module 2 – Non-native Species










COMNAP Practical Training Modules:
Module 2 – Non-native Species
Introduction
National Antarctic Programs provide a high level of education and training to their personnel, especially to those who deploy to the Antarctic Treaty area. COMNAP has therefore maintained a keen interest in education and training.
Common training interests
At COMNAP AGM XXV (2013) hosted by KOPRI in Seoul, Republic of Korea, the COMNAP Training Expert Group, led by Veronica Vlasich of  Direccion Nacional del Antártico, met in a break-out session and subsequently identified thirteen areas of common training interest across national Antarctic programs. The group agreed there was strong interest to understand the thematic training areas of others and to share and improve training practices. 

As a result of this discussion the Training Expert Group suggested that common training topics could be summarised into focused presentations that would be made freely available to the community for use if they wished.  As a result, COMNAP Training Module 1: Environmental Protocol was produced and made available in March 2014 (see COMNAP IP0046 to ATCM XXXVII (2014)). It is available for download from the COMNAP website  (https://www.comnap.aq/Groups/training/SitePages/Home.aspx) in all four of the official Antarctic Treaty languages. At COMNAP AGM XXVI (2014) hosted by Antarctica New Zealand in Christchurch, New Zealand, the Training Expert Group agreed to produce a training module on the topic of non-native species.
Training Module 2: Non-native Species
This paper presents (see attachment) the second training module entitled “Non-native Species”. It has also been developed by the COMNAP Training Expert Group.  The information was combined from training presentations from the National Antarctic Programs of Argentina, Australia, China, India, New Zealand and Spain. IAATO also provided input into the presentation. This training module will also be made freely available in various file formats from the COMNAP website. It is intended that this presentation will be kept opened for development and input from all COMNAP members and should evolve to incorporate staff feedback in later versions. 

Suggestions for improvements to this presentation are welcome to be sent at any time to sec@comnap.aq. 
Future work
The COMNAP Training Expert Group will continue to consider if there are other topics/themes of common training interest that could be prepared into subsequent training modules which will be shared and made freely available.


