





Cooperation of Romania with Australia in Antarctica








Cooperation of Romania with Australia in Antarctica 
Summary
Romania reviews by this Information Paper its Antarctic activities achieved in cooperation with Australia, especially following the Memorandum of Understanding concerning the joint use of Law Base at Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay, East Antarctica, signed in Stockholm on June 15th 2005, between Australian Antarctic Division and Romanian Antarctic Foundation, for a period of ten years.
Romania reaffirms its willingness to continue the Antarctic scientific, logistical and environmental cooperation with Australia within the Antarctic Treaty System based on a new, bilateral Memorandum of Understanding between Romania and Australia concerning the joint use of the Law-Racovita-Negoita Station in Larsemann Hills, to be signed between Australian Antarctic Division and Romanian Academy, which is the Romanian institution affiliated to ICSU and the Romanian Antarctic operator, through its National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR).
Background
The Romanian Polar Research Program was initiated in1987 by Dr. Teodor Gheorghe Negoita (1946-2011) and developed after 1990 especially by the two institutions established by him, i.e. Romanian Polar Research Institute (RPRI) and Romanian Antarctic Foundation (RAF) in cooperation with a series of Romanian state research institutes during 1994-2011. Romanian polar research activities were reorganized after 2011.
The representative scientific organism of Romania in the Antarctic Treaty System is, since 2012, the National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) established within the Romanian Academy. Some NCAR members were previously involved in activities of scientific research in Larsemann Hills and environmental activities related to the Management Group of Larsemann Hills ASMA 6, along with Australia, China, India and Russian Federation. 
Romania stated within ATCM 36 Brussels, Belgium, in the paper IP 71 rev.1, its willingness to continue the cooperation with the parties operating in ASMA 6, and especially with Australia, at the Law-Racovita-Negoita Base. IP 71 rev.1 described the current steps in order to reactivate Romania’s position as an active member of the ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group. The Romanian delegates to ATCM 36, Brussels, discussed in this regard with the Head of the Australian delegation, Dr. Richard Rowe, which in principle agreed the idea of a further cooperation between Romania and Australia in ASMA 6, possibly based on a new agreement, and discussions will be continued. 
Cooperation of Romania with Australia within the Antarctic Treaty System 
    1. Auroral and Space Physics Program 1991
The Romanian physicist Florian Baciu participated in some astrophysical research (Aurora australis phenomenon) at the Australian Casey Station in winter 1991 within the “Auroral and Space Physics” program, aiming to better understand the Earth upper atmosphere, the Heliosphere. The works under this program supported research programs of the Australian Antarctic Division, other Australian scientists and US, Canadian, New Zealand, Romanian and Russian agencies. 
Dept. of the Arts, Sports, the Environment and Territories (DASET) Annual Report 1991-92, Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, p. 58-61, Antarctic Division Library 

2. Romanian-Australian joint activities within CEP ICGs during 2003-2005
Romania participated in many activities aiming to establish some protected Antarctic areas and to elaborate the management plans for those areas, or other Antarctic environmental protection documents, as follows: 
2003. ICG led by New Zealand, WP 32 - ASPA No 118 Cryptogam Ridge, Mt Melbourne, North Victoria Land and summit of Mt. Melbourne, North Victoria Land, ATCM XXVI - CEP VI, Madrid, Spain. Final Report of XXVI ATCM, Part II, Annex A: Measure 2 (2003).  
2003. ICG led by Australia, WP 16 - ASPA No 135 North-East Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land; ASPA No 143 Marine Plan, Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land; ASPA No 160 Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica, ATCM XXVI - CEP VI, Madrid, Spain. Final Report of XXVI ATCM, Part II, Annex A: Measure 2.  
2005. ICG led by Australia, New Zealand, WP 10 - State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting System: Report of the Intersessional Contact Group, ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII, Stockholm, Sweden, Final Report of XXVIII ATCM.  
2005. ICG led by France, WP 23 - Progress report of the CEP Intersessional Contact Group on Environmental Monitoring, ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII, Stockholm, Sweden, Final Report of XXVIII ATCM.  
2005. ICG led by Australia, WP 30 - Report of the ICG Established to Update the „Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (1999)”, ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII, Stockholm, Sweden, Final Report. 

3. Australian-Romanian Memorandum of Understanding concerning the joint use of Law Base in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica  
As a result of the Romanian activities (national or in cooperation) within the Antarctic Treaty System and following the formal negotiations between Australia and Romania, a Memorandum of Understanding concerning the joint use of Law Base in Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay, East Antarctica was signed on June 15th 2005 in Stockholm, between the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), represented by Dr. Tony Press, and the Romanian Antarctic Foundation (RAF), represented by Dr. Teodor Gh. Negoita, the President of RAF and Director of the Romanian Institute of Polar Research. Romanian researchers by this memorandum benefited from the access to Australian Law Base (Philip Law - the first explorer of Larsemann Hills, 1958), the station denominated by this memorandum Law-Racovita in memory of the Romanian scientist Emil Racovita, the first biologist in the world that studied life in Antarctica within the Belgica Expedition (1897-1899) and redenominated on December 9th 2011 Law-Racovita-Negoita, in memory of its first Romanian leader, Dr. Negoita, recognizing its contribution to Antarctic science. 

4. Activities based on Australian–Romanian Memorandum of Understanding 
Romania organized, since 2005, three expeditions to this base. The first Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition (1st RONARE) in the Antarctic summer season 2005-2006 (in cooperation with China), involved three expeditioners and performed pedobiology, microbiology, environmental pollution and medicine studies. This expedition included the official inauguration of the base on February 20th 2006, in the presence of Australian AAD and Government delegates, along with representatives of the neighbouring stations of China and Russian Federation in Larsemann Hills, as well as a working visit to the Australian Davis Station on February 25th 2006. The 2nd RONARE expedition at Law-Racovita base, in cooperation with Russian Federation, continued these studies during the Antarctic summer 2006-2007. A third expedition was organized by Romania within an Excellence Research project in international cooperation, when the Estonian Dr. Enn Kaup worked in Law-Racovita Base. 
2006. Michael Stoddart, The inauguration of Law-Racovita Station, Australian Antarctic Magazine, Spring, 11, p.36.
2014. Sandra Potter, Managing activities in the Larsemann Hills, Australian Antarctic Magazine, 26, p. 32-33.
5. Activities within the Management Group of ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills 
Romania participated since 2006, along with Australia, China, India and Russian Federation, to the elaboration of the Management Plan for the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area (the draft prepared for ATCM XXIX - CEP IX, Edinburgh, UK, 2006 and the final document approved within ATCM XXX - CEP X, New Delhi, India 2007). Romania also prepared other ATCM-CEP documents related to this protected area ASMA 6. 
2006. ICG: Australia, China, Romania, Russian Federation, WP 008: Management Plan for the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area, ATCM XXIX - CEP IX, Edinburgh, UK, Final Report of XXIX ATCM 
2006. Romania IP 035: Law-Racovita Base, an example of cooperation in Antarctica, ATCM XXIX - CEP IX, UK, Final Report of XXIX ATCM 
2006. Romania, IP 036: Annual report pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, ATCM XXIX - CEP IX, Edinburgh, UK, Final Report of XXIX ATCM 
2006. Romania, IP 081: Initial Environmental Evaluation. Law-Racovita Base, ATCM XXIX - CEP IX, Edinburgh, UK, Final Report of XXIX ATCM 
2007. ICG: Australia, China, India, Romania, Russian Federation. WP 8: Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plan, ATCM XXX - CEP X, New Delhi, India, Final Report of XXX ATCM, Measure II, Annex B
2007. Romania, IP 88: Initial Environmental Evaluation Law-Racovita Base, ATCM XXX - CEP X, New Delhi, India, Final Report of XXX ATCM, 
2007. Romania, IP 89: Annual Report Persuant to the Protocol on Environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty, ATCM XXX - CEP X, New Delhi, India, Final Report of XXX ATCM.  

6. Workshop on Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, ATCM 36 2013, Brussels, Belgium 
Romania participated in this ATCM Workshop led by Belgium and Australia and also answered two questionnaires previously requested on the proposed Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 
2013. Australia and Belgium, WP 67: Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan, Final Report of the XXXVI ATCM, Brussels, Belgium

7. Scientific cooperation
Three Romanian Excellence Research projects (Module III - Networking) coordinated by or involving the Romanian Institute of Polar Research (RPRI) during 2006-2008, with Australia as a partner, have been run. Possible scientific research fields were discussed and established for future Antarctic research projects in collaboration. 
These projects involved Romanian research institutions and other 8 foreign partners, Australia (AAD) included.  The titles of the respective projects are:
    1. Structuring of an integrated international cooperation research on biodiversity in polar ecosystems, the response to environmental changes, and applications (Coordinator – RPRI) 
    2. Promotion of international cooperation research for the study of psychrophilic microorganism potential in bioremediation (Coordinator – RPRI)
    3. Promotion within an European and international partnership of biomedical research under extreme life conditions (Coordinator – Institute of Virology of Romanian Academy)
A fourth Romanian Excellence Research project (Module I, 2005-2008) was “Autonomous Module for Astronomical Observations in Polar Areas – Polar Robotic Telescope”, coordinated by the Astronomical Institute of Romanian Academy (Project Director Dr. Petre Popescu) with a Bulgarian participation. Another bipolar project entitled INTERHEMISPHERE, coordinated by Romania, also involving Australia and other 11 states, was accepted in 2009 and started in 2010.
    2006. Popescu P., Negoiţă T.Gh., Bot A., Wei W., Yang H. Equipment for Astroclimate Studies in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, SCAR XXIX, SCAR Symposium: The SCAR Scientific Programme on: Antarctica and the Global Climate System (AGCS), July 15-20, Hobart, Tasmania, poster P0684.
2008. P. Popescu, T.Gh. Negoita, P. Paraschiv, A. Nedelcu, O. Bădescu, M. Cotta. Robotic telescope for polar astronomical observations, SCAR/IASC/IPY OSC Polar Research – Arctic and Antarctic Perspective in the International Polar Year, St. Petersburg, Russia, July 8-11, Session 4.2. Astronomy and Astrophysics, Abstract volume, page 405, Published by Elektrostandard Print Joint-Stock Co., 2008, ISBN 978-5-98364-013-09, poster P04. 

8. Romanian activities within the SCAR-COMNAP JEGHBM Expert Group
Romania developed Antarctic medical research within the IPY 2007-2008, in connection with the IPY action Taking the Antarctic Arctic Polar Pulse, initiated by Jeff Ayton (AAD), IPY Coordinator of SCAR Expert Group on Human Biology & Medicine. Within the Joint SCAR–COMNAP Expert Group on Human Biology & Medicine (JEGHBM), led by Chair Jeff Ayton (Australia), Romania has since 2011 a National Contact Point namely Dr. Florica Toparceanu (Institute of Virology of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest). A significant activity in cooperation was developed within this Expert Group. Antarctic medical research also has been performed in cooperation with the specialists of other states having stations in ASMA 6, namely China and Russian Federation. Results of these studies have been reported within ATCM (2006 - IP 037; 2009 - IP 77; 2012 - IP83) and SCAR OSCs and Symposia (2006, 2008, 2010, 2014).  
2006. Romania IP 037: Romanian Antarctic medical activities in Law-Racovita Base in cooperation with China, ATCM XXIX - CEP IX, Edinburgh, UK, Final Report of XXIX ATCM. 
2009. Romania, IP 77: Results of the Romanian scientific Antarctic activities in Larsemann Hills, Chapter 3: Polar Biomedical Cooperation Research in the context of IPY 2007-2008, ATCM XXXII, Baltimore, USA. 
2012. Romania, IP 83: Medical scientific cooperation between Romania and UK within the SCAR for the study of biometeotological human adaptation in a changing climate, ATCM XXXV, Hobart, Australia. (Paper sent by SCAR to  JEGHBM). 
9. Current steps for a further cooperation between Australia and Romania in Antarctica
The National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of the Romanian Academy, who is the national Antarctic operator, is currently developing the National Antarctic Program according to the Romanian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2013-2020 (ATCM 36, IP 71 rev.1, 2013) in correlation with the strategic plan of the Romanian Ministry of Education and Scientific Research (MESR). In this context, NCAR intends to continue the cooperation of Romania with the Parties in ASMA 6 in the Antarctic scientific and environmental protection fields. A new, dedicated Department of Antarctic and Arctic Research was established on May 13th 2014 within the National Research and Development Institute of Biological Sciences (under the Romanian MESR) Bucharest. NCAR also performs and coordinates education and outreach activities – outlining the role of Antarctic environmental protection and science. 
NCAR under the auspices of Romanian Academy recognizes the opportunity of continuing Antarctic research connected with SCAR. The collaboration and partnership with the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), which is an important centre of excellence, is essential for Romania to effectively join the international knowledge exchange and to extend scientific and technological research activities ruled by SCAR. In this regard, Her Excellency Mrs. Nineta Barbulescu, Ambassador of Romania at Canberra, Australia, met on June 27th 2014 Dr. Tony Press, CEO (Chief Executive Officer) of Antarctic Climate & Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre, University of Tasmania; former Director of Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and former Chair of the Antarctic Treaty’s  Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). They discussed on the prospective scientific cooperation between Romania and Australia in Antarctica, based on the bilateral Memorandum of Understanding signed in 2005. Continuation of this dialogue was convened in view of supporting the efforts of the Romanian Party to further perform research in Antarctica, based on the Romanian internationally recognized tradition starting with the scientist Emil Racovita and continued by generations of Romanian researchers. A possible partnership between Romanian Academy – NCAR and Australian Antarctic Division could effectively contribute to develop and exchange knowledge in geosciences, life sciences and physical sciences research at an international scale. Existing programs under SCAR coordination will be the matrix of collaboration. 
Other ATCM documents describing the cooperation of Romania with Australia
2005. Romania, IP 62: Romanian Scientific Antarctic Activities 2005-2006. Scientific Program Summary in cooperation with Australia, ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII, Stockholm, Sweden, Final Report of XXVIII ATCM. 
2006. Romania, IP 038: Results of Romanian Antarctic Scientific Research 2005-2006, ATCM XXIX - CEP IX, Edinburgh, UK, Final Report of XXIX ATCM. 
2007. Romania, IP 91: Cooperation Research Opportunities in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, ATCM XXX - CEP X, New Delhi, India. Final Report of XXX ATCM.    
2007. Romania, IP 92: Romanian Antarctic Activities in Law-Racovita Station, Australian-Romanian, 69023'16”S, 76022'47”E, ATCM XXIX - CEP IX, New Delhi, India, Final Report of XXX ATCM.  
Romanian Books referring to the Romanian-Australian Cooperation in Antarctica
2006. Teodor Gheorghe Negoiţă, Romanian Embassy in Antarctica: Law-Racovita Station, The Publishing House of  Romanian Antarctic Foundation & Ars Docendi Publishing House of Bucharest University, ISBN(10) 973-87807-1-0, ISBN (13) 978-973-87087-1-6.  
2006. Antarctic and Arctic Research, Vol. IV, The Publishing House of Romanian Antarctic Foundation, Chief  Editor Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, 128 pages, ISSN 1584-7292. 
2007. International Symposium on Polar Scientific Research, Bucharest, Romania, November 15-16. The Publishing House of Romanian Antarctic Foundation, Bucharest, Editors: T. Gh. Negoita, F. Toparceanu, M. Cotta, A. Iordache, 104 pages. ISSN 1843-469X.     
Conclusions  
Romania reaffirms its willingness to continue the Antarctic scientific, logistical and environmental cooperation with Australia within the Antarctic Treaty System by:
    1. Signing a new, bilateral Memorandum of Understanding between Romania and Australia concerning the joint use of the Law-Racovita-Negoita Station in Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay,  East Antarctica; 
    2. Reactivation of the position of Romania in the Management Group of ASMA 6 by expeditions in cooperation to Law-Racovita-Negoita Station, and scientific collaborations/projects with the states in Larsemann Hills area.
Acknowledgements
Romania by the Romanian National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) acknowledges the support from AAD - Dr. Tony Fleming, Dr. Tony Press, Dr. Michael Stoddard; from Mr. Richard Rowe - Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade; Dr. Jeff Ayton  - Chair of the SCAR-COMNAP JEGHBM; the specialists working in Davis Station, as well as the collaborators in the Chinese and Russian stations in Larsemann Hills, support granted during the Romanian activities in ASMA 6 and within the Antarctic expeditions and scientific collaborations. 

Romanian contact for ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills: Dr. Florica Toparceanu, email:  florisci@hotmail.com

