





Research Activity Report
Czech Antarctic Expedition to James Ross Island Jan-Feb 2015








Research Activity Report
Czech Antarctic Expedition to James Ross Island Jan-Feb 2015

Introduction

During Czech Antarctic expedition to James Ross Island (Mendel station) held in January-February 2015, majority of research activities performed in the field were related to samples and data collection on northern part of James Ross Island, Ulu Peninsula in particular. In this information paper, we report scientific activities of the below-listed disciplines and their particular projects. 

	1	Climatology………………………………………………………….….. p. 3
			1.1. Long-term measurements of local climate
			1.2. Long-term monitoring of solar radiation
2	Glaciers and permafrost………………………………………………. p. 4
		2.1. Mass balance of glaciers
		2.2. Permafrost monitoring plots
3	Hydrology and limnology……………………………………………… p. 5
		3.1. Hydrological characteristics of streams and lakes
		3.2. Daily courses of dissolved oxygen in small-area ponds
4	Terrestrial Biology……………………………………………………… p. 6
		4.1. Biodiversity of terrestrial diatoms
		4.2. Seal carcasses colonization
		4.3. Long-term manipulated warming of vegetation
		4.4. Microbiology
		4.5. Soil nematodes
		4.6. Biodiversity of autotrophs 
4.7. Biologically active compounds
5	Environmental Science………………………………………………… p. 9 
		5.1. Case study of mercury
		5.2. Vegetation mapping
		5.3. Magnetic field measurements
		5.3. All-terrain vehicles impact assesment
		5.4. Measures to prevent alien species introduction
6	Medical Science………………………………………………………. p. 10
		6.1. Cardiovascular system parameters
		6.2. Hematological and immunological parameters		

In each discipline, a brief overview of field works and activities related to long- and short-term projects carried out at James Ross Island is given. Where appropriate, detailed information of specific subprojects are given as well.



1. Climatology

	1.1. Long-term measurements of local climate
In climate research, data download and maintenance of 10 automatic weather stations (AWS) situated at James Ross Island was done in Jan-Feb. 2015. Main objective was to continue a long-term monitoring of various abiotic factors (air, surface and soil temperatures, wind speed and direction) as well as investigations of spatiotemporal variability of the climatic conditions of the Ulu Peninsula. Another objective was to explain the processes leading to regional atmospheric warming and to determine relief influences on air masses transformation and boundary layer processes. 


Fig. 1. Maintenance of termometers and solar radiation sensors © FH

1.2. Long-term monitoring of solar radiation
Yearly data on global irradiance, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), UV-A, UV-B radiation were downloaded from particular sensors linked to dataloggers. Special attention was paid to services of the solar radiation sensors and devices (pyranometers, PAR radiometers, UV radiometer and UVB-Biometer), which are situated at the J. G. Mendel station. Prediction of the erythemally effective UVB radiation and evaluation of the influences of atmospheric factors (ozone concentration, optical air mass, aerosols) was studied with the help of nonlinear modelling approach.


2. Glaciology and permafrost research

	2.1. Mass balance of glaciers

Field works were performed at the Davies Dome ice cap and Whisky Glacier in Jan – Feb 2015 as a part of long-term research. Field camp was established close to Monolith Lake to provide a better acccess to glaciological research carried out at the two glaciers. 

Ablation and/or accumulation rates were evaluated using bamboo poles and GPS. The data allowed determination of glacier volumes that are used for mass balance determination. Yearly data (2014-2015) on the microclimate of both glaciers were downloaded from 5 automatic weather stations located (1) at the top of the Davies Dome ice cap (530 m a.s.l.) and (2) the upper part of the Whisky Glacier (356 m a.s.l.), and Triangular Glacier (120-230 m a.s.l.). The automatic weather stations were partly repaired and adjusted to actual height of snow accumulations. In January 2015, a new weather station was established at terminal part of Whisky Glacier. Energy supply to the automatic weather stations was provided by high-capacity batteries supplemented with external photovoltaic panels. Monitoring of mass balance changes and glacier flow of small local glaciers (Whisky Glacier and Davies Dome glacier) continued during this season. These changes are supplemented by meteorological data from individual automatic weather stations located at both glaciers and their forefields.


Fig. 2. Servicing microclimatological stations and data download from the station located at the top 
of Davies Dome glacier. © FH

	
	2.2. Permafrost monitoring plots
In Jan-Feb 2015, measurements permafrost depth along a 6-km-long profile (J.G. Mendel station-Johnson mesa - Brandy Bay) was done using a probe approach. The data were compared to those recorded in previous season. At two monitoring plots covering  an area of 5.600 m2, soil samples in vertical profile of some probes were taken for further analyses of grain structure and mass/volume soil characteristics.  

Periglacial research was focused on evaluation of thermal properties of active layer of permafrost and the upper layer of permafrost using a profile method. Altogether, 14 profiles were investigated. Active layer thickness was measured by a probe at 71 poarticular points. Soil samples were collected  at Abernethy Flats, Cape Lachman and Berry Hill for grain structure and soil humidity evaluation. Periglacial processes were monitored by 5 sensors evaluating regelation of permafrost active layer and solifluction rate (8 particular plots).  


3. Hydrology and limnology

	3.1. Hydrological characteristics of streams and lakes 

Stream discharge was measured on 3 representative basins (Algal stream, Bohemian stream, Phormidium stream) at northern part of James Ross Island using the approach of automated hydrostatic pressure sensors calibrated by manual measurements (Acoustic Doppler current profiler - ADCP). Moreover, suspended sediment load was assessed in Algal and Bohemian Streams using direct sampling and mineral particles fraction analysis. Annual courses of water temperature data were downloaded from data loggers placed into Green lake, Monolith lake, and Big Lachman lake. 

In addition, Short-term measurements of surface thermal properties of selected lakes and their surroundings were done using a thermocamera approach. The data will be used for characterization of relief-, season-, and atmospheric parameters-related differences between lakes of contrasting genesis. Within the period of January-February 2015, single measurements of water pH and conductivity was done at 90 different streams, lakes and ponds in order to relate such parameters to stream/lake general characteristics and genesis.

3.2. Daily courses of dissolved oxygen in small-area ponds
Using a field system composed of oxygen electrodes, thermocouples, PAR sensors, and data loggers, in situ long-term (1 month in 5 min step) monitoring of dissolved oxygen concentration (DOC) was carried out in 2 freshwater ponds. Field set up and 2 localities at James Ross Island were the same as in 2014. DOC was considered a measure of diurnal changes in photosynthetic and respiratory activities of microbial biota forming pond bottom. The DOC data showed daily curves, dependence of DOC on water temperature, postponed daily peak of DOC when compared to photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) daily peak, and an ability of microbial mats to photosynthesize under a thick ice layer covering pond surface that reduced available photosynthetically active radiation bellow 50 micromols m-2 s-1 of PAR incident on a pond bottom. 


4. Terrestrial Biology

	4.1. Biodiversity of terrestrial diatoms 
	
Samples of soil, mosses and microbiological mats from more than 60 individual sampling sites located on deglaciated part of James Ross Island were taken to estimate biodiversity of Antarctic terrestrial diatoms. Typically, the following compartments of Antarctic ecosystems were sampled: soils, seepages, wet rock walls, cryoconits. At wet sampling sites, pH and conductivity of water was mesured and the subsamples of substrate matter were dried out for consequent analyses of physical and chemical parameters related to sampling sites. Using optical microscopy, some diatoms were identified during expedition in J.G. Mendel station laboratory, e.g. Gleocapsa sp. from wet rock walls and Pinnularia borealis from moss samples. Majority of samples were put on WC medium and/or DNA buffer, transferred to the Czech Republic and co-operating institution (Univ. Ghent, Belgium) for further taxonomic ad genetic studies exploiting electron microscopy and molecular biology methods. 

4.2. Seal carcasses colonization
Samples from seal carcases were taken so that diatoms diversity could be evaluated. The samples represented small pieces of skin, bony tissue, substrate affected by  organic matter input from decaying seal bodies and unaffected control (mineral substrate in close neighbourhood of the carcases. Diatoms, cyanobacterie and algae were isolated from the smaples and cultivated on a Z and WC agar. Colonization of seal carasses by lichens and mosses was studied as well with the main ephasis given to the species richness in a close neighbourhood of the carcasses as dependent on liquid water availability and stage of dissintegration of seal remnants.


Fig. 3. Sampling of diatoms, cyanobacteria, mosses and lichens colonizing seal carcasses. © MB
	4.3. Long-term manipulated warming of vegetation 
		
4.3.1. Open top chambers
A long-term experiment with manipulated warming of vegetation cover using open top chambers (OTCs) was established in 2007. Since that time, vegetation cover as well as microclimate in 12 OTCs, located in three contrasting localities of James Ross Island, have been investigated. The localities represents: (A) coastal vegetation oasis, (B) plateau of a table mountain (350 m a.s.l.), and (C) freshly deglaciated area close to the glacier margin (410 m a.sl.) are investigated. In January 2015, microclimatic data from OTCs and control plots from the A, B and C sites were downloaded and analyzed in order to evaluate chamber effect. The data represent a set of the following parameters (measured both in OTCs and outside control plots): air temperature at 30 cm above soil surface, surface temperature and air humidity, soil temperature at 5, 10 and 15 cm depth. Yearly data on effective quantum yield of photosynthetic processes in PS were downloaded from fluorometers permanently-installed over moss (Bryum sp.) carpets in OTC and outside control plots. The data indicated subperiods of physiologically active and inactive state of the moss caused by freezing temperature, dehydration and light limitation.

4.3.2. Vegetation cover
On A, B, and C sites (see 4.3.1. for specification), photographs of vegetation cover inside the OTC and control plots were taken using a grid method in order to evaluate growth responses to long-term elevated temperature. The vegetation cover area, bare soil area and area covered by stones were evaluated using image processing software. From typical sites in OTCs and outside control plots, moss and soil samples were taken for analysis of microbial community so that the effect of long-term elevated air temperature could be evaluated.

 
Fig. 4. Vegetation cover in OTCs located at coastal long-term research plot. Moss-dominated vegetation cover – left, lichen-dominated vegetation cover – right. © MB


4.4. Microbiology 

	4.4.1. Antimicrobial activities of Pseudomonas sp.
Microbiological samples were collected from different terrestrial ecosystems of James Ross Island in order to isolate Antarctic Pseudomonas sp. The samples were cultured on agar plates and isolates were transferred to laboratories in Brno, where species determination took place. The mail goal is to detect and identify new bacteriocins (antibacterial proteins) in Antarctic Pseudomonas sp. New pyocins will be characterized using genetics and proteomic approaches and their pharmaceutical (antibiotics) and biotechnological potential will be evaluated. 

4.4.2. Microbiota associated with animals (birds and seals) 
Microbiological research in the northern part of James Ross Island was focused on sampling and isolation of bacterial and viral communities from mucous membranes and excrements of birds (skuas and penguins) and seals. Futher bacterial analyses will be done in the laboratories in the Czech Republic, with special attention to presence of gram-positive cocci and Escherichia spp.


	Fig. 5. Taking microbiological samples from a Weddel seal. 

	4.4.3. Soil microbiota in long-term warming experiment
To assess the effect of long-term elevated air temperature, soil and vegetation (microbiological mats, soil crusts, lichens and mosses) samples were collected from two long-term research plots (J.G. Mendel station, Berry Hill mesa). The samples were taken from open top chambers (elevated temperature) and outside untreated control plots. Preliminary cultivation on agar plates and selection of microorganisms were done in a laboratory at J.G. Mendel station. Detailed isolation from cultivations and original samples, as well as taxonomy of the species will be done in a specialized laboratory in the Czech Republic.


 
Fig. 6. Cultivation of bacteria on agars (left). Soil sampling for microbiological analyses (right). © KO

	

4.5. Soil nematodes 
To assess diversity of soil nematodes and their particular abundances in different types of vegetation cover, samples were collected from 14 sampling sites representing different ecological niches (moss cushions, seepages, stream margins and microbiological mats). Nematodes were taken from the samples at J.G. Mendel station laboratory from the samples using a heat source and trapping vessel. Individual nematodes were sucked into a pipette under a microscope, then fixed in ethanol and delivered to the Czech Republic where determined.

4.6. Biodiversity of freshwater autotrophs 
Wet terrestrial environments, such as seepages, streams, cryoconites and shallow ponds were sampled within the expedition so that consequent biodiversity studies could be done. Samples were taken from more than 150 sampling sites and preliminary taxonomy of algal and cyanobacterial species and their particular abundances in different ecosystems of James Ross Island  done. Further follow-up study will be performed in 2015. Preliminary data show, that freshwater ecosystems were dominated by Zygnema, Nostoc, Prasiola, and Stigeoclonium.

4.7. Biologically active compounds
More than 100 samples of algae and cyanobacteria from 70 sampling sites (streams, seepages, ponds, lakes) were collected to test production of biologically active compounds in these organisms. After the transfer to the Czech Republic, the species will be subjected to bioscreening comprising sets of tests exploiting fractionation. Consequently, endocrinological disruptive potential of their secondary compounds will be evaluated with main emphasis given to their estrogenic, androgenic and retinoid activity. Nostoc sp. potential to produce toxic compounds, especially microcystins, cylindro- spermopsin will be studied using HPLC with mass spectrometry detection approach.


5. Environmental science 

	5.1. Case study of mercury 
Since 2012, heavy metal contents have been analyses regularly in different compartments (ecosystem) of deglaciated area of James Ross Island, with a special emphasis to mercury. Within the study performed in Jan-Feb 2015, 150 samples from lakes, ponds, streams, soils, lake sediment, and lichen thalli were collected as a part of a follow up study. Streams margins, perpendicular rock walls, a close neighborhood od seal carcasses, microbiological mats, fine fraction of mineral material from lakes and ponds bottom, lichens and mosses were collected in order to determine Pb content in these compartments of Antarctic ecosystems. The samples were dried out in a laboratory at J.G. Mendel station and transferred to a laboratory in the Czech republic, where Pb contents is analyzed by AAS and gas chromatography with  atomic fluorescence spectrometry (GC-AFS) 

5.2. Vegetation mapping
A GPS method was used to measure areas and shape of borders of several large-scale (above 25 m2) moss-covered areas located at northern coast of James Ross Island. The areas of interest were particularly in neighborhood of Big and Small Lachman lakes and northern slopes of Berry Hill. Specimens of mosses were collected from each site so that dominating species forming community structure could be evaluated.

5.3. Magnetic field measurements
In Jan-Feb 2015 local magnetic field was measured at J.G. Mendel station in order to determine temporal variation in this period. The data will be used to complement former research to test a hypothesis that littoral Amphipods use a sense for Earth magnetism to find the sea–beach axis and orient their movement respectively.

5.3. All-terrain vehicles impact assessment
Since 2006, members of Czech expeditions to James Ross Island, moved to remote parts of the island as pedestrians and/or using rubber boats (zodiacs) on ice-free sea. Because of persistent sea ice witnessed in 2013 and 2014 austral summer seasons, the Czech team decided to use 2 all-terrain vehicles in Jan-Feb 2015 for the transport of field camp facilities between J.G. Mendel station and Monolith lake. To minimize negative impact on soil surface that may happen on moist sites the routes for the vehicles were planned carefully beforehand using a detailed map of Northern part of James Ross Island, green spots avoiding strategy, and maximum slope parameters. During the 2015 expedition, the tracks followed the proposed route with a minimum of a change (mainly due to snow fields location, and meltwater filling shallow muddy depressions). The tracks made by the vehicles were photo documented carefully. The depth of the tracks was measured at different spots along the path so that the change between 2015 and 2016 could be evaluated and thus the impact of the vehicles on soil surface assessed.

 
Fig. 7.  Tracks of all-terrain vehicles in low-altitude location close to Mendel station 
(left - sedimentary rock surface) and in dry stony substrate in Abernathy flats, 
300 m from Monolith Lake (right). © MB


5.4. Measures to prevent alien species introduction
To prevent microbiological aliens transfer to J.G. Mendel station, fresh fruits and vegetables were sterilized by UV-C radiation immediately after their delivery (expedition days 1 and 2) to the station. Special holders combined with UV-C lamp and effective air circulation (a hood) enabled to sterilize overal surfaces of several hundreds pieces of different fruits and vegetables (apples, onions, potatoes, oranges, lemons, carrot, garlic, cabbage, and beet) to eliminate transient microbial contamination. Such approach prevented spoilage of food and avoided the spreading micro-organisms associated with fruits and vegetables into the station.

	
6. Medical science

6.1. Cardiovascular system parameters
Medical research focused to health of crew members in January-March 2015 at James Ross Island. The research was based on repeated measurements of blood pressure parameters using a 24-lasting ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. Each crew member was monitored once before the expedition, and at least 2 times during the stay at J.G. Mendel station. The data will be used for conventional and chronobiolological analyses to determine the effects of a crew member stay in polar region on various parameters of cardiovascular system. 

6.2. Haematological and immunological parameters
Crew members were sampled before the expedition and then two times within the expedition (d 24, and d 45). From blood samples, altogether 17 haematological and immunological parametres were determined. Cell numbers (erythrocytes, leucocytes and their types) were counted and blood differential was determined from stirred blood samples. Antibodies and antigene complexes were determined by turbidimetry. Parameters derived from color change of samples of blood serum were determined using a spectrophotometric approach. Analysis of data showed several trends in crew members acclimation to cold environment. Among them, it was apparent that at least 5 parameteres changed significantly after 45 days of expedition.  


Fig. 8. Processing blood samples for haematological and immunological parameters. © MB




