





The Annual Report for 2014/15 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)









Annual Report for 2014/15 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
COMNAP is the organisation of National Antarctic Programs which brings together, in particular, the managers of those programs, that is, the national officials responsible for planning, conducting and managing support to science in Antarctica on behalf of their respective governments, all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. 
COMNAP was established in September 1988, and has grown into an international association whose Members are the 29 National Antarctic Programs from the countries of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, Ukraine, Uruguay and USA. Presently, the National Antarctic Program of the Republic of Belarus is a COMNAP observer organisation. The National Antarctic Program of Portugal has also recently indicated interest in COMNAP observer organisation status.
COMNAP's purpose is to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. As an organisation, COMNAP acts to add value to National Antarctic Program’s efforts by serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner, by facilitating and promoting international partnerships, and by providing opportunities and systems for information exchange.
COMNAP strives to provide the Antarctic Treaty System with objective, practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' extensive pool of expertise and their first-hand Antarctic knowledge. Since 1988, COMNAP has been an active contributor to ATCM and CEP discussion, with the presentation of 30 Working Papers and 99 Information Papers to date. 
COMNAP continues to have a close working relationship with other Antarctic organisations, in particular with SCAR. A joint COMNAP/SCAR Executive Committee Meeting was held in Auckland in August 2014. The bi-annual COMNAP Symposium was also held in August 2014 in Auckland, New Zealand, during the SCAR Open Science Conference. COMNAP attended the FARO meeting as an invited observer and the Executive Secretary participated in the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR) Polar Symposium in Tachikawa, Japan. COMNAP and CCAMLR trialled an intern exchange scheme for two early career people. Each intern undertook a 4-week exchange programme at one of the Secretariats.
The COMNAP Annual General Meeting was held in August 2014 in Christchurch, New Zealand, hosted by Antarctica New Zealand. Professor Heinrich Miller (AWI) completed his three-year term as COMNAP Chair and Professor Kazuyuki Shiraishi of Japan’s NIPR was elected as the COMNAP Chair for a three-year period to AGM 2017. Michelle Rogan-Finnemore continues as Executive Secretary under a new six-year term of office. COMNAP renewed its MOU with the University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand, to continue to host the COMNAP Secretariat for an additional six-year term, until 30 September 2021.
COMNAP Highlights and Achievements for 2014/15
COMNAP Symposium & Proceedings
On 25 August, 2014, COMNAP held its 13th Symposium which was convened by John Hall (BAS) in Auckland, New Zealand, on day 1 of the SCAR Open Science Conference and attracted over 300 participants.  The theme of the Symposium was “Success Through International Co-operation”. The Symposium Review Committee selected nine oral presentations for the programme and thirteen posters.  The Proceedings of the COMNAP Symposium have been published (ISBN 978-0-473-31397-5) and a copy will be given to each ATCM delegation.

Waste Water Management Workshop
Sandra Potter (AAD) and José Retamales (INACH) co-convened this COMNAP workshop in Christchurch, New Zealand (28 August 2014) to discuss practical and technical solutions to waste water management in Antarctica.  The workshop presentations and discussions highlighted: how the management of waste water is becoming an increasingly complex issue; the wide range of technologies currently in use to treat station waste water and the value in information-sharing on environment protection challenges and solutions.  An Information Paper which presents the Waste Water Management Convenors Report is available at this ATCM. 
Sea Ice Challenges Workshop
Rob Wooding (AAD) convened the COMNAP Sea Ice Challenges Workshop on 12–13 May 2015, co-hosted by AAD and the ACE CRC in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. The open workshop provided an opportunity for the science and operations communities to discuss regional sea ice trends around Antarctica and to propose technical and practical ways to address the challenging nature of supporting national Antarctic program operations. The workshop was timely given that sea ice conditions vary across regions of the Antarctic, but generally, have over recent years been difficult and in some cases impossible to successfully complete resupply and science delivery campaigns. Sea ice conditions not only affect national Antarctic programs operations but also those of other operators in the area.  Representatives from other operators were invited to attend along with those from rescue coordination centres.  Because of the timing of the workshop, information is not available for this ATCM on workshop outcomes.  See: https://www.comnap.aq/SitePages/SeaIceWorkshop.aspx 
COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship
COMNAP established the Antarctic Research Fellowship in 2011. For the 2014 round, COMNAP was able to offer two fellowships. One to Sandra Potter (University of Tasmania, Australia) to undertake travel to the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AARI)/Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) to undertake research on “Quantifying factors limiting implementation of Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty". A second fellowship went to Keith Soal (University of Stellenbosch, South Africa) to undertake research on "Ice and hydrodynamic loading on a polar supply and research vessel in Antarctic conditions" at Technische Hochschule Ingolstad (Germany) and Aalto University (Finland). COMNAP and SCAR have agreed to once again offer the Fellowships for 2015. Both organisations are also working with CCAMLR to promote their scholarships. The 2015 COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellow will be announced in August 2015 as part of the COMNAP AGM in Tromsø, Norway. COMNAP and CCAMLR also trialled an intern exchange which provided two early-career persons the opportunity to work at the COMNAP and CCAMLR Secretariats. See https://www.comnap.aq/SitePages/fellowships.aspx 
COMNAP Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) Project 
At the COMNAP AGM XXVI (2014) members agreed that COMNAP should lead the next step in the Antarctic Horizon Scan process.  SCAR initiated a Horizon Scan process in regards to Antarctic research which ultimately lead to the publication of 80 science questions that were collectively considered to be a vision for future Antarctic science directions. The outcomes are published in Nature and Antarctic Science (Kennicutt II et al, 2014). This “roadmap” for Antarctic research for the next 20 years and beyond brings with it a number of challenges for delivering such science.  Addressing these challenges is the focus of the COMNAP ARC project which has to date completed the first of two on-line open surveys and which is expected to result in a high-level strategic document to assist national Antarctic programs to develop their own science support strategies into the future.  See https://www.comnap.aq/Projects/SitePages/ARC.aspx  and also an Information Paper is available at this ATCM.


COMNAP Products and Tools
Search and Rescue (SAR) Webpage    www.comnap.aq/membersonly/SitePages/SAR.aspx
As requested in ATCM Resolution 4 (2013), COMNAP has established a SAR webpage in consultation with RCCs which is regularly updated. COMNAP will convene the SAR Workshop III in 2016.  Details will be made available soon.
Accident, Incident & Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR) www.comnap.aq/membersonly/AINMR/SitePages/Home.aspx
Information on problems encountered in Antarctica has always been exchanged. The AINMR System was developed to assist in such exchange and is available on the members-only area of the COMNAP website. The AINMR's primary objective is: to capture information about events that had, or could have had, serious consequences; and/or reveal lessons; and/or are novel, very unusual events. Full reports on accidents can also be posted and shared on the site and can be discussed and reviewed. National Antarctic Programs can learn from each other to reduce the risk of serious consequences occurring in the course of their Antarctic activities. 
COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS) https://www.comnap.aq/sprs/SitePages/Home.aspx 
The SPRS is an optional, voluntary system for exchange of information about National Antarctic Program ship operations. Its primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration. It can also, however, make a very useful contribution to safety with all SPRS information made available to the RCCs as an additional source of information complementing all other national and international systems in place. Position information is delivered via email and can be graphically displayed in Google Earth. 
The Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) 
AFIM is a handbook of aeronautical information published by COMNAP as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as per Resolution 1 (2013). COMNAP continues with the trial phase of an electronic AFIM alongside the paper AFIM format (see Information Paper available at this ATCM). The AFIM continues to be updated via information from National Antarctic Programs.  
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)
ATOM is an evolution of the handbook of telecommunications practices to which ATCM Recommendation X-3 Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica and the Collection and Distribution of Antarctic Meteorological Data refers. COMNAP Members and SAR authorities have access to the latest version (March 2015) via the COMNAP website.  
________
For more information see www.comnap.aq or email info@comnap.aq. 
Also, see Attachment 1.
Attachment 1: COMNAP officers, projects, expert groups and meetings
Executive Committee (EXCOM) 
The COMNAP Chair and Vice-Chairs are elected officers of COMNAP. The elected officers plus the Executive Secretary, compose the COMNAP Executive Committee as follows:
Position
Officer
Term expires
Chair
Kazuyuki Shiraishi (NIPR) kshiraishi@nipr.ac.jp 
AGM 2017
Vice-Chairs
Hyoung Chul Shin (KOPRI) hcshin@kopri.re.kr 
AGM 2016

John Hall (BAS) jhal@bas.ac.uk 
AGM 2016

José Retamales (INACH) jretamales@inach.cl 
AGM 2017

Rob Wooding (AAD) rob.wooding@aad.gov.au 
AGM 2017

Yves Frenot (IPEV) yves.frenot@ipev.fr 
AGM 2017
Executive Secretary
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore michelle.finnemore@comnap.aq 

Table 1 – COMNAP Executive Committee.
Projects
Project
Project Manager
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) – Electronic Format Implementation
Paul Morin & Brian Stone
John Hall
Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC)
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
Antarctic Peninsula Advanced Science Information (APASI)

José Retamales
Fuel Tank Automated Warning System
Oleksandr Kuzko
Yves Frenot
Sea Ice Challenges Workshop 
Rob Wooding
Rob Wooding & Yves Frenot
Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS) Review
Robb Clifton
Hyoung Chul Shin
Station Infrastructure Catalogue

Yves Frenot
Suppliers Database
Graeme Ayres
John Hall
Telemedicine Workshop
Jeff Ayton
John Hall
Table 2 – COMNAP projects currently in progress.
Expert Groups
Expert Group (topic)
Expert Group leader
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Air
Giuseppe Di Rossi & Brian Stone
John Hall
Energy & Technology
Felix Bartsch & Pavel Kapler
Rob Wooding
Environment
Anoop Tiwari
Hyoung Chul Shin
Medical
Jeff Ayton 
John Hall
Outreach/Education
Eva Gronlund 
Yves Frenot
Safety
Henrik Törnberg 
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
Science
Javier Arata
José Retamales
Shipping
Miguel Ojeda 
José Retamales
Training
Veronica Vlasich 
Yves Frenot
Table 3 – COMNAP Expert Groups. 
Meetings 
Previous 12 months 
24 August 2014, COMNAP/SCAR joint Executive Meeting, Auckland, New Zealand.
25 August 2014, COMNAP Symposium “Success through International Co-operation”, Auckland, New Zealand.
27­–29 August 2014, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP AGM XXVI), hosted by Antarctica New Zealand, Christchurch, New Zealand  (included the Safety Workshop and the Waste Water Management Workshop on 28 August 2014).
20–21 October 2014, COMNAP EXCOM Meeting hosted by National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Tachikawa, Japan.
12–13 May 2015, COMNAP Sea Ice Challenges Workshop, co-hosted by Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and the Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre (ACE CRC), Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.
Upcoming 12 months
22–24 August 2015 (TBC), Antarctic Roadmap Challenges Workshop, venue TBC.
25 August 2015, COMNAP/SCAR Joint Executive Committee Meeting, Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI), Tromsø, Norway.
26–28 August 2015, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP AGM XXVII), hosted by the Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI), Tromsø, Norway (includes Safety session and the Joint Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine Telemedicine Workshop).


