





EU-PolarNet – Connecting Science with Society








EU-PolarNet – Connecting Science with Society

Information Paper submitted by Germany on behalf of the EU-PolarNet consortium



Abstract

The rapid changes occurring in the Polar Regions are significantly influencing the World's climate with consequences for global society. European polar research has contributed critical knowledge to identifying the processes behind these rapid changes, however in contrast to lower latitudes, datasets from the Polar Regions are still insufficient to fully understand and more effectively predict the effects of change on global climate and society. This situation can only be improved by a holistic integrated scientific approach, a higher degree of coordination of polar research and closer cooperation between all relevant actors on an international level. As a first step in this direction, the European Commission (EC) has therefore recently launched a five-year coordination and support action “EU-PolarNet – Connecting Science with Society” which will work in close cooperation with the EC in the upcoming five years in shaping Europe’s polar research and policy agenda.

EU-PolarNet will provide Europe with the capability to better understand the nature of environmental risks and enable policy makers and governments to design measures to mitigate them and other stakeholders benefit from the opportunities that are opening up in the Polar Regions.
EU-PolarNet will establish an ongoing dialogue between policymakers, business and industry leaders, local communities and scientists to increase mutual understanding and identify new ways of working together. The results of this dialogue will lead to an Integrated European Research Programme for the Antarctic and the Arctic that will be co-designed with all relevant stakeholders and coordinated with the polar research activities of many nations beyond Europe. Additionally, EU-PolarNet will closely cooperate with the European Commission by providing sound scientific knowledge of vulnerabilities and risks in order to develop appropriate regulatory policies and advice on all issues related to the Polar Regions.

The project is coordinated by the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research in Germany and has 22 partners from 17 European countries. The consortium brings together well-established, world-class, multi-disciplinary research institutions whose science programmes are internationally recognised for excellence. Alongside these scientific capabilities, the national programmes represented in this proposal possess a unique array of infrastructure and operational expertise to support science at both Polar Regions. The consortium is uniquely positioned to significantly enhance Europe’s capabilities to undertake state of the art science and cost-efficiently operate infrastructure in challenging polar environments.


Objectives:

From 2015-2020, EU-PolarNet will develop and deliver a strategic framework and mechanisms to prioritise science, optimise the use of polar infrastructure, and broker new partnerships that will lead to the co-design of polar research projects that deliver tangible benefits for society. By adopting a higher degree of coordination of polar research and operations than has existed previously, the consortium will engage and cooperate with all relevant actors on an international level. Polar issues have been rising on the political agenda across Europe over the past decade. The increasing level of investment being made by governments is a clear demonstration of how critical polar research outcomes are for informing policy objectives, including those relating to climate change, energy security, global food security, innovation and economic growth.

EU-PolarNet nurtures an ongoing dialogue between policymakers, NGOs, business and industry leaders, local communities and scientists to increase mutual understanding and identify new ways of working together that will deliver economic and societal benefits. Since ATCM sets the regulations and guidelines for the management of the Antarctic Treaty area, to initiate a dialogue with its members is of high importance to EU-PolarNet.

EU-PolarNet aims to be the catalyst to strengthen existing partnerships, to bundle ideas and seize new research opportunities in order to enhance long-term planning (over decadal timelines) that will continue to advance knowledge and understanding of the polar regions in a way that is truly connected to the end-users of that research.
EU-PolarNet will develop an Integrated European Polar Research Programme that will be co-designed with all relevant stakeholders and international partners for the first time. It will be designed in close cooperation with the EC by initiating a regular dialogue between EU-PolarNet and the relevant units of the EC. To meet this challenge, EU-PolarNet will:

    • Improve and strengthen international cooperation in polar research and implement the Transatlantic Research Alliance;
    • Improve the co-ordination of European research in the Arctic and Antarctic to develop an integrated European polar research programme;
    • Design a resource-oriented European infrastructure access and usage plan to support an integrated research programme;
    • Initiate, conduct and sustain ongoing dialogue and cooperation with all relevant stakeholders for the polar regions.

The Consortium:

The EU-PolarNet comprises all major polar research institutions and polar infrastructure providers in Europe. The EU-PolarNet partners will act as national coordinators for their entire scientific communities to guarantee a coordinated input by the individual national Polar Research Programmes.
The consortium comprises the following institutes:

Austria:	Universität Wien – Austrian Polar Research Institute (UW-APRI)
Belgium:	Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB)
	Institut Royal des Sciences Naturelles de Belgique (RBINS)
Bulgaria:	Bulgarski Antarkticheski Institut Association (BAI)
Denmark:	Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland (GEUS)
Estonia:	TTÜ Geoloogia Instituut (IG-TUT)
Finland:	Oulun Yliopisto (UOULU)
France:	Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)
	Institut Polaire Français Paul Emile Victor (IPEV)
Germany:	Alfred-Wegener-Institut, Helmholtz – Zentrum für Polar-und Meeresforschung (AWI)
Greenland:	Gronlands Naturinstitut (GINR)
Italy:	Consiglio Nazionale Delle Ricerche – Department of Earth System Science and Environmental Technologies (CNR-DTA)
Norway:	Norges Forskningsråd (RCN)
Poland:	Instytut Geofizyki Polskiej Akademii Nauk (IGF PAS)
Portugal:	Instituto de Geografia e Ordenamento do Território –Universidade de Lisboa (IGOT-UL)
Spain:	Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (MINECO)
	Agencia Estatal Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas (CSIC)
Sweden:	Polarforskningssekretaritet (SPRS)
The Netherlands:	Rijksuniversiteit Groningen (RUG)
UK:	British Antarctic Survey (NERC-BAS)
International:	World Ocean Council Limited (WOC)
	Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme Secretariat (AMAP)

The following international organisations are cooperating with EU-PolarNet:

    • European Polar Board (EPB)
    • Arctic Programme of the European Climate Research Alliance (ArcticECRA)
    • ArcticNet, Canada´s Network of Centres of Excellence
    • Arctic Science Partnership (ASP) and the University of Manitoba, Canada
    • BILAT USA (2.0)
    • Canadian Polar Commission (CPC)
    • Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
    • Danish Technical University (DTU Aqua)
    • EU Arctic Information Centre at the Arctic University of Lapland (EUAIC)
    • Forum of Arctic Research Operators (FARO)
    • International Arctic Science Committee (IASC)
    • International Arctic Social Science Association (IASSA)
    • International Network for Terrestrial Research and Monitoring in the Arctic (INTERACT)
    • Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
    • Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH), U.S.A.
    • World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) Climate and Cryosphere Project (CliC)
    • World Meteorological Organisation´s World Weather Research Programme, Polar Predication Project (WWRP-PPP)

The European Polar Board (EPB) is a special cooperation partner for EU-PolarNet because it supports the project by extensive in-kind contributions. The EPB is a think tank and the European high-level facilitator of cooperation between European national funding agencies and national polar institutes and research organisations. Outcomes from the EU-PolarNet will add long-term value to EPB activity in providing strategic science-policy advice to the European Commission and other international bodies. A major benefit of the involvement and support of the EPB is that the legacy of EU-PolarNet can be reliably sustained by the Board into the future.


Work Packages and Work plan

EU-PolarNet comprises the following Work Packages (WP):

WP No
Work Package Title
WP Lead 
Short Name
1
Management of the Consortium, International Integration and Policy Guidance
AWI
2
Polar Research for Science and Society
CNRS
3
Infrastructures, Facilities and Data
NERC-BAS
4
Interaction with Stakeholders and end-users
CNR-DTA


The work plan of EU-PolarNet is divided into 3 phases and detailed as follows:

Phase 1: March 2015 – May 2016
Providing the background information and First Conference with Stakeholders / Science Community Integration
The knowledge of the current European and international polar research landscape will be consolidated by compiling available information from ongoing research planning initiatives, such as the third International Conference on Arctic Research Planning (ICARP III) and SCAR Horizon Scan and national research plans. Additionally, all available types of polar infrastructures, facilities and large instruments will be collated and the relevant stakeholders and international partners identified.

The first conference with stakeholders and the science community is planned for summer 2016 in Brussels with associated side events. Representatives of all key scientific and stakeholder communities, including indigenous communities and local and regional governments, will be invited. The aim is to agree on top-level priorities and strategies for the Integrated European Polar Research Programme, taking into account national and international research priorities, infrastructure and capabilities, key stakeholder requirements (incl. their infrastructures and capacities).


Phase 2: May 2016 – June 2019
Addressing any disparities identified in phase 1 and preparation and release of white papers addressing key polar research questions, infrastructure and data access and interoperability  
Phase 2 corresponds to a strategic scoping exercise. It will include a series of workshops, stakeholder consultations and other participatory activities, such as online questionnaires and other relevant means, to identify the key current research gaps and weaknesses as well as gaps in infrastructure capability and availability. On this basis, priorities for new research programmes and infrastructure investments will be developed to address any shortcomings, and to design new mechanisms and partnerships for the delivery of key products to end-users.
The white papers are intermediate compilations, targeted at policy makers and funding agencies including the EC, to give advice on the most pressing issues that have to be solved in the polar areas. The white papers will be co-designed by scientists and stakeholders and will be presented to policy and decision makers.
Phase 2 will include a second conference with representatives of all key scientific and stakeholder communities. The goal is to draw together the work of individual WPs into a coherent design for a European Polar Research Programme by unifying and enhancing existing research efforts, by determining key new investments (scientific and infrastructure) that may be required, and by developing new mechanisms for the provision of outputs to stakeholders.

Phase 3: June 2019 – February 2020
Final Report – Integrated Polar Research Programme 
In phase 3 the European Polar Research Programme will be refined based on the results of the second conference. It includes the production and iteration of the final report and the publishing of recommendations for research funders, public and private decision makers.


For further information, please contact the EU-PolarNet Project Manager:
Dr Nicole Biebow,
Alfred-Wegener-Institut,
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar und Meeresforschung,
Am Handelshafen 12, 27570 Bremerhaven
Tel: +49 (0)471 4831 1011, 
Email: nicole.biebow@awi.de
www.eu-polarnet.eu

or the Executive Secretary of the European Polar Board

Dr. Renuka Badhe 
Executive Secretary, European Polar Board
Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk (NOW) 
Laan van Nieuw Oost-Indië 300, 
2593 CE The Hague, 
Netherlands
Mobile: +31 6 51715 012 
Email: r.badhe@nwo.nl

