





Workshop on Education and Outreach - Education and Outreach Activities of the United States Antarctic Program (USAP)









Education and Outreach Activities of the United States Antarctic Program (USAP)

 Information Paper submitted by the United States
Introduction
The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) has long supported education and outreach activities with an increased effort associated with the International Polar Year, 2007-2009 (IPY). Following IPY, the USAP has continued to support a variety of endeavors, both directly and in partnership with other organizations. The United States has also actively participated in and supported SCAR and COMNAP education and outreach efforts including fellowships and student exchange programs.  A number of USAP programs and projects are well-established, with a long history of support, while many were of shorter duration in association with discrete outreach events and funded research projects.  Future directions for USAP E&O include efforts to bring scientific data from the polar regions directly into the classroom and to develop international collaborations for scientists at an early stage in their careers.  
Long-term Education and Outreach Programs and Projects
Several E&O programs and projects have been supported by the USAP for many years and some of these programs have had international collaborations or products that were internationally available. The following is a sampling of these well-established programs.
Antarctic Artists & Writers Program:
For more than three decades, the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Antarctic Artists & Writers Program has provided opportunities for scholars in the humanities (painting, photography, documentary films writing, history, and other liberal arts) to conduct fieldwork in Antarctica and on the Southern Ocean. The program serves as means to engage the general public in the research that NSF supports in the Antarctic.  Prospective program participants must submit a formal proposal (http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2013/nsf13540/nsf13540.htm) to NSF and are chosen through an external merit-review process. The Program makes no awards, but instead provides participants in-kind support to make observations at U.S. Antarctic Program stations and research camps, in wilderness areas or aboard USAP vessels. 

Among the more than 90 program participants (http://www.nsf.gov/geo/plr/aawr.jsp) are nationally and internationally recognized figures in the arts, including documentary filmmaker Werner Herzog; photographers George Steinmetz and Galen Rowell; award-winning science fiction writer Kim Stanley Robinson; historian Dian Belanger, and author Barry Lopez. In addition to public showings or publication of finished works, participants often blog and otherwise communicate with the public both during and after their deployments, such as: (http://www.aprilsurgent.com/).
Polar Media Program
For more than two decades, NSF has supported the Polar Media Program, which provides an opportunity for television, radio, newspaper, and magazine reporters to visit Antarctica and report on the NSF-supported science. The opportunity is advertised annually in an NSF media advisory (http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=132054). U.S. media are given preference in selection, in recognition of the fact that NSF is a taxpayer-supported, U.S. government agency. 

Media visitors have included reporters from The New York Times, The Los Angeles Times, CBS News, and National Public Radio, as well as strategically-placed regional outlets. During the IPY, NSF supported a weeklong series of live broadcasts by the NBC News morning program, the Today Show, reaching a daily audience of approximately 5 million viewers.  Works produced by media visitors have been recognized for excellence; most recently free-lance writer Govert Schilling received Sky & Telescope magazine’s David N. Schramm award for high-energy astrophysics science journalism for his reporting on the South Pole Telescope. The Polar Media Program is a component of a comprehensive media strategy that includes the issuance of press releases; the development of video news products; and the daily posting of items to NSF’s Polar Facebook Page (https://www.facebook.com/pages/Division-of-Polar-Programs-National-Science-Foundation/1392901317615113 [open to non-subscribers]) and a Twitter feed (@NSF_OPP). 

David Bjerklie,  a journalist from Time for Kids (TFK), an imprint of Time Magazine for students in grades K through 6, deployed with the media program in 2013-14. Bjerklie produced pieces for print editions of TFK’s weekly newsmagazine that reached about 3.5 million students in the U.S. In addition to the English-language version, as a standard practice, Bjerklie’s cover story was translated into Spanish and is available to subscribers online. Bjerklie’s reporting was also used to produce a TFK “mini-site” devoted to USAP science (http://www.timeforkids.com/minisite/antarctica) and in the newly launched TFK iPad edition. TFK also produced packages of grade-appropriate teacher materials to accompany the stories. During his deployment, Bjerklie, along with an NSF staffer and a researcher, also participated in a live, international webcast that reached more than 1,500 schools around the globe. In January 2015, TFK published a follow-up publication, Around the World Antarctica, (http://www.timeforkids.com/destination/antarctica) featuring a “Day in the Life” of Jean Pennycook, a USAP-supported educator who assists with research at the Cape Royds Adelie penguin colony. A webcast associated with that publication generated 2,500 log-ins, representing an estimated audience of 50,000 school children worldwide, which a TFK editor characterized as “by far our most successful Webinar.”
Teacher Experiences in Antarctic Research
The USAP has provided in-kind and direct support for programs that include K-12 teachers in research and offer them a field-based Antarctic experience. These programs have had a variety of names, beginning with Teachers Experiences Antarctica (TEA; 1992-2005) and followed by the PolarTREC (Teachers and Researchers Exploring and Collaborating; 2007 to present). PolarTREC is a program in which K-12 teachers spend 3-6 weeks participating in hands-on field research experiences in the polar regions. The goal of PolarTREC is to invigorate polar science education and understanding by bringing K-12 educators and polar researchers together (http://www.polartrec.com/about ). Since 2010, over 140 teachers have been placed with research programs in the Arctic and Antarctic. 
International High School Student Programs
The first Joint Antarctic School Expedition (JASE), a collaborative venture of the USAP, with support from the NSF Division of Polar Programs, and the Chilean National Antarctic Institute (Instituto Antártico Chileno (INACH)), brought high school students and teachers to Punta Arenas, Chile, in February 2014. This pilot program aimed to engage U.S. high school students in INACH’s well-established Feria Antártica Escolar/Expedición Antártica Escolar program and to provide participants with hands-on experience with Antarctic environments and ecosystems research. USAP hopes to build on this pilot project in the future.

Through NSF support, U.S. high school student have also engaged in the Joint Science Education Project (JSEP). The Joint Committee, a high-level forum involving the Greenlandic, Danish and American governments, established JSEP in 2007, as a collaborative diplomatic effort during the International Polar Year to: 1) educate and inspire the next generation of polar scientists; 2) build strong networks of students and teachers among the three countries; and 3) provide an opportunity to practice language and communication skills by taking students to the ice sheet in Greenland to observe polar science in action. Since its inception, JSEP has had 100 student and 25 teacher participants and has involved numerous scientists and field researchers.
Early-Career Polar Biology Course
The NSF sponsors an international advanced integrative biology training course in Antarctica for early-career scientists. The course primarily involves PhD students and post-doctoral scholars who are interested in polar research, but who have not had an opportunity to work in Antarctica. Participants are introduced to topics in molecular biology, physiology and ecology at the frontiers of polar science as well as to the many possibilities, and limitations, of Antarctic fieldwork and logistics. Since 1994, there have been 228 participants from 126 institutions representing 24 countries (and 29 nationalities). The course has served to 1) create new research directions, collaborations, and opportunities for early-career scientists; 2) recruit the ‘next generation’ scientists bringing new ideas, methods and technologies into the international polar community; and 3) increase awareness of the global importance of Antarctic science in academic curricula at many home institutions and in public presentations given by participants. 
PenguinScience.com
An IPY-era award helped start PenguinScience.com.  The website has extensive material that is useful for teaching all ages about penguins and Antarctica.  Activities include how the changing environment currently and over the previous 12,000 years has affected the population size and distribution of Antarctica’s penguins. Thousands of students and teachers worldwide have accessed this website in the past decade. There are also opportunities for students to interact with penguin researchers including a postcards from Antarctica program and web-based interactions such as question & answer sessions and video chats.
The Antarctic Sun
The USAP publishes The Antarctic Sun (http://antarcticsun.usap.gov), an on-line newspaper that provides USAP participants and the general public with current and historical information about program activities. The stories in The Sun, written by an employee of the USAP logistics contractor, focus primarily on NSF-supported scientific projects occurring on “the ice”, but also include human-interest pieces and news about life at the various USAP stations. In 2014, The Sun registered a total of 930,385 discrete visitor “sessions,” for a daily average of 2,549 sessions. The Antarctic Sun posted 94 separate pieces to its website in 2014. 
Antarctic Photo Library
One of the most popular public-outreach resources offered by the USAP is an on-line library of photographs taken by USAP participants (http://photolibrary.usap.gov/). The library, which is updated regularly, currently contains more than 6,000 searchable, categorized, and downloadable images, each captioned and with appropriate photographer credit. It is curated by an employee of the USAP logistics contractor, who also handles individual photographers’ permissions-for-use issues. The library serves as a source of photographs for a variety of users, from textbook publishers to the news media. The library received 195,587 visits in 2014, up from 163,712 in 2013.
Long Term Ecological Research (LTER)
NSF funds LTER projects at two sites in Antarctica – the McMurdo Dry Valleys and Palmer Station area. Both LTER projects support a variety of E&O efforts that are mainly aimed at K-12 students. Outreach activities for the McMurdo Dry Valley LTER can be found online (http://www.mcmlter.org/outreach.htm) and the children’s book, The Lost Seal, their contribution to the LTER book series, is available at: http://www.mcmlter.org/lostseal/.  Palmer Station LTER has similar E&O efforts that are detailed on their website (http://pal.lternet.edu/education) and include a children’s book, Sea Secrets, that can be found at http://pal.lternet.edu/education/k-12/childrens-book . The Palmer LTER also regularly includes educators in their field teams.
E&O Exhibits, Movies and Other Projects
Over the past three decades, many E&O projects have been supported by the USAP, often in collaboration with international partners, and have been made available to the international community. Here we present several examples of discrete projects with lasting E&O impacts.  
Frozen Planet
USAP provided the logistical support in Antarctica that helped make possible Frozen Planet, a seven-part television series jointly produced by the BBC’s Natural History Unit and U.S.-based Discovery Communications (http://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=0848627). The series highlighted disciplines as diverse as climate science, volcanology, geology, glaciology, as well as natural history. Through a comprehensive distribution mechanism—which included repeated broadcasts, video-on-demand viewings, and distribution on DVDs—the program reached an audience of more than 65 million people across the United States. In 2012, the U.S. Academy of Television Arts & Sciences voted the series four Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Nonfiction Series (http://www.emmys.com/shows/frozen-planet).

Polar-Palooza
Developed during the IPY, Polar-Palooza (http://passporttoknowledge.com/polar-palooza/pp01.php, : http://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=0632262) was an informal-education project that aimed to engage, inform and inspire large audiences in rural and urban areas of the United States, where exposure to polar science and researchers is far from common. The USAP facilitated fieldwork for Polar-Palooza’s "HiDef video Science Story Capture Corp", a team of professional videographers whose high-definition video was made available as public-domain materials accessible online. The footage was also used in video and audio podcasts distributed through iTunes, Google, Yahoo and IPY websites. The"Stories from a Changing Planet" presentation was part of the outreach activities at the 32nd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Baltimore in 2009 (http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=114340).
ANDRILL 
(ANtarctic geological DRILLing) was a multinational collaboration, active during the IPY (2007-2009) comprised of more than 200 scientists, students, and educators from nations including Germany, Italy, New Zealand, and the United States. The chief objective was to drill back in time to recover a history of paleoenvironmental changes that will guide our understanding of how fast, how large, and how frequent the glacial and interglacial changes were in the Antarctic region. ANDRILL supports a variety of international education projects that can be found at http://andrill.org/education/. An example of the latest US ANDRILL education effort is the ‘Antarctic Time Travel Exhibition,’ a portable display that has a message of carbon dioxide control on past climate and ice sheet conditions, and future predictions.  The Time Machine, developed in Nebraska and based on a New Zealand model was recently visited by 1,600 kids and adults and will be on display several more times in 2015.
Magmatic Field Laboratory Workshop
The McMurdo Dry Valleys are a unique natural laboratory in many respects. Because the Dry Valleys contain exceptional exposures of the 180 million year old Ferrar magmatic system, a field workshop was organized in 2004-2005 to bring researchers together to study the overall system.  Through the group’s collaboration the fundamental value of magmatic crystallization to science could more effectively be conveyed to those beyond the Antarctic community. While this was a one-time event, it was quite successful by several measures – it resulted in new collaborations and a number of follow-on proposals for research – essentially broadening the range of scientists benefiting from this unique natural laboratory. Several summaries of this activity were published (see for example: “Cold Fire” by E. A. Mathez, Natural History, July/August 2005, p. 26-31; Geoscientist (magazine of the Geological Society of London), Vol. 15, no. 9, Sept 2005). 
IceCube Education and Outreach
 NSF is the principal funder of the international IceCube Neutrino Observatory, a facility that ushered in and underpins the new field of neutrino astrophysics. As a major research activity that builds on the substantial US investment in construction and operation of  the world’s largest neutrino observatory, IceCube is expected to be a focus for education and outreach associated with particle astrophysics. The University of Wisconsin, as the lead organization for the IceCube collaboration, coordinates with US University and international partners to ensure a robust set of E&O activities including involvement of undergraduate students, activities for high-school students, professional development for high-school teachers, and E&O events at museums and other public venues. Current education and outreach activities can be found at: https://icecube.wisc.edu/outreach.
Boston University Video Series
Dr. David Marchant at Boston University included a number of videographers in a recent Antarctic expedition.  Together, they produced a set of videos explaining the search for ancient ice in Antarctica, what we hope to learn from this ice, and how Antarctic field science is accomplished (http://www.bu.edu/research/articles/marchant/

