





Special WG on Competent Authorities Issues 

Agenda Item V - Development of Domestic Guidance on Emergency Preparedness, Response Planning and Insurance Requirements (Measure 4 (2004))







Agenda Item V - Development of Domestic Guidance on Emergency Preparedness, Response Planning and Insurance Requirements (Measure 4 (2004))

Information Paper submitted by New Zealand

Summary

The purpose of this Information Paper is to provide the Special WG on Competent Authorities Issues with information on New Zealand’s domestic guidance for applicants on emergency preparedness, response planning and insurance requirements (Measure 4 (2004)).


Background

Measure 4 (2004) on Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area obliges Parties to require those under their jurisdiction, organising or conducting tourist or other non-governmental activities, to demonstrate compliance with the following requirements:

    • that appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements are drawn up and in place prior to the start of the activity in respect of health and safety, search and rescue, and medical care and evacuation;
    • such plans and arrangements shall not be reliant on support from other operators or national programmes without their express written agreement; and
    • that adequate insurance or other arrangements are in place to cover any costs associated with search and rescue and medical care and evacuation.

New Zealand approved Measure 4 (2004) in July 2005.  While the Measure has not yet entered into force, its requirements are given effect to in New Zealand by way of directions given to applicants by the Minister of Foreign Affairs under section 10 of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994 (the Act).1

Accordingly, with respect to tourist or other non-governmental activities, operators are required by ministerial direction to demonstrate that appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements for health and safety, search and rescue, and evacuation are in place prior to the start of the activity.  This is in addition to having adequate insurance or other arrangements to cover any costs associated with search and rescue and medical care and evacuation. It is a further requirement that such plans and arrangements not be reliant on support from other operators or national programmes without their express written agreement.  Wilful failure to comply with ministerial directions is an offence carrying a penalty of up to one year’s imprisonment or a fine of up to $100,000.

To assist applicants New Zealand has developed a domestic guidance document on emergency preparedness, response planning and insurance requirements (draft attached at Appendix 1).  The aim of this document is to provide applicants with direction on the type of information MFAT requires in order to assess the application against the requirements of Measure 4 (2004).   This provides MFAT with a more robust basis on which to assess applications.  Development of this document is ongoing, and we anticipate making the document available on MFAT’s website with the expectation that applicants will provide the requisite information when submitting an environmental impact assessment. 

In the drafting of this guidance we consulted with the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand, Antarctica New Zealand and local tourism operators.  We also approached Competent Authorities from other similar jurisdictions to seek views on the implementation of Measure 4 (2004) and Resolution 4 (2004) at their national levels and whether any additional guidance is provided.  This revealed that there is at present no consistency of approach.


Next Steps

New Zealand would welcome a discussion during the Special WG on Competent Authorities on: 

    1. How Competent Authorities are assessing compliance with the requirements of Resolution 4 (2004) and/or Measure 4 (2004); and
    2. Whether Parties would see value in the development of a guidance document for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty System ensuring that, when in force, the requirements of Measure 4 (2004) are clearly articulated to applicants.

Appendix 1: DRAFT Emergency Preparedness and Response Planning and Insurance for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area (Measure 4 (2004))

Additional Information and Guidance for Applicants

Guidance on Emergency Preparedness and Response Planning and Insurance Requirements

In order to fully meet the Government’s obligations under Measure 4 (2004) of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, MFAT requires information on details of emergency preparedness and response plans, and insurance arrangements. This will enable MFAT to be able to assess whether the operator has demonstrated compliance with the Measure 4 requirements. 

Sufficient information (including supporting documentation) on arrangements should therefore be included at the same time as submitting an environmental impact assessment. The various aspects covered by this Guidance could well be covered by the applicant in a single (Emergency Preparedness and Response) Plan. Such information must be provided prior to the issuance of the notification/permit.

Examples of the kind of information which will be required include:

Appropriate Health and Safety Arrangements 

Evidence of:

    • A Health and Safety Plan which sets out the procedures in place for all proposed activities in Antarctica (e.g. conducting landings ashore; camping; helicopter activities; small boat operations; overland travel etc.) to ensure the health and safety of participants. The emphasis is on prevention and risk reduction, to show that operators are operating in such a way to minimise the need for a SAR or medevac response. The Health and Safety Plan should ideally include details of: 

        ◦ Staff/expedition leader health and safety training.
        ◦ Plans for pre-deployment training/drills for staff and expeditioners.
        ◦ Personal Protective Equipment to be used by or provided to staff and expeditioners.
        ◦ Procedures used for assessing risk prior to conducting an activity.

    • In preparing your plan, you should refer to New Zealand Government Guidelines available from MFAT’s website, as well as the points relevant to safety from existing ATCM guidance for tourists and expedition organisers should also be considered (see “Other Relevant Guidance” below for details).

Appropriate Arrangements for Search and Rescue

Evidence of:

    • Arrangements for search and rescue appropriate to the activities to be undertaken, that:
        ◦ Identifies emergency events that could arise as a result of the activities to be undertaken; 
        ◦ Identifies pre-deployment training provided to or undertaken by staff and expeditioners to deal with emergency events;
        ◦ Identifies emergency response equipment to be carried (e.g. communication equipment, fuel spill response equipment, distress beacons & EPIRBs, life rafts and boats emergency provisions and shelter, taking into account the possibility of lengthy delays caused by environmental conditions etc.);
        ◦ Provides details of regular reporting arrangements (e.g. participation in IAATO or other vessel tracking schemes);
        ◦ An indication of regular access to key data and information (e.g. ice charts and weather information);
        ◦ Provides details of arrangements in place for search and rescue and any other arrangements that have been made for emergency support in or recovery from Antarctica, for example details of any mutual support arrangements that have been made with another ship(s), and evidence that those other ships are expected to be nearby (IAATO’s ship scheduler could provide evidence of this);
        ◦ Arrangements for re-provisioning or on-continent support (including possible delivery of mechanical parts) should this be necessary;
        ◦ For land-based tourism (e.g. treks or cross-continent traverses but not including landings ashore), we would expect the plan to include evidence of an arrangement for air support (e.g. through ALE/ALCI) that does not rely upon NAP support, unless otherwise agreed.  

Appropriate Arrangements for Medical Care and Evacuation

Evidence of:

    • Pre-departure medical checks, for both passengers and staff.
    • A requirement that any medical conditions are notified by passengers and staff who are responsible for having any medication specific to these conditions with them.
    • Details of medical equipment/supplies that are to be carried or are held on-board the vessel.
    • Medically qualified staff and details of medical/first aid training of staff/expedition leaders.
    • Arrangements for external medical support, including for medical evacuation should it be required.
    • It is required that all passengers and staff hold medical insurance, including explicitly for medical evacuation from Antarctica.

Adequate insurance or other arrangements to cover any costs associated with SAR and medical care and evacuation

Evidence of:

    • Insurance cover held, including insurer, type and amount of cover and expiry dates. 
    • Insurance must cover all of the proposed activities to be undertaken. Include, where applicable, details of insurance cover held for medevac, repatriation and search and rescue. 
    • Applicants must attach copies of any insurance policies. Applications are required to explain how any exclusions in the policies relevant to the activities to be undertaken, will be covered.




Risk Assessment

    • As part of your application, we would encourage you to include a comprehensive risk assessment for all proposed activities to determine risk levels, and to identify mitigation measures and contingency plans (See Resolution 6 (2014) "Toward a Risk-based Assessment of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities”).

