





Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica








Important Bird Areas in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by 
Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States
Summary
Summary results from a recently completed analysis of Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica are presented in the attached report ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015: Summary’.
IBAs are identified by applying a set of global criteria, developed by BirdLife International, and species-specific thresholds, derived from global population assessments for bird species that breed in Antarctica, to all available data on the location and population sizes of breeding colonies for the continent and its offshore island groups.
The data were drawn predominantly from the peer-reviewed published scientific literature, supplemented in some cases by additional unpublished information contributed by collaborating scientists. A wide range of scientific experts reviewed the assessment at different stages, and their comments were taken into account in the final analysis and report.
The initiative was developed through collaboration between BirdLife International and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) that started in 1998, and was recently renewed with the support of a number of Parties and the Pew Charitable Trusts (see ATCM XXVIII WP40). 
Key findings
The analysis has identified 204 IBAs that meet the selection criteria as they apply to the avifauna of Antarctica. The summary report describes the background to the project and the methodology employed, provides the list of IBAs identified, and includes a set of maps showing their locations across Antarctica.
The full report, from which the summary attached to this Information Paper is drawn, includes Site Accounts that describe for each IBA the bird species present and their numbers, as well as information on the local environment, other wildlife, potential conservation issues, and references to further data and site descriptions. The Site Accounts include maps showing the IBA boundaries in their local context, including prominent physical features, local research stations, and nearby protected areas. 
The full report comprises more than 300 pages and therefore is not attached to this Information Paper. However, the full report is being made available for free download from the websites of BirdLife International (http://www.birdlife.org) and Environmental Research & Assessment (http://www.era.gs/resources/iba), who were responsible for undertaking the Antarctic IBA assessment in collaboration with SCAR and members of the Antarctic scientific community.
The results from the Antarctic IBA assessment are being incorporated into BirdLife’s dedicated World Bird Database and will also be made available online through the Data Zone of the BirdLife website (http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/site).
It is anticipated that the IBA assessment will be updated periodically as Antarctic bird populations change and as new data become available.

