





Special WG on Competent Authorities issues: 

Summary of the United Kingdom’s Antarctic Permitting Process 









Summary of the United Kingdom’s Antarctic Permitting Process

Information Paper presented by the United Kingdom
Summary
The UK Antarctic Acts 1994 and 2013, and associated Antarctic Regulations, implement the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection (including its Annexes I-VI) into UK law.  This legislation establishes a permitting regime for British activities in Antarctica and eligible visitors are required to obtain the necessary permits in advance from the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. The competent authority for the UK is therefore the Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO).

Background

Persons requiring permits

Separate permits are required under the Antarctic Act 1994 for:

    • British expeditions to Antarctica (section 3)
    • A person remaining in Antarctica on a British station (section 4)
    • British registered vessels and aircraft entering Antarctica (section 5)
    • Mineral resource activities (for the purposes of scientific research) (section 6) 
    • The taking of, or harmful interference with fauna or flora (section 7)
    • The introduction of non-native animals and plants into Antarctica (section 8)
    • Entry into areas protected under the Protocol (section 9). 

The Antarctic Act also enables the UK to implement, through the permitting regime, other relevant ATCM Measures and Resolutions as appropriate: notably Measures 4(2004) and 15(2009) and Resolutions 4(2004), 4(2007), 5(2007) and 7(2009).

Application process

Prospective travellers to Antarctica can download application forms from www.gov.uk/visits-to-antarctica-how-to-apply-for-a-permit.  The main application form (covering entry into Antarctica) requires full information about the proposed itinerary of any visit to Antarctica, including full details of the proposed location; duration; names of all participants (together with their Antarctic experience, as relevant); and all activities they wish to undertake while in Antarctica.  

All applicants must complete a preliminary environmental impact questionnaire (PEIQ), unless the level of required environmental impact assessment has already been agreed.  The PEIQ is then used to assess whether a subsequent IEE or CEE is required.

Applicants are also asked to complete a detailed risk assessment covering all proposed activities, and append all relevant documentation to their application form.  This includes:  

        a. insurance documentation - covering all expedition members and explicitly mentioning Antarctica; and  
        b. contractual agreements relating to contingency plans and any arrangements for search and rescue and medical evacuation.  

Consideration of applications

Where an applicant is not already known to the permitting authority, they will normally be required to visit the FCO to present their proposed activities and to allow for a full discussion of plans, itineraries, environmental impact assessments, risk assessments and contingency plans.

The competent authority assessment process particularly focuses on:

    a. previous experience of the applicant – in terms of planned location in Antarctica and activities proposed;
    b. the relevant experience and/or training team of the expedition organisers and members;
    c. whether the environmental impact assessment is thorough and credible.  If a proposed activity may have more than a minor or transitory impact, an IEE or CEE is commissioned;
    d. whether the contingency planning covers all potential scenarios which the expedition may face in Antarctica – and in particular, whether plans are in place to remove all waste and equipment from Antarctica after the completion of the expedition;
    e. whether the risk assessment indicates that the applicant has adequately considered all perceived risks and how they would mitigate each of them;
    f. whether there is a clear communications plan in place, with a formalised reporting schedule and contingencies for loss of contact, equipment loss or failure etc covering the entire duration that the expedition is south of 60⁰ South;
    g. whether any part of the activities are subject to authorisation by another Treaty Party, or where there are any implications for other Parties (in terms of the involvement of their nationals, or where activities are proposed to take place in the vicinity of Antarctic stations etc); and
    h. whether there is a reasonable justification for the activities to take place in Antarctica and a credible education angle (in line with Resolution 7(2009).

Permit conditions

The permit application, including all of the above mentioned information and as amended (if appropriate) during the competent authorities consideration process, is appended to the permit in full.  Deviation from this application is an offence under the Antarctic Act.

In addition, permits may contain any specific conditions as the competent authority deems appropriate.  These are normally used to reinforce specific provisions previously agreed with the applicant.  There are standard permitting conditions for many specific activities, such as the use of helicopters, vehicles or drones, or for specific ‘adventure activities’ like diving and snow-boarding.    Standard conditions clearly set out that the permit holder has legal responsibility for any equipment and its responsible use.  

Any breach of the conditions set out in the permit may lead to suspension or revocation of the permit in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Regulations 1995/490 and is punishable as an offence under section 5(4) or section 13(2) of the Antarctic Act 1994, for which the maximum penalty is two years imprisonment, an unlimited fine, or both.  

