





Update of the status of the rare moss formations on Caliente Hill (ASPA 140 – site C)









Update of the status of the rare moss formations on Caliente Hill (ASPA 140 –site C)
An Information Paper submitted by Spain
Summary
Deception island, in the South Shetland Islands, has the largest concentration of rare bryophyte (and several lichen) species in Antarctica. Due to the inadvertent cumulative trampling from scientific activities and probably, uncontrolled touristic visits, the endemic moss (Schistidium deceptionense) is been damaged inadvertently and irreversibly.  This information paper tries to draw attention on such sensitive area.
Background
The actively volcanic Deception Island has a series of unique plant communities and numerous plant species that are exceptionally rare in the Antarctic terrestrial biome. There are several sites, mostly of very small area, with active fumaroles and associated heated ash soil, all of which support communities of bryophytes unique to the Antarctic and including several species unknown elsewhere in the biome. These areas constitute some of the 11 sub-sites defined in the Antarctic Specially Protected Area Nº 140, Parts of Deception Island; the designation of these sub-sites was intended, among others management functions, to afford protection from human impact.

In 2012, Spanish researchers detected and reported about some visual evidences of damage on the Caliente Hill’s mosses, this situation was highlighted in the IP 58 submitted by Spain to the ATCM XXXVII/CEP XXVII.

Since summer season 2013-2014 Spain has increased the precautions for all scientists and support personnel working in ASPA 140, furthermore, for the 2014-2015 campaign, the Spanish Polar Committee has developed an “Interim code of conduct to develop activities in the Site C- Caliente Hill of ASPA Nº 140 Parts of Deception Island” with the aim to afford greater protection to this area.
Status of the moss formations on Cerro Caliente in January 2015
Cerro Caliente was visited by two Spanish environmental researches in 2015. The extent of the moss formations was photomapped (an excerpt can be visualized in the photographs below) along the area to estimate the total cover (roughly 2 square meters total), unfortunately, further damages were observed on the moss formations, either from direct trampling on the mosses, or from sample extractions in cores. 

Three other geothermal sites were visited, Site H - Mont Pond; Site E - west of Stonethrow Ridge and Site J -Perchuc Cone. These remote sites offered no observed damages, nonetheless they showed extreme sensibility.

In order to increase the awareness on this sensitive area, Spain has developed an internal regulation for all the Spanish activities to be conducted in Caliente Hill, Site C during its campaign. A special session about “environmental protection of geothermal systems” has been included in the formative course held before the campaign. Additionally, two posters are being produced, to be placed in the Argentinian Base “Decepción” and the Spanish Base “Gabriel de Castilla”, to inform about the distinctive features and sensitiveness of the Caliente Hill area.



Conclusions
    • Caliente Hill is a perfect example of a geothermal area that would benefit from the general provisions on the ‘Draft Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica’ in progress.
    • Further coordination among the Parties which conduct activities in Cerro Caliente would be a very good start to protect these mosses communities.
    • In order to protect the sensitiveness of this geothermal areas, Spain any other interested CEP Members, will work during the inter-sessional period to develop additional management measures.




