





Special WG on Competent Authorities session - Brief summary of the French competent authority domestic process









Is there an application process? If not, which other process is there?

If so, what is asked and what documents are requested from the applicant
Are permits given? If not, is any approval or other response given?
How comprehensive are those permits/approvals/responses? 

Is the permit/approval/response subject to provisions and conditions?

Does your national legislation give any guidance with respect to regulation of activities where participants or interests from more than one country are involved?

France
- NCA:  The French Southern and Antarctic Lands (Terres Australes et Antarctiques Françaises – TAAF)
According to national regulations, a prior notification is required. The notification must be given at last five months before the beginning of the activity in Antarctica. The TAAF may grant exemptions from this deadline.

Pursuant to national regulations, tourism activities are evaluated as having a “minor or transitory impact” on the environment. As such, they have to be submitted under the “permit process” comprising an EIA, and not under the simple “declaration process” (which is reserved for activities having less than a minor or transitory impact).

The notification must include information about who is responsible for the activity, the crew, passengers, the ship, a description of the activity, the visited sites, action plan in case of an emergency, an assessment of the potential environmental impact of the activity (ASPA, ASMA, HSM, protection of fauna and flora, management of waste, self-evaluation of impacts), a plan for how to limit negative impact, and information about contingency plans and search-and-rescue insurance. 

If a contingency plan requires support from others, the agreement for support must be documented. Insurances must also be documented. 

TAAF approves the activity if it is found to be in accordance with the regulations and the Environmental Protocol. TAAF may also demand further information or documentation; or order that an activity must be changed or postponed; or may prohibit an activity if it is not in accordance with the regulations. The instruction process takes into account environmental as well as security criterions. 

Pursuant to national regulations, every notification is transmitted for examination and advice to the French Committee for Polar Environment.

If TAAF does not decide otherwise and provide a statement about the refusal to the proponent, the activity may be carried out in accordance with what is stated in the permit issued by TAAF. 
The permit summarizes the information in the notification and specifies the activity that is permitted (who, where, when, what activity). 

It states the advice noticed by the French Committee for Polar Environment as well as the obligations from the TAAF.

It recalls the obligation to provide the TAAF with a Post-visit report. The approvals are normally two pages long for yachts, and 11 pages for cruise ships.


The approval may be subject to provisions/conditions from TAAF and from the  French Committee for Polar Environment .

Normal conditions are submission of documentation of civil liability insurance, a photography of the vessel, a map of the itinerary, copies of emergency action plans, copies of diplomas concerning sailing and medical abilities, and copy of the expertise report of the vessel (if existing).

For the 2015-2016 season, and in application of Measure 4(2004), the TAAF will ask for insurance covering the costs related to SAR operations, medical care, medical evacuation, and repatriation to the country of origin.

 
The French Law and regulations  apply to French nationals, French legal persons, French ships and aircrafts.

The Regulations also apply to foreigners who participate in or are responsible for activity in Antarctica which is organised from France or from a French territory.

The Law and regulations do not apply to persons taking part of an activity approved by another State which has corresponding provisions and is party to the Environment Protocol. 

