





Workshop on Education and Outreach 

Whom, how and what do we reach with Antarctic education and outreach?










Workshop on Education and Outreach
Whom, how and what do we reach with 
Antarctic education and outreach?

Information paper submitted by Germany


1. Introduction

In Germany educational outreach activities about Antarctica have a long tradition and a broad variety of formats. For more than 30 years, polar researchers have been trying to bring fascinating wildlife, the remote environments of the Southern Ocean and the White Continent closer to the general public and to society as a whole.
2. Whom do we reach?

Widely used formats
Open-house-events, presentations or experiments for specific groups (“children’s university”, “academy for the elderly”, “family science nights”) are widely offered by several universities and research institutions. With these formats we reach a general public showing a primary interest in Antarctica and the audiences would usually comprise persons with a higher interest in education. 

Specialized formats
Specialized formats have been developed with the objective to strengthen the interface between schools and Antarctic institutions and experts. Three of these specialized formats which are carried out at the AWI are briefly outlined: (a) The programme HIGHSEA of the Alfred-Wegener-Institute Helmholtz-Centre for Polar and Marine Research (AWI), (b) the school lab SEASIDE and (c) the cooperation project “Cool classrooms” of the German “Polar Teachers” with the AWI. Apart from conveying knowledge and scientific results, environmental issues and protection of Antarctica are natural topics for all of the three formats.

(a) HIGHSEA
Every year the AWI accepts 24 high school students for the programme HIGHSEA. During their last three years of school, these students leave their schools for two days a week to study and learn at the AWI. For the school-subjects biology (as a major), chemistry, mathematics and English (each as additional subjects) all topics are covered at the AWI facilities by a group of teachers and researchers collaborating closely. All remaining subjects of the students are being taught at their normal school. For every group, their learning and studying culminates in a scientific expedition (e. g. to Iceland, Greenland, or Svalbard). The first group of HIGHSEA-students left the AWI ten years ago. Due to a vibrant alumni network the AWI has good knowledge of the careers chosen by former HIGHSEA-students. Comparison with regular German high-school students clearly shows the successes of the HIGHSEA-programme: Students taking up university studies of sciences are more than doubled (17.6% of an age group for Germany as a whole vs. 36.1% of the HIGHSEA-students). Moreover, dropout rates are drastically reduced: in Germany about 27% of the university students leave the university as non-graduates (i. e. without completing a bachelor). But only 1% of the HIGHSEA-students leave the university prior to graduation. Encouraging is also that about 10% of the former HIGHSEA-students come back to the AWI to work on or carry out their bachelor-, master- or PhD-theses.

(b) SEASIDE
With the AWI school laboratory SEASIDE the successful work with Highsea-students is transferred and extended to younger students and to a broader audience of teachers. The AWI offers courses for groups of children (grades 3-12), and for teachers who are interested to include Polar regions in their regular class work. Common to all courses is the duration: SEASIDE does not offer courses lasting only one day. Courses take at least 5-6 course-days, usually spread out over two month to give the students and/or teachers ample opportunity to familiarise themselves with and to work on the material in between visits to SEASIDE. 

(c) Coole Klassen
During the last International Polar Year (IPY), the cooperation Coole Klassen (Cool Classrooms) between the AG Polarlehrer (Working group “Polar teachers” within the German society of Polar Research) and the AWI was founded. If possible, the AWI provides a place for a teacher to participate on a polar research expedition. The cooperation slightly resembles the PolarTREC programme (Polar Teachers and Researchers exploring and collaborating) of ARCUS (Arctic Research Consortium of the United States), even though the later one is substantially bigger and more elaborate. Experiences in Germany have shown, that the Coole Klassen cooperation could possibly be improved, especially with regard to the application and the follow up processes after the expeditions.
3. What do we reach?

Regardless of the chosen format, the common result of any such educational outreach activity is a general sense of amazement and well-being among all participants — audience and researchers alike. Visitor’s feedback usually is enthusiastic and awe-inspired. The fascination for Antarctica, research about it and its environmental values are easily transferred from researchers to the public. Also, those researchers who get engaged tend to enjoy outreach activities, sharing their experiences with and talking to an interested audience. 

Here the fundamental question arises, whether or not our objectives for outreach and education activities have been met. What, in fact, are our objectives? How can we tell that one education and outreach activity was a full success, while another might not have met expectations? Widely used to assess success is the pure count of contacts: visitors to an exhibition, number of participants / size of the audience, number of clicks for a website. However, a qualitative and result-based assessment to determine whether the education and outreach activity had an (long-lasting) impact is rarely tried or undertaken.

With this contribution to the ATCM Workshop on Education and Outreach, we hope to start and stimulate a discussion about objectives and formats for Antarctic education and outreach activities that answer the following questions:

    • Could education and outreach activities be more than solely a transfer of knowledge and fascination from a researcher to the public? 
    • How can the message about environmental protection and conservation of the Antarctic be best communicated through education and outreach activities?
    • Could possibly education and outreach activities serve as a solid basis for decision-making processes or even political programmes?
    • Could such activities give incentives to the public to get involved in the preservation and protection of the Antarctic?
    • How could researchers be remunerated for their engagement in education and outreach activities? 
    • Is it possible to create through education and outreach activities “Antarctic ambassadors” of all ages that will engage themselves and encourage others to do the same?
    • How can the environmental footprint of educational field campaigns be minimized?
4. Outlook

Building on our extensive shared experience during the last IPY and utilising the expertise represented by the participants at the ATCM Workshop on Education and Outreach, we hope to be able to generate a strong collective impulse to carry outreach and education one step further with respect to the questions brought up in the title and in the text above.

