





Antarctic Lakes and Global Climate Perspectives: The Indian Footprint









Antarctic Lakes and Global Climate Perspectives: The Indian Footprint
Abstract
Abrupt climate change has become a key issue in paleoclimate research. In particular, the climate changes and its causative factors within the Holocene is a matter of great interest and importance. Under the aegis of the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), and R&D Wing of the Government of India, a long-term Science Plan of paleolimnological studies focusing on the lakes of the Schirmacher and Larsemann Hills of East Antarctica has been formulated. Variations in the  physical parameters of the sediments  (grain size, environmental magnetism), and variations if any,  in the annual nutrient chemistry of the lakes along with pigment analysis of organic matter in the sediments are planned/in progress to understand the response of these lakes to a changing climate.
Introduction
It is well established that lakes are “sentinels of change”. They are sensitive and respond rapidly to changes in climate, integrating information about these changes in their sediments. Lakes, which record a host of paleoenvironmental conditions in their sediments not only serve as archives for their past-history but also record past environmental conditions of its surrounding region (Smeltzer and Swain, 1985) and mechanisms of climate change. Lakes respond well to changes in environmental conditions such as seasonal temperature shifts, period of ice-free conditions, catchment runoff and input of glacial melt-water. These responses are reflected in the variation of sediment composition and associated proxy variables.  
Abrupt climate change has become a key issue in paleoclimate research. In particular, the climate changes and its causative  factors within the Holocene is a matter of great interest and importance. Un­derstanding the processes and dynam­ics of rapid and high-amplitude climate shifts (e.g. ENSO, PDO, NAO/AO, Heinrich and D/O events, Younger Dryas) is crucial for a better assessment of the probability of such changes in the future, which bear risks for landscapes, ecosystems, and or­ganisms of all sorts, including humans. “Reliable risk assessment should not ex­clusively be based on computer model simulations but also on accurate observa­tional and high-resolution paleoclimate data” (S. Rahmstorf, EGU meeting Vienna, 20 April 2009). The approaches being developed in paleolimnology provides robust reconstructions of climate variability and of the lacustrine ecosystem’s sensitivity to climate changes (e.g., Batterbee et al., 2004; Pienitz et al., 2004; Smol, 2008). Insights into the hydrological cycle can deciphered from lakes along with long-time records where other archives cannot (eg., trees and ice cores).  Relatively little progress has howver, been achieved in the area of developing proxy records that provide sufficient resolution to resolve decadal- to century-scale variability over several millennia, and to understand and refine empirical climate-proxy relationships. 

India’s endeavours in Antarctic paleolimnology
The importance and utility of lake studies has been well recognised by the Indian paleoclimatic community.  Under the aegis of the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), and R&D Wing of the Government of India, a long-term Science Plan of paleolimnological studies focusing on the lakes of the Schirmacher and Larsemann Hills of East Antarctica has been formulated.   Initial studies were confined to hydrogen and oxygen isotopic analysis of the lake waters of Schirmacher Hills and the textural characteristics and mineralogy of the sediments from the lake bottom (Sinha et al. 1999; Sinha and Chatterjee, 2000a,b; Sinha et al. 2000a, b).  More recently, Govil et al. (2011) have reconstructed the Holocene paleoenvironmental conditions by studying the biogenic silica, sand and organic carbon concentrations in a sediment core from the L2 Lake of the Larsemann Hills. They have inferred that the high sand (%) during the ~ 8.3 - ~ 5 cal ka B.P was due to increased glacio-fluvial deposition. Rock magnetic and preliminary organic geochemical work have been carried out  recently on a few sediment cores from the lakes of the Schirmacher Hills.   The high-resolution rock magnetic data obtained indicate variations in magnetic concentration, mineralogy and grain-size. These variations throw light on the paleoenvironmental conditions that prevailed during the Holocene (Warrier et al., 2014).  Multiproxy dataset generated from sediments have been utilized for other paleoclimatic interpretations (Achyuthan et al. 2008; Govil et al., 2011). Sharma et al. (2007) analyzed the pollen and spores from a sediment core in one of the largest lakes of the Schirmacher Hills and reconstructed the paleoclimatic variations during the Holocene.  On the basis of a study of the palynomorphs from this lake, the climatic history of the past 7130 years has been deciphered (Bera, 2004). A more recent paper on environmental magnetism (Warrier et al., 2014) has interpreted the Antarctic climate variation on glacial-interglacial time-scales with the core spanning the last 42 ka.

Studies planned
The past few years of work have helped the Indian scientists to streamline the lake studies. The working group has identified a few lakes (continental and island lakes) in both the Schirmacher and Larsemann Hills as the representative ones, wherein biogeochemical studies are being carried out on  sustained basis. Intra-seasonal measurements are also planned to assess the effect of shifting weather system and its impact on the lake geochemistry.  Different approaches such as elemental analysis of lake waters as well as sediments, stable isotopic geochemistry (e.g. 13C and 15N), variations in the physical parameters of the sediments  (grain size, environmental magnetism), and variations if any,  in the annual nutrient chemistry of the lakes along with pigment analysis of organic matter in the sediments are planned/in progress to understand the response of these lakes to a changing climate.

References
Achyuthan, H., Asthana, R., Ravindra, R., Eastoe, C., 2008. Radiocarbon Dates and Sedimentation within the Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica. SCAR Open Science Conference, St. Petersburg, Russia, 8 – 11th July,155 p. 
Batterbee, R.W., et alk., (Eds) 2004. Post Climate Variability through Europe and Africa, Developments in Paleoenvironmental Research v(6), Springer, dordecht. pp.638.
Bera, S.K. 2004: Late Holocene palaeo-winds and climatic changes in Eastern Antarctica as indicated by long-distance transported pollen–spores and local microbiota in polar lake core sediments. Current Science 86, 1485–1488.
Govil, P., Mazumder, A., Tiwari, A., and Kumar, S. 2011. Holocene climate variability from lake sediment core in Larsemann Hills, Antarctica. Journal of Geological Society of India, v.78, 30-35.
Pienitz, R., et al., 2004. Long-Term Environmental Change in Arctic and Antarctic Lakes, Developments in Paleoenvironmentals Research, v. 8, Springer, Dordecht, pp.562.
Sharma, C., Chauhan, M.S. and Sinha, R. 2007. Studies in Holocene climatic changes from Priyadarshini Lake Sediments, East Antarctica: the palynological evidence. Journal of Geological Society of India, v.69, ppp. 92-96. 
Sinha, R. and Chatterjee, A. 2000a. Mineralogy of Lacustrine Sediments in the Schirmacher Range Area, East Antarctica, Journal of Geological Society of India, v.56(1),39-45.
Sinha, R. and Chatterjee, A. 2000b. Thermal structure, sedimentology and hydro-geochemistry of Lake Priyadarshini, Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica. Department of Ocean Development, Technical Publication, 14, pp.279-308.
Sinha, R., Chatterjee, A., and Panda, K. 1999. Thermal structure and heat-budget of Lake Priyadarshini, Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica. Current Science, v.76(5), 680-683.
Sinha, R., Sharma, C., and Chauhan, M.S. 2000a. Sedimentological and pollen studies of cores from lake Priyadarshini, Eastern Antarctica, Paleobotanist. V49, 1-8.
Sinha, R., Navada, S.V., Chatterjee, A., Kumar, R., Mitra, A., and Nair, A.R. 2000b. Hydrogen and Oxygen Isotopes of Antarctic Lake Waters, Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica, Current Science, v.78 (8), 992-995.
Smeltzer, E., Swain, E.B. 1985: Answering lake management questions with paleolimnology. Pages 268-274 in Lake Reserves. Management - Practical Applications.  Proceedings of 4th Annual Conference and Symposium (NALMS), 390.
Smol, J.P., 2008. Pollution of Lakes and Rivers: A Paleoenvironmental Perspective – 2nd Ed, wiley-Backwell Publishing, Oxford, pp.383.
Warrier, a.K., Mahesh, B.S., Rahul Mohan, Shankar, R., Asthana, R., and Ravindra, R. 2014. Glacial-interglacial climatic variations at the Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica: The first report from environmental magnetism. Paleogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology.


