





Damage to the Observation Hill Cross (HSM 20)








Damage to the Observation Hill Cross (HSM 20)

Information Paper submitted by New Zealand



Background

This paper advises the Meeting of damage to the Observation Hill Cross (HSM 20), and steps taken in response.


The Observation Hill Cross

The Observation Hill Cross stands on Observation Hill on Ross Island, close to Robert Falcon Scott’s Discovery Hut, McMurdo Station and Scott Base.  The Cross was erected in January 1913 by the British Antarctic Expedition as a memorial to Scott and his party, who perished on their return journey from the South Pole in March 1912. 

In 1972 the Cross was included in the list of Historic Monuments adopted under Recommendation ATCM VII-9.  The listing of the Cross was jointly proposed by the Governments of the United Kingdom and New Zealand. 

Article 8(4) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection provides that “Listed Historic Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed.”


Damage to the Cross and prosecution

On 24 January 2015 a private of the New Zealand Army, stationed at Scott Base, damaged the Cross by scratching three letters and the year “2015” into the front of the monument.  

Following consultation among relevant New Zealand authorities as to the appropriate legal response, the service member was charged with damaging the Cross under the Armed Forces Discipline Act 1971 (AFDA).  The AFDA contains a catch-all provision whereby any act that would be an offence under the civil (i.e. non-military) law of New Zealand is also an offence under the AFDA, and can be prosecuted through the military justice system accordingly.  In this case the relevant civil offence was contained in section 27 of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994, which makes it an offence to damage, remove, or destroy any Historic Monument.  

A summary trial, presided over by an NZDF officer, was held on 6 March 2015.  The service member entered a guilty plea.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade provided a written statement, prepared in consultation with Antarctica New Zealand, describing the history and significance of the Cross. 

The service member was found guilty and received a punishment of 17 days’ confinement to barracks, plus an order for compensation of $500 to be paid to Antarctica New Zealand for the repair of the Cross.

The service member wrote a letter of apology to the Chief Executive of Antarctica New Zealand and the Executive Director of the Antarctic Heritage Trust, and met with them on 16 March 2015 to deliver the letter and the payment of $500.
In the view of the New Zealand Government, this outcome is appropriate given the inexperience of the service member and the relatively superficial nature of the damage, while also sending a valuable message to personnel stationed at Scott Base as to the significance of the Observation Hill Cross and other monuments on Ross Island.  


Repairs to the Cross

Antarctica New Zealand has forwarded the compensation payment to the Antarctic Heritage Trust to assist with its repair efforts.  In addition to the damage caused by the service member, other initials of unknown origin appear on the front and back of the Cross.

The damage will be covered for the winter months and reassessed in October/November 2015.

