





Special WG on Competent Authorities session

Implementing the Madrid Protocol
Dutch experiences and questions for the ATCM workshop of Competent Authorities










Implementing the Madrid Protocol
Dutch experiences and questions for the ATCM workshop of Competent Authorities
Information Paper presented by The Netherlands
    1. Introduction
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (hereinafter: the Protocol) and Measures that have been adopted since 1991, have been implemented into Dutch law through the Protection of Antarctica Act 1998 (hereinafter: the Act) and legislation under this act. One of the main instruments for regulating human activities in Antarctica is the permit obligation: The Act requires any person (individual or company; regardless the nationality) who organizes an activity from the Netherlands to Antarctica to apply for a permit and to meet the other requirements of the Dutch legislation (Art. 8). The specific permit requirements of Annex II and V to the Protocol have been integrated into this general permit for Antarctic activities (Art. 6, 8 and 9). In addition to this permit requirement, more specific obligations and prohibitions (e.g., the duty of care obligation of Art. 3, the mining prohibition and the specific prohibitions of the Annexes to the Protocol) apply to all Dutch citizens participating in activities in Antarctica, irrespective of the country from where the activities are organized.
Competent authority for the Act are two Ministers: the Minister of Infrastructure and the Environment and the Minister of Economic Affairs. On behalf of the Ministers, the Department of Waterways and Public Works is responsible for the practical activities to execute the legislation, such as the assessment of permit applications under the Act. The Dutch government has drafted a policy framework for the Polar Regions, which contains also further guidance for the implementation of the domestic Antarctic legislation. 
With this paper, the Netherlands aims to share some experiences regarding the permitting practice for Antarctic activities and certain concrete challenges that we encounter. The paper is deliberately short as we expect that reading the non-papers of all Contracting Parties will be time-consuming. The structure of this paper follows the structure of the workshop-agenda, although some of the items have been combined (Section 3). Next, these experiences will be translated to a number of concrete issues for our workshop-discussions (Section 4). However, before discussing these more substantial issues, we will first provide a brief impression of the number and type of permit applications that we receive on an annual basis (Section 2).
    2. The Dutch situation
The competent authority receives between 6 and 10 applications from different organizers each year, most of which relate to tourist activities. Typically, these activities are relatively small scaled ship-based tourism expeditions. The other applications relate to Dutch researchers who did not receive explicit authorization under the legal regimes of other Contracting Parties to the Protocol. Regularly, these activities are planned and conducted in collaboration with the British Antarctic Survey, Alfred Wegner Institute or other institutes in other Contracting Parties.
    3. Experiences and Challenges
Agenda item III - Issues with activities involving participants/organizations from multiple nations/
Agenda item IV - Issues involving activities permitted by other national authorities
Under the Dutch Act, a permit is not needed if the person can demonstrate that the activity has received an authorization of another Contracting Party to the Protocol. In that situation the person will not be considered as ‘organizer’. In practice this regularly requires the competent authority to contact colleagues in other Contracting Parties to ensure that the relevant person has indeed received an authorization. There are several occasions in which this approach has worked well; however, we have experienced some difficulties:
‘forum shopping due to different ‘standards’ and/or different interpretations of the provisions of the protocol’

    • Dutch Law does not permit any organizer to travel to ASPA’s unless for scientific purposes. Therefore recently one organizer was denied permission to carry out activities involving visiting ASPA’s. However, part of the journey including ASPA visit was eventually organized through other nations. At the moment a proposal is in the making suggesting a change in Dutch Law to bring the legislation concerning ASPA’s more in line with legislation of other Contracting Parties. 

    • Furthermore, in at least one occasion, an activity that would not have been authorized under the Dutch Act, because it was not in line with Dutch policy regarding the use of motorized vehicles in the Antarctic, was authorized by another Contracting Party since a multi-national team was involved. 

The concrete cases showed that differences in interpretation of provisions and assessment criteria may constitute impulses for forum shopping.
It is our believe expectation these type of concerns are likely to increase with the further diversification of human activities in Antarctica and the further development of domestic policies regarding the assessment of diverse types of activities in the Antarctic. Against this background, it appears valuable to discuss the diversification of activities in Antarctica at the ATCM in order to assess whether further ATCM guidance would be desirable.

Agenda item VI - Issues with requested (existing and new) activities?
Agenda item VII - Activities conflicting with purpose and principles of Protocol
During several previous ATCMs, the diversification of activities in Antarctica has been discussed. Certain states have expressed the view that the allowance of activities in Antarctica should be determined on the basis of the Protocol’s provisions. However, it has also been noted that the general provisions of the Protocol (e.g., Article 2 and 3 of the Protocol) often provide no clear guidance in respect to whether certain types of activities should be allowed in the Antarctic. For instance, what does the designation of Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science, mean for  the permission for allowance of the very divers non-scientific activities in the Antarctic? What does it mean that Contracting Parties should take into account the wilderness values of Antarctica in the planning and conduct of activities in Antarctica? Even though in this field for National Parks all over the world explicit policy decisions have been made, it is still unclear if Antarctica is open for all types of tourism and non-governmental activities. The problem is, however, that making no policy choices in this respect, implies the decision that there are no restrictions. The Dutch Competent Authority experiences this as a difficulty in view of the increasing diversification of activities. Applications for motorized tourist activities and (more recently) the use of drones for non-scientific purposes are among the various concrete examples. To a certain extent, the Netherlands have developed domestic policy in respect of these issues, but as noted above, differences between domestic policies among the Contracting Parties to the Protocol may result in forum shopping. Therefore, a more international approach at the level of the ATCM appears important.




    4. Discussion

The initiative to discuss the issues that Competent Authorities encounter is very much appreciated, and we are looking forward to the exchange of information and discussions during the upcoming workshop. Based on our experiences, we would like to underline the importance of:
    • The strengthening of informal contacts between Competent Authorities to learn from each other, to prevent forum shopping and to improve joint efforts to ensure compliance of all activities with the Protocol and other ATS provisions;
    • The necessity of harmonizing interpretations of the Protocol and other ATS provisions in view of permit applications of divers activities;  
    • Joint efforts to work out the concrete meaning of the concept of wilderness protection in Antarctica, particularly in view of the assessment of permit applications and/or the execution of requirements in respect of Environmental Impact Assessment;
    • Related to the previous issue but from a broader perspective: initiating discussions among the Consultative Parties on the diversification of non-scientific activities in Antarctica;
    • Discussing the need for a more strategic approach in respect of tourism, for instance to prevent undesirable cumulative impacts for Antarctic values.




