





The successful eradication of Poa pratensis from Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula









The successful eradication of Poa pratensis from Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula 

Information Paper submitted by Argentina, Spain and the United Kingdom 
Introduction
The grass Poa pratensis (also known as the smooth or common meadow-grass) was introduced inadvertently to Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula, during transplantation experiments in 1954-55. Two Patagonian tree species were transplanted from Tierra de Fuego to Cierva Point to assess their capacity for survival in Antarctica.  Although the trees did not survive, the accompanying grass (Poa pratensis), which was inadvertently introduced with the trees, became established within the original experimental plot.  Since 1995 the plant has extended its area of coverage by lateral growth (i.e. increasing from 40 cm to over 1 m in diameter in 17 years), although micro-climatic conditions have not yet allowed for fertile seeds to develop, disrupting sexual reproduction and hence natural seed dispersion. Of particular concern, the location where this non-native grass has established is near ASPA 134, which was designated to protect diverse plant communities and bird populations.  
Annex II Article 4 (4) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty states that ‘Any other plant or animal introduced into the Antarctic Treaty area not native to that area, including any progeny, shall be removed or disposed of, by incineration or by equally effective means, so as to be rendered sterile, unless it is determined that they pose no risk to native flora or fauna’. Within this normative framework, and in a context of current climate change, since 2010, Argentina, Spain and the United Kingdom have been collaborating extensively with the aim of protecting Antarctic biodiversity from this non-native grass. The description of the colonization status of Poa pratensis, and the on-going investigations and future eradication plans were presented to the Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) for consideration (ATCM XXXV-IP 13 and ATCM XXXVI-IP 35, respectively).
After considering the existing baseline knowledge of Poa pratensis and assessing its invasive risk at Cierva Point, a joint decision to undertake an eradication attempt was made. For over a year, a procedure on how to approach the eradication was discussed (taking into account several methods) and agreed by the three Parties.   Pre-deployment work included the (1) drafting of an Environmental Impact Assessment, (2) the issuing of relevant permits to work in the field and (3) the gathering of specific tools/equipment/suits that would allow the complete and safe removal of this non-native plant from Antarctica. 
Field work
During the austral summer season of 2014/15, an international research team composed of botanic experts from Spain and an environmental manager/biologist from Argentina worked side by side for three full intensive days. 
During day 1, the area was identified with reference to the Poa pratensis colony description and a general site survey undertaken (identification of accompanying species, differentiation from the native species Deschampsia antarctica, examination of the floral state of both plants, examination of the morphometry of Poa pratensis, taking of photographic records of the area and individual species, and the examining the ground depth profile) followed by sampling biota in the area (invertebrates within the plot, grass spikes and stems, accompanying plant species, setting up of pitfall traps for nearby invertebrates and live samples for ex situ laboratory experiments). After assessing the current status of Poa pratensis, a final meeting took place, and favoured by good climatic condition and conditions at the site that made work feasible, a decision to carry out the eradication was made.   
During day 2, the researchers proceeded with the mechanical removal of plant material, according to the measures previously defined. Clean tools and equipment were used and special over-clothing worn once at the site. A canvas tarpaulin was laid out around the non-native grass mat, which was moved as different parts of the plant colony were removed. Resistant plastic boxes and bags were prepared to collect material and loose rocks at the mat periphery were removed and cleaned. Mechanical eradication removed all aerial vegetative structures containing Poa pratensis and other accompanying species, as well as all soil with roots, rhizomes and other organic material. Approximately 350 kg of material (contained in 14 boxes of around 25 kg each) was removed from the site. Mechanical cleaning with brushes was also performed around rocks adjacent to where the plant had been to eliminate all rhizomes and organic material. 
During day 3 controlled burn of the rock substrate was undertaken to completely eliminate all Poa pratensis roots and potential propagules, records were made of each box of soil and organic waste that was to be removed from Antarctica and biological samples were processed (including the preparation of herbarium specimens, drying of springtails, immobilization of invertebrates, and the set up and preparation of live and frozen samples for safe removal from Antarctica).
During the last day, the team completed the work, achieving the overall objective of the planned eradication as all plant and soil material was removed from its original site, and the rocky substrate was carefully inspected for the presence of rhizomes, thereby minimizing the possibility of Poa pratensis re-growth. 
Future steps
It was agreed that dried samples of Poa pratensis should be incorporated into the plant collections of each Party (i.e. the Instituto Antártico Argentino (IAA) from Argentina, Herbarium of the University Autonomous of Madrid  (MAUAM) with the agreement of the Spanish Polar Committee from Spain and the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) Herbarium (Herbarium Code: AAS) from the United Kingdom). Also, it was agreed that a dried sample should be left at Primavera Station to facilitate recognition of this non-native plant during future monitoring at the site.  
Although all organic material containing Poa pratensis vegetation is thought to have been removed from Antarctica, it is essential to regularly monitor the area where once this non-native species was able to establish. In order to do so, an Annual Monitoring Plan will be developed that not only includes how to systematically evaluate the area for the presence of Poa pratensis and how to proceed in case new plants are found, but also to raise awareness of this species in several stages of the pre-season preparations such as Training Courses specifically given to scientists and logistic personnel travelling to Antarctica, to thereby further improve monitoring actions. 
This Annual Monitoring Plan is intended to be discussed and agreed during the next inter-sessional period. It is anticipated that the Plan development and outcome will be shared with all Parties and the CEP, and if found to be satisfactory after implementation, it is proposed that the Plan be included in the Non-Native Species Manual, contributing to its Monitoring section.
We propose that in future this Information Paper might be referenced within the CEP Non-native Species Manual as a contribution to the ‘Response’ section.
In order to continue contributing to the Non-Native Species Manual, it is intended that Argentina, Spain and United Kingdom, and any other interested CEP Members, will work during the inter-sessional period to develop an eradication protocol to provide guidance to the Parties on the eradication of non-native vascular plants in Antarctica.


Supporting references
Corte A (1961). La primera fanerógama adventicia hallada en el continente antártico. Contribución del Instituto Antártico Argentino 62: 3–16.

Pertierra LR, Lara F, Benayas J & Hughes KA (2013). Poa pratensis L., current status of the longest-established non-native vascular plant in the Antarctic. Polar Biology 36: 1473-1481.


