





A risk-based approach to safe operations of unmanned aircraft systems in the United States Antarctic Program (USAP)









A risk-based approach to safe operations of unmanned aircraft systems in the United States Antarctic Program (USAP)
Information Paper submitted by the United States

Summary
At ATCM XXXVII/CEP XVII, the United States submitted WP 51 to encourage discussion of the safe and environmentally-sound use of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) for research and monitoring.  As a follow-up, this Information Paper conveys experiences and current practices relating to UAS operations within USAP.
UAS in the USAP
UAS have been employed in a wide variety of research programs within the USAP.   Dr. John Cassano, of the University of Colorado – Boulder, with funding from the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF), has conducted studies of mesoscale scale atmospheric circulation studies using two small, fixed-wing UAS.  The Center for the Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets (CReSIS) at the University of Kansas developed mid-sized UAS to perform radar soundings and collect images of the ice sheet in the Whillans Ice Stream area.  National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) researchers estimated abundances of krill-dependent predators with multicopters to help fulfill Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) monitoring obligations (IP XX). 
As a result of the rapid development and increasing accessibility of UAS technology, in September 2014, the USAP released a programmatic notice stating that UAS use in Antarctica by USAP personnel was prohibited without specific authorization by the NSF.  Requests for UAS use by USAP participants or on/near USAP facilities are currently considered on a case-by-case basis.  Reviews of proposed UAS operations are based on guidelines for operationally- and environmentally-safe use of UAS informed by a risk assessment process.
Operational Guidelines
Guidelines for the use of UAS in the USAP are included in a chapter of the program’s Air Operations Manual (AOM).  The UAS guidelines are based primarily on regulations established by Civil Aviation Authorities (CAA; e.g. FAA, ICAO).  The USAP continues to make improvements to the UAS guidelines.  The most recent additions include guidelines for smaller classes of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) as those technologies become more prevalent and as CAA rules and regulations evolve.
The USAP AOM chapter on UAS includes guidance on: planning and preflight operations, including the development of a Concept of Operations (ConOps); rules for flight operations, including in-flight emergency procedures and safe separation; crew requirements, including training and certification; and airworthiness and flight safety standards.  The USAP divides UAS into three categories based on weight and airspeed (I: <25 kg, <70 kt; II: 25-150 kg, <200 kt; III: >150 kg, >200 kt) and is currently considering a fourth category, the “microUAS” weighing less than 2.25 kg.
In addition to the ConOps, USAP participants are required to submit documentation such as certifications, log books, and manufacturer specifications and to complete a questionnaire.  The questionnaire allows for collection of information about the UAS and the planned operations to be reviewed by the USAP Airworthiness and Flight Safety Review Board.  Prospective UAS users must answer questions about: aircraft specifications; command, control, and communications; configuration and software management; pre- and in-flight operations; maintenance; certifications and qualifications; and the area of operations.
USAP participants proposing to use small and micro-class UAS are advised of additional requirements for those vehicles including the use of blade guards; high-visibility coloring; constant maintenance of visual contact with the UAV; restricted operating radius (<300 m) and altitude (<120 m above ground/sea level); and spatial and temporal separation from all other aircraft and non-participant personnel.  Commercial, off-the-shelf (COTS) status in these small-sized UAV is considered sufficient for airworthiness certification.  Pilot certification from a recognized authority is required, but the requirement is more flexible for pilots of these smaller craft given their reduced risks.
Ship-based UAS operators are required to submit a ConOps, a completed questionnaire, and certifications of crew qualifications and airworthiness.  In addition, the UAS crew is expected to establish and maintain regular communications with the ship’s captain regarding the intended UAS operations.  A standard operating procedure (SOP) is under development for USAP ship-based UAS operations.  The SOP will include special considerations for maritime operations including: weather and wind; ship operations; UAV retrieval from the sea or sea ice; and take-off/launch and landing methods and space.  The SOP will be based, in part, on risk assessments for ship-based operations and can be adapted to projects using small or micro-UAS, particularly those capable of vertical take-off and landing (VTOL; i.e. multicopters).
Risk Assessment
NSF safety experts performed a risk assessment of UAS operations to validate and inform the evolving USAP guidelines.  The risk assessment process involved the following: thinking of the hazards of operation; imagining events that might be caused by those hazards; estimating the probability and severity of those events before controls are implemented; noting the resulting risk; thinking of controls; rethinking the probability and severity with controls in place; and noting the remaining risk.  As a result of a shortage of reliable data on UAS technology, this carefully considered risk assessment process was necessarily subjective and resulted in conclusions about the relative risks of various activities rather than, for example, quantifications of absolute risks, but was nonetheless very valuable.
The general risk assessment matrices for the three categories of UAS and for micro-UAS with VTOL capability (e.g. quadcopters) are included in the Attachment.  The risk (very low to extreme) of an event is based on its probability (frequent [level I] to unlikely [level IV]) combined with its severity (grave [level A] to minor [level D]).  For example, an out-of-control UAV could damage property (e.g. structures, vehicles, runway) if it crashed.  The probability of this occurring is a bit higher (level III) than for the UAV colliding with a flying aircraft as a result of the greater amount and occurrence of property the UAV is likely to encounter.  The severity of the outcome is relatively low (level B) because people will not be injured (risk of injury to personnel on the ground is assessed separately).  The resulting risk is rated at medium.  Controls, or mitigation measures, including crew qualifications and currency, as detailed in the USAP AOM for UAS, should reduce the probability (level IV).  The risk, with controls in place, is therefore reduced to very low.
The risk assessment process can be tailored and conducted for individual projects.  In those cases, a final step of analyzing any risks remaining after mitigation/controls are in place versus the benefits of the operation can be undertaken.  
Review Process
Currently, the use of UAS by USAP participants requires special authorization by the NSF.  Prospective UAS operators requesting authorization are notified of the required compliance with the guidelines in the USAP AOM chapter on UAS and that they will need to prepare and submit a ConOps and completed questionnaire.  
NSF science program officers confirm the scientific justification for the UAS operations.  The documentation and questionnaire responses provided by the UAS operators are then considered by the Airworthiness and Flight Safety Review Board.  This safety and operational review ensures the protection of USAP persons and property.  The operations information can be incorporated into a risk assessment customized to the project and can allow for the Review Board to consider the resulting risk-benefit analysis.  For ship-based UAS, the ship’s captain and crew also review the planned operations.
The final step before authorization is granted is an environmental review.  Reviewers consider operational parameters intended to minimize the waste release resulting from the irretrievable loss of the UAV including: maintenance of visual line-of-sight, when applicable; weather and other operating conditions; in-flight emergency procedures, including return-to-home; and operational parameters such as minimum battery/fuel level and operating radius.  The environmental review also considers plans for operating near concentrations of wildlife, Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas (ASMA & ASPA), and historic sites and monuments (HSM) and suggests mitigation measures.  Mitigation measures are evolving for operating near and/or monitoring wildlife populations as research on UAS safe operating distances from wildlife becomes available (Goebel et al., 2015 & Vas et al., 2015).
Considerations
The USAP guidelines and the review process for the use of UAS are thorough yet adaptable to many different UAS, projects, and objectives.  The United States welcomes discussion of our risk-based approach to operationally- and environmentally-safe use of UAS in Antarctica.  We are interested in sharing best practices and look forward to working with other national Antarctic programs as requirements and standards evolve.
Resources
Websites accessed April 2015
USAP NSF Programmatic Notice, dated September 15, 2014, Restrictions for Use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in the United States Antarctic Program,  https://www.nsf.gov/geo/plr/plr_announce/uav_policy_09152014.pdf
John Cassano, Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, http://cires.colorado.edu/about/organization/fellows/john-j-cassano/
Center for the Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets (CRESIS), University of Kansas, https://www.cresis.ku.edu
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration: Antarctic Ecosystem Research Division (NOAA Fisheries, U.S. AMLR), http://swfsc.noaa.gov/aerd/
Goebel, M.E., Perryman, W.L., Hinke, J.T., Krause, D.J., Hann, N.A., Gardner, S., LeRoi, D.J. 2015. A small unmanned aerial system for estimating abundance and size of Antarctic predators.  Polar Biology, Open Access. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00300-014-1625-4
Vas, E., Lescroel, A., Duriez, O., Boguszewski, G., Gremillet, D. 2015. Approaching birds with drones: first experiments and ethical guidelines. Biology Letters 11, 20140754. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2014.0754

