





The COMNAP Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) project











The COMNAP Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) project

Background
At the COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM XXVI) in August 2014, members agreed that COMNAP should lead a project to explore the issues related to how national Antarctic programs might deliver their science in the next decades. Such a project is timely since many national Antarctic programs are currently investing significant amounts of money into the upgrading of their facilities and on new vessels.  Still others have just completed or are in the process of completing their countries’ Antarctic science strategies. Such strategies will take many of those country’s science programmes through to the next decade. SCAR has also just completed an Antarctic Science Horizon Scan process. The SCAR Horizon Scan outcomes can be found in the article “A roadmap for Antarctic and Southern Ocean science for the next two decades and beyond” published in Nature1 and Antarctic Science2.  These outcomes will be important when Antarctic research priorities for funding are considered by Consultative State governments3 and several national Antarctic programs have already requested Horizon Scan presentations to assist with their planning. 
At the time of writing of this document, COMNAP had begun the ARC Project under the guidance of two co-convenors and an international ARC Steering Committee (ARC-SC) (see https://www.comnap.aq/Projects/SitePages/ARC.aspx). The project will ultimately deliver information by way of two community-wide surveys, a workshop and a series of white papers on practical and technical challenges in order to assist national Antarctic programs in planning delivery of their future Antarctic research. 
The SCAR Antarctic Science Horizon Scan 
A ‘horizon scan’ is a priority-setting method that systemically searches for opportunities, which are then used to articulate a vision for future research directions4.  SCAR initiated a Horizon Scan process, the process resulted in 80 science questions within seven clusters or themes that were collectively considered to be a vision for future Antarctic research. The outcomes were published in Nature and Antarctic Science.
The Way Forward
While SCAR led the Horizon Scan process of identifying what Antarctic science questions are likely to be of importance in the future, it is national Antarctic programs and governments which fund and deliver  science carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Several national Antarctic programs have indicated that they are now working within their countries to develop national Antarctic science strategies bearing in mind the outcomes of the SCAR Horizon Scan.   
COMNAP is well-placed to assist national Antarctic programs to understand future science support needs and the technological and operational challenges such science presents. Therefore, COMNAP is leading the next step in the ‘roadmap’ process, which is, to assist national Antarctic programs to practically and technically realise their science aspirations.
Using the SCAR Horizon Scan roadmap as an indication of future science, a review of the 80 questions proposed reveals a number of challenges for national Antarctic programs of a practical and technical nature.  These challenges are broadly identified as:
Challenge 1: Collaboration
Challenge 2: Extraordinary Logistics Requirements
Challenge 3: Human Resources
Challenge 4: Technology 
Challenge 5: Infrastructure
Challenge 6: Energy 
Challenge 7: Long-term, Sustainable Funding/Budget  Considerations
Addressing all seven of the identified challenges is not possible at this point in time.  So it was agreed the ARC Project would focus on Challenges 2 and 4, although it was expected that the project would also go some way to inform our understanding of Challenges 1, 5 and 6, since those challenges are very much integrated with 2 and 4.
The project does not focus on other issues that were raised during the SCAR Horizon Scan process or which presented themselves in response to the outcomes, such as the environmental challenges (conservation issues) and issues around safety in science support.  These are considered fundamental, underlying considerations in any science undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area.
COMNAP’s challenge – assisting national Antarctic programs
As a result of identifying likely future Antarctic science requirements and associated challenges in delivery of such science, COMNAP is now in the middle of the ARC Project which began with the formation of an international Steering Committee, and the subsequent launch of the first of two on-line, open access surveys. At the time of writing this paper, survey 1 had been accessed by over 300 individuals.  Its outcomes would inform us of the technology priorities, access and delivery needs and identify where gaps in technology and required infrastructure might exist and therefore need consideration.
Survey 2 will use the top priorities identified in survey 1 to address funding requirements, timeframes for technology development or sourcing and extraordinary logistics requirements especially those of a highly collaborative nature. 
Communities of researchers and those with technical and operations, engineering and communications expertise have also been asked to submit white papers on their topics which will provide guidance to national Antarctic programs on describing the technological challenges and the logistical support envisioned to conduct the research identified.
The results of the surveys and the white papers will be considered in a workshop largely consisting of the ARC Project Steering Committee members that will produce a document for national Antarctic program reference which highlights the likely technology and logistical needs for future Antarctic Treaty area science. The workshop is scheduled to take place in late August 2015.  It is anticipated that the resulting reference document will be available by the end of 2015 or in early 2016. 

