





Special WG on Competent Authorities session - French issues and experiences of relevance to the paragraphs III to VII of the agenda









French issues and experiences of relevance to the paragraphs III to VII of the agenda
This document highlights the issues of relevance for the Competent Authority of France, the TAAF (Terres Australes et Antarctiques Françaises / French Southern and Antarctic Lands) in relation to the NCA Forum agenda items III, IV, V, VI and VII.

NCA Forum Agenda Item III: What issues have Parties’ competent authorities encountered when handling activities involving participants from multiple nations and/or multiple organizations? Short introduction followed by discussion.
So far, the TAAF never had to process EIAs from multiple organizations.
The TAAF authorizes every season cruise and yachting activities involving participants from multiple nations. The permits apply to the activity as a whole, notwithstanding the nationality of the passengers and crew. In such cases, for the moment, the TAAF has only been dealing with French expedition leaders, without any contacts with the tourists from different nationalities. Furthermore, contacts with other NCAs remain limited but do occur directly or indirectly on occasional basis, eg. for the 2014/15 season:
    • - A French film team has requested permission to shoot videos in Antarctica onboard a vessel operated by Argentina. The Argentinian NCA has contacted TAAF for information and courtesy.
    • - A French film team contacted the TAAF, informing of the German nationality of the expedition leader and of the EIA procedure in progress in Germany. The TAAF asked the operator to make sure that the permit comprises both the nautical and audiovisual activity.
    • - The paddle board challenge mentioned in ATS Circular 19-2014 implied extensive contacts with the Chilean NCA in order to verify the information provided by the expedition leader.

Discussion: As the French NCA has denied so far six activities (all mentioned in the Denial of Authorization section of the EIES), TAAF would propose to enhance dialogue amongst the NCAs in order to avoid any kind of forum shopping phenomenon. Would the Parties welcome a more systematic and bilateral information exchange, when contacted by a foreign operator, or with foreign nationals, especially when it deals with yachting and sport challenges? 

NCA Forum Agenda Item IV: What issues have Parties’ competent authorities encountered when handling activities where various elements of the activity have been handled/approved/permitted by different national authorities? Short introduction followed by discussion.
So far, the TAAF has never been confronted to issues where various elements of the activity have been handled/approved/permitted by different national authorities. In the case such a situation occurs, the TAAF would contact the relevant NCA for coordination.

NCA Forum agenda item V: What issues have Parties’ competent authorities encountered when assessing safety issues related to activities?
    1) Lack of expertise and legal basis
For the French NCA, the main issue in assessing the safety of activities lies in the diversification of activities, including sport challenges. Furthermore, the absence of a binding agreement or reference in the Antarctic Treaty recommendations makes it difficult to settle a specific security framework for these new activities.
For example, the TAAF is regularly consulted for solitary traverses of the Antarctic continent without assistance. In view of the TAAF, it is one of the most dangerous case, therefore it does not encourage this kind of risky activity. However, in the silence of the Treaty recommendations, it remains difficult to issue a denial of authorization or to regulate this type of sport challenge. The TAAF is aware of the authorization and supervision given by other NCAs for similar risky activities and proposes to consider harmonization between NCAs in dealing with such requests in order to limit the phenomenon of “forum shopping”, and to reinforce the legitimacy of NCA decisions.
In application of Measure 4(2004) and in the light of Resolution 6(2014), the French NCA adopted, on February 12th 2015, a regulatory order which provides consideration for safety criteria when delivering authorizations to carry out activities in Antarctica. This order also requires from the head of the expedition to contract all necessary insurances in order to cover any associated costs relating to potential search and rescue operations, medical care, evacuation and repatriation. 

Discussion: Would Parties seek for harmonization of the security criteria at an international level?

    2) A level of danger often underestimated by individual petitioners
The TAAF has to rely on the goodwill and honesty of petitioners. However, the concept of dangerousness is often interpreted differently by the ANC and petitioners. The TAAF often needs to request additional supporting documents regarding safety issues, or to prohibit the activity, whereas the petitioner considers its project safe. This assessment can only be achieved in a trust relationship between the NCA and its petitioners. 
Besides, despite good faith, interpretation and application of the obligations issued by the TAAF are subject to the interpretation by the petitioners and it does happen that experienced petitioners commit errors, in good faith, due to misinterpretation of a Treaty recommendation, eg:
    • - Entry into a penguin colony by a person with a pole equipped with a camera is rated by the French ANC as very intrusive for animals. It was not perceived that way by the person concerned;
    • - Diving and climbing activities carried out without prior assessment, but detailed in the post-visit report  to the TAAF as being achieved.
Sometimes the TAAF also encounters difficulties to commit organizers to play by the rules and to submit a complete request for authorization containing all pertaining elements.
Discussion: TAAF considers the role of the MRCCs of utmost value. In order to harmonize security consideration amongst the Parties, the TAAF would propose to increase cooperation with the MRCCs during the national authorization process, so as to benefit from the MRCC’s experience, and consider potential recommendations that could be given by the MRCCs.

NCA Forum Agenda item VI: What issues/challenges of wider implication/interest have Parties’ competent authorities handled with regard to various types of activities? Short introduction followed by discussion.
The TAAF have handled issues of wider implication and interest with regard to various types of activities:
    • Overlap of PEPAT (Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty) and CCAMLR legal regimes concerning tourism activities: the TAAF has processed during the 2014-15 season two EIAs for tourism and non-governmental activities in which captures of marine plankton where planned. The captures where not organized by scientific programs. Notwithstanding the educational purpose of these activities, nor the volume of the catch, and taking into account the absence of scientific programs involved, capturing plankton was considered as a CCAMLR issue. No permit was issued for these activities. 
    • -	Regulating activities which are not specially regulated by PEPAT or ATCMs Recommendations. The TAAF applies the French laws and regulations to activities that are not prohibited by PEPAT nor by ATCM recommendations, such as the use of drones, mountaineering and deep sea diving activities. This legal application is adapted to the specific conditions of Antarctica (fragile and unique environment, remoteness, dangerousness…). The increasing diversity of activities is challenging for the TAAF and tackles both environmental and safety issues. 

Discussion: In order to avoid environmental impacts, risks for human safety and forum shopping, TAAF would propose that the ATCM consider recommendations to harmonize Antarctic standards on activities presenting high risks for the environment and/or safety.

NCA Forum Agenda item VII: Have Parties’ competent authorities encountered challenges/issues considering of activities in light of the purpose and principles of the Protocol and other relevant ATCM recommendations? Short introduction followed by discussion.
So far, the TAAF has not encountered challenges/issues considering of activities in light of the purpose and principles of the Protocol and other relevant ATCM recommendations.

