





Alleged Solo Expedition to the South Pole by a German National










Alleged Solo Expedition to the South Pole by a German National 
Information Paper submitted by Germany
1. Introduction
This paper is submitted with reference to Article 13, paragraph 4 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) regarding the sharing of information on activities affecting the implementation of the Protocol. This paper highlights the cooperation among competent authorities, parties and logistic companies concerning the alleged South Pole expedition by the German national Martin S. in January 2015. 
2. Alleged Solo Expedition to the South Pole
In October 2014, the Federal Environment Agency (UBA), the German competent authority, became aware through internet news of the plans of a German national to carry out a solo ski-trip to the South Pole. He allegedly planned this trip in connection with a climbing expedition to Mount Vinson in December 2014/ January 2015.
UBA contacted Martin S. to inform him that a trip to the South Pole requires a permit, and to ask for details about his planned journey. However, UBA did not receive any information on his way in and out of Antarctica or on external support. UBA contacted Antarctic Logistics and Expeditions (ALE) who confirmed that Martin S. was part of an authorised touristic expedition to Mt. Vinson but that further details about a trip to the South Pole were not known. 
Beginning of December 2014 the German national sent an e-mail to UBA indicating that he would postpone his ski-trip to the South Pole to the season 2015/2016. As a matter of precaution, UBA sent an official letter to the US American competent authority and logistic companies asking for their cooperation should evidence appear of Martin S. visiting the Pole in 2014/2015. 
In February 2015, TV, newspapers and social media issued reports that Martin S. allegedly had conducted a solo trip to the South Pole and that he had set a new world record (14 days and 18 hours). The travel agency, who had organised the expedition to Mount Vinson, informed UBA that the German national left Antarctica on 9 January 2015 and arrived in Frankfurt on 14 January 2015. 
According to the information provided to Germany by other competent authorities and companies, the alleged trip had not been authorised by any Party. Pursuant to German legislation implementing the Protocol, such an unauthorised trip would have represented an administrative offence. On this basis, UBA initiated proceedings in mid-February 2015. 
After hearing Martin S. and conducting different witness interviews, UBA inquired from other parties like USA, UK and Italy and logistics companies about more available information on this case, especially for specific details about all flights to and from the South Pole between 9 January and 13 February 2015. Martin S. himself stated that he had been to the South Pole, but did not give any further information. 
Based on the answers and information received, it could not be verified that Martin S. had in fact visited the South Pole. Consequently, UBA will most likely close the proceedings. 
3. Acknowledgment for good cooperation 
Germany would like to thank all Parties involved as well as the logistics companies contacted for all advice and information given in order to clarify this matter. This case highlights the importance of a strong and close cooperation between competent authorities and companies involved.  

