





Special WG on Competent Authorities session - An illustration of successful cooperation between NCAs










An illustration of successful cooperation between NCAs

Summary :
France and Chile would like to share their experience on an activity carried out by French nationals during season 2014/2015 and which departed from Chile. This activity raised several difficulties: departure without any authorization granted by the French NCA, then attempt to obtain such an authorization from Chilean authorities, etc. Thanks to a good level of communication and cooperation between Chilean and French authorities, the said activity has been duly monitored and was finally carried out in compliance with the Antarctic regulatory framework.  
The Initial Project
The project initially aimed at crossing the Drake Passage on a paddleboard from Chile to the Antarctic Peninsula. The three French nationals which led the project had planned to carry it out in December 2014. Thanks to its online watch system, the French NCA (The French Southern and Antarctic Lands / Terres Australes et Antarctiques Françaises – TAAF) casually found out about this project in March 2014 before any request for authorization had been filed by the responsible organization “Cap o pas Cap”.
The French National Competent Authority, the TAAF, was led to deny twice the authorization for the planned activity
In July 2014, i.e. 6 months prior the beginning of the planned expedition, the NCA contacted the organization in order to encourage them to submit a request for authorization within the statutory time limit provided by French Law (5 months prior carrying out the activity). The request for authorization was eventually filed by the organization Cap o pas Cap in September 2014 after three reminders by the French NCA. The French NCA immediately indicated to the organization that the chosen vessel to carry out the expedition, the Esprit d’Equipe, was prohibited from gaining any access to Antarctica until 31 December 2015. On October 3rd 2014, the French NCA notified the organization its decision to refuse to grant the authorization for the said activity as the request appeared incomplete and not solid enough.

This denial was accordingly sent to the EIES. The Secretariat of the Treaty also issued a circular (19-2014). Besides, France directly informed Chilean authorities of this case as the expedition had planned to depart from Punta Arenas.

On October 24th, the French NCA accepted to examine a reviewed request submitted by the organization Cap o pas Cap but again this request appeared incomplete, notably concerning safety issues. Thus, despite a long dialogue with the organizers, the French NCA had to deny the authorization for a second time on December 2014. 
Departure for Chile and cooperation with Chilean authorities 
Once France had contacted the Chilean authorities to inform the denial of this activity, relevant port authorities, in particular in Punta Arenas and Puerto Williams, were duly informed so as to minimize the risk that the activity were to be carried out without the necessary authorization. 

The coordinator of the Cap o pas Cap expedition contacted the Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs to request permission to carry out the activity. The organisers were informed that they would not be allowed to proceed without authorization from their government.

On January 2nd 2015, the French NCA found out that the expedition eventually gave up on reaching the Antarctic Peninsula because of the sea conditions which were too dangerous. 

Given that France finally did not authorize the activity, the coordinator of the expedition requested permission to make the journey outside the Antarctic Treaty Area. The activity finally covered a route from Puerto Navarino on the island of the same name to Cape Horn and return to Puerto Williams with the support of the yacht Chilean flag "Chonos" and within waters under Chilean jurisdiction. This new activity began on 4 January 2015 and concluded the 14 January 2015.
During the whole process there was a constant exchange of information between the French and Chilean authorities.
Conclusion : 
Educational efforts towards organizers are crucial but not enough. Thus, information sharing and cooperation among the Parties to the Treaty (EIES, circular, bilateral contacts) are essential in this kind of configuration in order to avoid any “forum shopping” phenomenon and to prevent, where required, the departure of a non-authorized expeditions from their ports. 
Several issues remain open: How to cope with the lack of knowledge on Antarctic regulations concerning « amateur » organizers? Can all Parties rely on a legal basis in their national legislation to prevent the departure of a non-authorized expedition from one of their ports? Which kind of beforehand consultation may be imagined with the competent MRCCs in order to hear their opinion on the safety of an expedition supposed to be particularly risky?
In application of Measure 4(2004) and in the light of Resolution 6 (2014), these events encouraged the French NCA to adopt, on February 12th 2015, a regulatory order which provides consideration for safety criteria when delivering authorizations to carry out activities in Antarctica. This order also requires from the head of the expedition to contract all necessary insurances in order to cover any associated costs relating to potential search and rescue operations, medical care, evacuation and repatriation.

