





Workshop on Education and Outreach – Examples of educational and outreach activities of the Belgian scientists, school teachers and associations in 2013-2015








Examples of educational and outreach activities of the Belgian scientists, school teachers and associations in 2013-2015
Information Paper submitted by Belgium for the Workshop on Education and Outreach (Agenda Item 15)
Summary
The paper outlines the education and outreach activities undertaken by Belgian scientists, school teachers and associations in 2013-15 since Brussels hosted the XXXVI ATCM. This paper illustrates the commitment of Belgium to education and outreach in relation to the Antarctic continent studies and the role of the Antarctic Treaty. Moreover, Belgium will be co-leading the workshop on education (see ATCM XXXVII/WP09), with Bulgaria, Brazil, Chile, Portugal and the United Kingdom, planned for the ATCM XXXVIII, in Sofia, Bulgaria.
Introduction
The Resolution 2 (1996) of RCTA XX, Utrecht (1), recommends “Promoting the understanding and appreciation of Antarctica’s values, in particular her scientific, aesthetical and wild life values, by the means of educational opportunities especially for young people”. At ATCM XXXVI, Belgium provided a background paper emphasizing the importance of education and outreach and the Belgian activities in this domain since 2009 (ATCMXXXVI/BP 22). Moreover, the topic ‘Education and Outreach’ was elevated to Priority 2 in the Five-Year Work Plan of the CEP (CEP XVI, final report, para. 166). At ATCM XXXVII, Brazil, Belgium, Bulgaria, Portugal and United Kingdom, along with other Parties, further emphasised the relevance of education under the Antarctic Treaty System (ATCM XXXVII/IP2 and ATCM XXXVII/WP09). In addition, the Meeting agreed to hold a Workshop on Antarctic education and outreach at ATCM XXXVIII in Bulgaria. It was proposed that Parties would introduce Information Papers on their Education and Outreach activities, to better prepare for the Workshop. 
This Information paper is presenting educational and outreach activities undertaken in Belgium with the purpose to raise awareness of a large audience and school students about the importance of the Antarctic continent and the function of the Antarctic Treaty.
These activities were organised individually by scientists and scientific teams, by school teachers, or by organisations related to Antarctica. To keep this document rather short, the list and descriptions are not extensive but more details can be obtained by emailing the organisers and contact persons indicated.  When possible, links to websites or videos are given. The Belgian national languages or English were used for these activities.

1.	Activities undertaken by scientists
A) Interactions with media
a) A crew from the German television (ZDF) accompanied the team of Prof. Ann Vanreusel (U.Gent) to Carlini (Jan-March 2015). They recorded the preparations of the biogeochemistry work and interviewed Francesca Pasotti, which was broadcasted on 30/03/2015: http://www.zdf.de/ZDFmediathek/beitrag/video/2373554/Tauchen-in-der-Antarktis 

b) Numerous interactions with journalists took place with Antarctic scientists but are not detailed here.

B) Contributions for websites
a) On the website of the scientific diving centre of the Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI) in Bremerhaven, a report about the diving for the biogeochemistry program of the team of Prof. Ann Vanreusel (U.Gent) was posted as well: http://www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/underwater/scientific_diving/

b) Outreach activities are undertaken in the framework of the PREDANTAR research project (www.climate.be/PREDANTAR). A general audience report and short movies about educational experiments that can be easily repeated at home or at school will be available on this website.

C) Activities for schools and universities
a) Printemps des Sciences (23-29 March 2015) is a one-week initiative of scientific outreach and education for schools and families. Several Antarctic scientists have participated:
    • Dark Snow (Geography Department, ULB): Bachelor 3 students presented the influence of carbon soot on the albedo of ice sheets their melting. 
    • The activity (UCL-TECLIM) entitled "La machine climatique", dealt with the climate system in general and with the ocean and sea ice in particular. Simple experiments illustrating ocean and sea ice processes were carried out with the students. A teacher's guide related to this activity is available. 
    • Hands-on workshop on the extraction and pigment analysis of Antarctic cyanobacteria (Annick Wilmotte, U. Liège).

b) On 12 March, 2015, a group of 2nd Bachelor students Biotechnology from VIVES University College visited the Laboratory of Microbiology of the University of Gent. After an introduction on the microbial diversity research theme and methods by prof. Anne Willems, they were given a tour of the labs and were introduced in more detail to some of the research topics. Claudine Vereecke introduced the BCCM/LMG bacteria collection, that includes Antarctic isolates. Guillaume Tahon presented his work on bacteria in Antarctica that can use light energy (http://lmg.ugent.be/?q=outreach/vives-colleges-visits-lab )

c) At the occasion of the “Antarctic Day” in 2013 and 2014.  Both in December 2013 and December 2014,  Alexander Mangold (Royal Meteorological Institute) gave live skype interviews from the Princess Elisabeth station  to school classes (around 8 year old pupils) in the UK (2 classes in 2013, 1 in 2014). In addition, in December 2014, Quentin Laffineur (RMI) gave one live skype interview form PE to a school class in Luxembourg

D) Outreach for a large audience
a) Talk on Antarctic research to the general public. On the occasion of the centenary of the Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium (RMI) in 2013, a symposium has been organised for the general public with talks on meteorology, climatology and current research. Alexander Mangold gave an overview on Antarctic research at Princess Elisabeth station – one talk in French and one in Dutch. 

b) Outreach Session ‘Le traité sur l’Antarctique: une gouvernance originale pour un continent exceptionnel’ at College Belgique, Royal Academy of Belgium :
- 28/03/2013 : ‘Le traité sur l'Antarctique : enjeux politiques et gouvernance’ by Jean-Arthur Régibeau
- 28/05/2013 : ‘Le système du traité sur l’Antarctique : un mécanisme de coopération unique. Le Comité pour la protection de l'environnement : un outil mis en place par le protocole de Madrid pour protéger l'Antarctique’ by Prof. Anne Choquet (Brest Business School) and Dr. Yves Frenot (Director IPEV)
Audio records available at (http://www.academieroyale.be/cgi?lg=fr&pag=1026&tab=146&rec=18791&frm=290&par=secorig919&par2=Index,1#detail )
Organisers : Prof. André Berger (U. Louvain) and Dr Annick Wilmotte (U. Liège).

E) Activities for blogs and social media
a) Science and expedition blog of the IceCon project (BELSPO) at http://icecon2012.blogspot.be

b)  The Tweeting ice shelf” (ULB-FNRS): science and outreach project. A series of GPSes and a phase-sensitive radar installed in a potential melt channel in the Roi Baudouin ice shelf. It sends on a daily basis the status of the instruments and the positions of the systems, from which the speed of ice flow is determined. It ‘tweets’ its position regularly via Twitter (@TweetinIceShelf). There is a website with more detailed info and outreach: http://tweetiniceshelf.blogspot.be.  At EGU 2015 in Vienna (April 2015), the system was presented: The Tweeting Ice Shelf: geophysics and outreach (B. Van Liefferinge, S. Berger, R. Drews, F. Pattyn)- http://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU2015/EGU2015-5738.pdf

c) Blog  belatmos.blogspot.be . The blog describes  -since 2009 and ongoing until present-   the evolution of the research on atmospheric composition of the Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium at Princess Elisabeth station. The blog is from the view of the scientist at spot, describing not only science and instruments but also daily life, how it feels being far far away from home…

F) Exhibitions
a) Exhibition ‘on the occasion of the Open Door Days of the Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium (RMI) in 2013 on Antarctic research. Posters, slides shows on current Antarctic research of RMI and posters of the expedition of Adrien de Gerlache in 1897/98. 

2.	Activities undertaken by school teachers
A) Construction of a solar-tracker for Antarctica
The solar-tracker will be operational in our school in 2015-2016. The school pupils carry out scientific research using a scientific research procedure. They will compare the solar-gain of the solar-tracker and a fixed panel that, orientated to the South. They will research the influence of weather conditions of Londerzeel (own weather station) on the solar-gain.
If the solar-tracker works well at our school and is tested in freezing conditions (freezer) another solar-tracker can go to Antarctica. Then the pupils will compare the solar-gain and weather conditions of Antarctica with these of our school.
The making of the device was a cooperation between different fields of study. The students of  ‘Industrial Science’ designed and wrote the software for the tracker. The BSO-pupils (welders, mechanics and electricians) have effectively created the solar-tracker.
Organiser: Wim Van Buggenhout, Polar teacher at GTI Londerzeel, Belgium, and colleagues.
wim.vanbuggenhout@skynet.be (052 / 35 88 39 or 0472 85 78 23)

B) Comenius project: “Melting away for the climate”.
The purpose of this European initiative is to raise awareness of the cooperating schools (teachers, students) of climate change, global warming and the protection of the environment and we do it in an interdisciplinary way. The pupils have to realise that the climate-crisis is not only an ecological issue. It also has a scientific, politic, economic, social and technological dimension. The project consists of two parts: information and action. The involved countries were France, Germany, Poland, Spain, Turkey and Belgium.
1) Information: we want to inform our students about all aspects of Global Warming so that they can form their own opinion about the problem rather than following popular public opinion. Each school will organize activities e.g. lectures by specialists or presentations by the students concerning Global Warming and Environment Protection, investigations (questionnaires) in all the partner schools, etc. Students will investigate the problem from different points of view in order to achieve a good understanding of all the elements involved. 
2) Action: The students will choose and organize actions. This may vary from collecting data concerning their own use of natural resources and their ecological footprint, to organizing actions to protect the environment and save natural resources such as drinkable water. These actions will be published in e-booklets and shared on the website to inspire the other partners and maybe other schools. The students involved in the project will act as "climate ambassadors". They will inform the other students in the school and motivate them to change their behaviour as well.

This resulted in an e-booklet ‘Melting away for the climate’, where each country is presenting the initiatives taken during this Comenius project: http://issuu.com/cbonte/docs/e-booklet_25-03-2015
Co-organiser: Wim Van Buggenhout, Polar teacher at GTI Londerzeel, Belgium, Christine Bonte, and colleagues.
wim.vanbuggenhout@skynet.be (052 / 35 88 39 or 0472 85 78 23)

C) Rewards for teacher and school
1) In May 2013, Queen Paola of Belgium gave to Wim Van Buggenhout, a diploma for the boundless project 'THE CLIMATE CRISIS: DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT! '. The Queen Paola Prize for the Education Award-winning teachers from secondary school, is given to an original educational project that gives quality education and shows creativity and innovation.

2) In May 2014 the GTI Londerzeel school won the Belgische Energie- en Milieuprijs (Belgian Energy and Environment) prize of the ‘International Polar Foundation Award’ and was nominated for the category ‘Education Eco-Award’.

3.	Activities undertaken by associations
A) Activities of the International Polar Foundation (IPF)

1) Website EducaPoles (www.educapoles)
New educational tools have been published on the website including:
- Educational package on the theme of water (in French)
(http://www.educapoles.org/fr/news/news_detail/icestein_leau_aujourdhui_et_demain)
This educational package includes four educational fiches (The Role of Polar Regions in the water cycle, Water production and water treatment at the Princess Elisabeth Station, Water management at the Princess Elisabeth Station and Careers in water) as well as a video interview of the engineer responsible for water management at the Station.
- Educational package on the theme of polar sciences developed in the framework of Polar Quest 2013-2015 (in Dutch)
(http://www.educapoles.org/nl/news/news_detail/stem_samen_met_de_wetenschappers_naar_princess_elisabeth_antarctica)
This educational package aims to bring polar sciences into the classrooms by inviting the students to discover three scientific projects that were carried out during the 2011-2012 Belgian Antarctic expedition. It is composed of the three following modules: the BELDIVA project (microbiology), the BELATMOS project (atmospheric sciences) and the GEA project (geosciences). Modules contain an information sheet, an exercise sheet, an instruction sheet for the teacher, a picture gallery and videos.
The website also includes news on projects and activities.

2) Several Twitter accounts were developed:
- @educapoles where teachers and the general public can follow the news and activities.
- @AntarcticBase where the activities at the Princess Elisabeth basis can also be followed
- @SciencePoles where news and updates on polar science and research findings can also be found

3) Competition “Polar Quest 2” (http://www.educapoles.org/projects/project_detail/polar_quest )
A second edition of the Polar Quest project was launched in October 2013. The principal theme is sustainable energy, with Princess Elisabeth Station (PEA) as a showcase. To enter the competition, classes had to design an energy project to be carried out during the 2014-15 school year.  The winning class was announced at the contest awards ceremony in Brussels on 14 May 2014 (a video of the awards ceremony is available online). The winning teacher, Roger Radoux, an electronics teacher at the Athénée Royal d'Ans, spent 5 weeks at PEA during the Antarctic summer season 2014-2015. Teachers, students and the general public were able to follow the activities on the project on EducaPoles, on the school's website and via social media.

4) Educational tools for Class Zero Emission (CZE)
Educational tools developed in the framework of Class Zero Emission in Belgium are available online on EducaPoles under multimedia and education material. Teachers can therefore use the tools in their classrooms to teach about the Polar Regions, climate change and energy. The IPF no longer organises workshops in a CZE center in Belgium but the material and educational tools from the workshop are available on demand. They were recently used in workshops organised for schools in Schaerbeek (Brussels) in the framework of the Défi NRJ 1030 project in collaboration with GoodPlanet (http://www.educapoles.org/fr/news/news_detail/classe_zero_emission_schaerbeek ).

The IPF-UK CZE mobile workshop is now running at locations around the United Kingdom. The International Polar Foundation UK and UK Polar Network (UK APECS) are running a series of three public engagement events on polar science and climate change. The first event took place on 27-29th September 2014 at Dundee Science Centre (http://www.educapoles.org/news/news_detail/successful_sea_ice_shackleton_and_science_sessions ).
The Sea Ice, Shackleton and Science project is also supported by the Polar Regions Department, UK Foreign Office and is a nice example of collaboration between Belgium and UK. It includes free workshops, activities and talks. 

5) Celebration of “Antarctica Day”
In 2013 and 2014, the IPF Education Team, in partnership with OurSpaces, set up some activities to celebrate “Antarctica Day”. Children have been invited to draw flags for “Antarctica day”. In both years, a selection of flags from around the world was taken to Princess Elisabeth Antarctica Station (PEA). Skype calls were also organised between schools and team members at PEA. The following news provides details on these activities as well as pictures and videos:

A look back at Antarctica Day 2013 is available on the website:
(http://www.educapoles.org/news/news_detail/a_look_back_at_antarctica_day_2013)
In 2014, flag schools have live links with Princess Elisabeth Station (2014):
(http://www.educapoles.org/news/news_detail/antarctica_day_flag_schools_have_live_link_with_princess_elisabeth_station), participation of schools shown on the website: (http://www.educapoles.org/nl/news/news_detail/scholen_zetten_zich_in_voor_antarctica_day), and Antarctica Day at the Princess Elisabeth Station:
 (http://www.educapoles.org/fr/news/news_detail/le_jour_de_lantarctique_a_la_station_princess_elisabeth)

6) PEA station's website (www.antarcticstation.org)
The general public can learn about the projects and the work carried out at the Princess Elisabeth Station during the Antarctic season via regular updates in the form of news, interviews, videos and picture galleries.

7) Outreach website “SciencePoles”
The IPF created SciencePoles in 2005 to communicate polar research to the wider scientific community and general public. SciencePoles's mission is to make polar science more approachable, by featuring interviews with leading scientists and background articles on important research from both the natural and social sciences. 

8) Arctic Futures Symposium (http://www.arcticfutures.org )
Established in 2010, and organised by the IPF, the Arctic Futures Symposium is an annual forum that brings together a wide variety of Arctic stakeholders. The 2014 symposium focused on the people of the Arctic and the economies of different regions of the Circumpolar North.

9) 2014 InBev-Baillet Latour Antarctica Fellowship Conference & Award Ceremony
(http://www.polarfoundation.org/projects/detail/inbev_baillet_latour_fellowship)
At this occasion, the IPF organised an afternoon science conference, 'Antarctica – The Next Generation', at the Palais des Académies/Paleis der Academiën in Brussels on September 17th 2014. The speeches and presentations are available online as well as two videos of the event.

10) Organisation of a panel session at the Ecsite Conference
IPF organised and presented on a panel at the Ecsite Conference in The Hague 2014 (European Science Centres). The panel session “Melting the Ice: Polar Topics for Conveying Climate Change” was chaired by Dave Carlson and with Jose Xavier, Matteo Cattadori, myself and Inga May as speakers. The panel was very successful and received a very high rating from Ecsite. This was supported by SCAR.

B) Activity of the association “The New Belgica vzw”
This association is rebuilding a replica of the ship ‘The Belgica’to create a social and educational project, to commemorate the first Belgian Antarctic expedition and to build an international heritage community with other countries involved with the Belgica-expedition. Presently, there is a collaboration for an exhibition with the FRAM museum in Oslo (Norway). In the wharf of “De Steenschuit” education centre in Boom, unprivileged trainees learn technical and social skills.
Website: www.newbelgica.be/ 


C) Activities of APECS-Belgium
The Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) is an international and interdisciplinary organization for anyone with an interest in the Polar Regions and promotes outreach activities. The national committee APECS Belgium revived on December 1st 2011, on Antarctica Day, where several young researchers from different institutions got to know each other. A core group for APECS Belgium was then formed. Several of the members did educational and outreach activities since the last International Polar Year. The website is: https://sites.google.com/site/apecsbelgium/ 

a) The APECS Belgium Science Fair (25-26 May 2013) was organised during the ATCM with experiments, a photo exhibition, lectures by invited speakers, documentaries and a kids’ corner (http://apecs.is/news-feeds/features/6088-apecs-belgium-outreach-event-during-the-atcm )

b) There was a 2nd APECS BeNeLux symposium in the Netherlands (31/10/2013)  (https://sites.google.com/site/apecsnetherlands/home). The organisers followed the same concept as for the 1st symposium: talks by international speakers, policy-makers and early career scientists and workshops in the afternoon.  Thus, this is a nice example of a co-organized outreach activity between countries (Belgium and the Netherlands).

c) Celebration of “Antarctica Day” 
APECS Belgium organized a story contest for all school kids from 10-12 years old with the support of the Belgian Science Policy Office (BELSPO) for “Antarctica Day”.  Members from APECS Belgium went to the classes from the winning stories (10 Flemish, 10 French) and gave an afternoon lesson about the poles.  They performed some experiments with the kids, told stories, showed pictures and played games.  The kids all will receive a book with the winning stories.  More information: http://www.belspo.be/belspo/BePoles/calendar_en.stm#2013November29 
Contact: apecsbelgium@gmail.com




