





Report by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)








Report by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)
Improving Hydrography and Nautical Charting 
in Antarctic Waters

Introduction
The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) is an intergovernmental consultative and technical organization.  It comprises 85 Member States.  Each State is normally represented by its national Hydrographer.
The IHO coordinates on a worldwide basis the setting of standards for hydrographic data and the provision of hydrographic services in support of safety of navigation and the protection and sustainable use of the marine environment.  The principal aim of the IHO is to ensure that all the world's seas, oceans and navigable waters are surveyed and charted.
What is Hydrography?
Hydrography deals with the measurement and description of the physical features of oceans, seas, coastal areas, lakes and rivers.  Hydrographic surveying identifies the shape and nature of the seafloor and the hazards that lie upon it, together with an understanding of the impact of tides on the depth and water movement.  This knowledge supports all marine activities, including transport, economic development, security and defence, scientific studies, and environmental protection.
Importance of Hydrography in Antarctica
Hydrographic information is a fundamental pre-requisite for the development of successful and environmentally sustainable human activities in the seas and oceans.  Unfortunately, there is little or no hydrographic information for a number of parts of the world, especially in Antarctica.
In this particular region, where vessels may face the most severe weather conditions, any grounding due to a lack of adequate surveying or nautical charting may have serious consequences.  Unfortunately, the grounding of vessels operating outside previously navigated routes in Antarctica is not uncommon.
The Polar Code, adopted by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) in 2014, includes significant cautions concerning hydrography and nautical charting.
Most scientific studies and an understanding of the marine environment benefit significantly from a knowledge of the nature and shape of the seafloor and the movement of the water caused by tides.  Therefore the lack of such hydrographic knowledge in most Antarctic waters, particularly in the coastal and shallower regions, must compromise many scientific endeavours being undertaken under the auspices of ATCM and individual Member States.
Status of Hydrography and Charting in Antarctica
The state of hydrographic surveying and nautical charting in Antarctica poses serious risks for the safety of navigation as well as impeding the conduct of most activities taking place in the surrounding seas and oceans.
Over 90% of Antarctic waters remain unsurveyed.  Large areas are uncharted and where charts do exist, they have limited utility because of a lack of reliable or comprehensive depth information.
Hydrographic surveying in Antarctic waters is expensive and problematic.  This is because of hostile and unpredictable sea conditions, short seasons for surveying and the long logistic train involved in supporting ships and equipment.
According to IMO international requirements (Safety of Life at Sea - SOLAS), Electronic Nautical Charts (ENCs) are now required for navigation in all passenger vessels and an increasing number of vessels of other types - all of which are operating in Antarctic waters.  So far, only half of about 170 ENCs that have been identified by the IHO Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (IHO HCA) as being required for navigation in the region have been published.
The production of ENCs for Antarctica is severely hampered by the lack of data, the poor state of the corresponding paper charts that they are intended to replace and the production and financial priorities of those States that have volunteered to make the ENCs; only 10 ENCs were produced in 2014.
IHO Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica
The IHO HCA is dedicated to improving the quality, coverage and availability of nautical charting and other hydrographic information and services covering the region.  The HCA comprises 23 IHO Member States (Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom, Uruguay, USA, Venezuela), all of which have acceded to the Antarctic Treaty and are therefore also directly represented in the ATCM.
The IHO HCA attempts to work closely with stakeholder organizations such as COMNAP, IAATO, SCAR, IMO and IOC,  However, with the exception of successful work with IAATO, no co-operative programmes or packages using ships of opportunity or other resources have been achieved in order to improve hydrographic data in critical shipping areas.
Ways and Means to Improve Hydrography and Nautical Charting in Antarctica
The IHO has reported regularly on the unsatisfactory level of hydrographic knowledge in Antarctica since ATCM XXXI (Kiev, 2008).  The IHO has consistently indicated the requirement to obtain support at the highest political levels if things are to improve significantly.
It is pleasing that the last meeting (ATCM XXXVII) adopted Resolution 5 (2014) on strengthening cooperation in hydrographic surveying and charting of Antarctic waters.  It is too early to report any noticeable impact, the more so as the IHO HCA, through which ATCM Parties are invited to coordinate their hydrographic surveying and charting activities, has not met since ATCM XXXVII.
In this context, it is unfortunate that the 14th annual meeting of the IHO HCA, planned to take place in March 2015, has been postponed until 2016, due to the low level of registrations from Member States and from Observer Organizations.  This does not bode well for the reconsideration of the low priority that governments have been placing on improving hydrographic and bathymetric knowledge in the region.
Recommendation for Consideration by ATCM
The IHO invites ATCM to encourage Parties to participate in the next meeting of the HCA and contribute effectively to its activities in accordance with Resolution 5 (2014).

