





Contribution of Colombia to the Maritime Safety in Antarctica

English version provided by the author









Contribution of Colombia to the Maritime Safety in Antarctica

Summary 
The first scientific expedition of Colombia in Antarctica, was undertaken in the austral summer 2014-2015, foregoing according to reports from the Colombian delegation, through the document IP 104, in the thirty-Sixth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Brussels in 2011).
The Scientific Expedition was carried out between December 16, 2014 and March 24, 2015, using as a research platform the Colombian navy ship "20 DE JULIO", were integrated to the expedition, eight national research projects and two international, involving twenty researchers aboard, representing fifteen national institutions, also made part of the project a Chilean researcher.
In this context, DIMAR1, as National Maritime Authority, through the National Hydrographic Service, CIOH2, began with the execution of the research project: "Marine Scientific Research for Antarctic Maritime Safety -2014 / 2018 '. The research project involves the construction of simulation models for drifting ice, and trajectory of spilled oil at sea; and a hydrographic component, in a first phase, the project includes international cooperation with the SHOA3, in order to update the international nautical chart "INT 9103 Markmann Bay - Andvord Bay".
    1. Background
The Colombian Antarctic program4 and the Antarctic Scientific Agenda of Colombia 2014-2035, established as a line of research, maritime safety, directly involving CIOH, which led to establish a work plan in this area.
In December 2013, during the thirteenth Conference of the Antarctic Hydrographic Commission, held in Cadiz, the Colombian delegation represented by DIMAR, socialized the intention of contributing to the Antarctic maritime safety by supporting other countries, with bathymetric information obtained during the First Colombian Expedition in Antarctica and the production of nautical charts, receiving the support of the countries participating in the meeting.
This led to the CIOH and SHOA, work together, specifically with technical meetings, held in Valparaiso in February 2014, noting the cooperation of Colombia, with the acquisition of bathymetric information for updating the INT nautical chart 9103, and joint efforts to this edition.
    2. Execution
The research project on maritime safety, focuses on the production of nautical charts and construction of a hydrodynamic model with numerical blocks of drifting ice and oil spill.

Ocean Parameter Measurement
Between 16 and January 22, 2015, profile measurements of oceanographic parameters were made, namely: 
a) temperature, 
b) salinity, 
c) density, and 
d) marine currents, 
Also meteorological parameters in 40 oceanographic stations, in order to obtain the data necessary for the assembly of a hydrodynamic numerical model, which will have a numerical component in drifting ice, applied to the Gerlache Strait. This model will have a second numerical block, applicable to issues of protection of the marine environment, which will simulate oil slicks drifting.
Likewise, through radar was carried out, tracking ice floes drifting, and measurement of geometrical parameters, complemented with measurements of ocean currents, between 0 and 60 meters deep, and measurements of wind speed and direction, allow calibrate and validate the numeric block, to calculate the drift of ice floes.

Figure 15. Oceanographic stations. In black and blue: CTD and SVP profiles, for calibration echo sounder;  red: sampling stations with CTD in bays.

Hydrographic Survey
Between January 23 and February 5, 2015, the bathymetric survey was conducted to update the nautical chart INT 9103, Markmann Bay - Andvord Bay. 
The hydrographic survey areas indicated in Figure No. 2, corresponds to 1000 nautical miles, exceeding sixty percent, the planning of the task, because the binomial ship-boat, allowed the survey, both in deep waters within 24 hours, as in shallow waters during daylight hours, respectively.
Sectors within the polygons in red, Figure No. 2, were surveyed using the vessel with an echosounder Kongsberg EA600, and transducer of 18 KHz. 
Sectors outside these polygons, were surveyed with a portable echosounder, Kongsberg EA400 18 KHz, aboard a boat, type Defender. 
For positioning during these surveys, it was used differential signal SEASTAR with satellite correction and tidal corrections were made, by recording sea level, using a depth sensor located in the vicinity of the survey area.


Figure 26. Lines of bathymetric survey (left); Interpolation of bathymetric data obtained (right).
    3. Conclusiones
Colombia initiated research projects aimed at the maritime safety of Antarctica, according to the information to the XIII meeting of the Antarctic Hydrographic Committee, and more specifically, with regard to the production of bathymetric information, according to the guidelines of the Antarctic Scientific Agenda of Colombia 2014-2035.
In accordance with the coordination made with SHOA, the bathymetric information will be shared and used to update the nautical chart INT 9103 Andvord Bay-Markmann Bay. During the edition of that nautical chart, CIOH will work with SHOA. 
The development of numerical models which will allow to understand and simulate the Gerlache Strait hydrodynamics, one of the places in Antarctica which receives a significant amount of tourist cruises, coupled with numerical blocks to calculate ice drift, will be an important contribution to maritime security.



