





Workshop on Education and Outreach - UK’s Antarctic Education and Public Engagement Programmes









UK’s Antarctic Education and Public Engagement Programmes
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
Education and outreach is an important part of the UK’s overall Antarctic policy. Key UK Antarctic partners, including the Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO), British Antarctic Survey (BAS), Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI) and the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust (UKAHT), share a common goal of engaging many different sectors of society in the global scientific importance of Antarctica and in the objectives and work of the Antarctic Treaty System.

Introduction
The UK’s Antarctic education and outreach programmes form part of broader UK education policies and initiatives to enhance education and awareness relating to the Polar Regions and science more broadly.

The FCO, BAS and Royal Geographical Society maintain a bespoke educational website, which supports the UK’s national curriculum: www.discoveringantarctica.org.uk. This website was launched in 2006 (ATCMXXIX/IP041) and has won a number of education awards. The site receives more than 250,000 unique visitors each year and it is currently being revised to ensure compatibility with mobile and tablet devices. There is also a sister site relating to the Arctic (www.discoveringthearctic.org.uk).

In addition, the UK’s Antarctic partners undertake a range of education and outreach activities relating to Antarctica:

British Antarctic Survey (BAS)
BAS education and public engagement activities are delivered through partnerships with leading UK (and occasionally international) museums, science centres or institutions. BAS’s contribution to these partnerships involves the development of content; provision of visual assets and objects; the presence of science and support staff at dialogue events; and joint media and stakeholder promotion. All education and engagement campaigns are aimed at targeting new audiences: enabling public participation with science by taking science to those not currently involved; and by interacting with people. Key themes are:

1. Enthusing young people in science, engineering and polar operations
Aim: enhance scientific literacy through formal and informal classroom learning.
What BAS does: Approximately 50 classroom sessions per year are delivered by BAS scientists and support staff, directly reaching over 2,500 young people. 

2. Enthusing families in polar science
Aim: to engage family audiences by collaborating with leading UK museums and science centres. 
What BAS does: partnerships with national and international museums and science centres create informal learning opportunities for millions of visitors in the UK and overseas. Examples include: Penguin Ice Adventure at London Aquarium (1 million visitors annually); BAS ice core in the Atmosphere Exhibition at The Science Museum, London (3 million visitors annually); Ice Station Antarctica exhibition at Dundee Science Centre (28,000 visitors), exhibition at London Zoo penguin enclosure (1 million+ visitors); Ice Lab exhibition in collaboration with British Council showcasing Halley VI model in Christchurch and Dunedin, Otago, New Zealand; family events at Scott Polar Research Institute, Cambridge (1,000 visitors per session).

3. Enthusing business leaders in climate science
Aim: to provide adult learning opportunities for executives whose companies seek informed dialogue about climate change.
What BAS does: In collaboration with the Cambridge Institute for Sustainable Leadership (CISL), BAS hosts 30+ business events per year, each with 25-30 participants from blue-chip companies including Shell, World Bank and Jaguar Land Rover. Climate scientists present their work in formal lectures and via onsite tours. 

4. Promoting science and engineering stories
Aim: to promote and explain polar science to many different sectors of society through print, broadcast and digital media; and to boost engagement and dialogue through social media channels.
What BAS does: BAS issues proactive media releases featuring a diverse range of science. The annual media visits programme to Antarctica includes international documentary makers and news crews. Broadcasts from a single season’s visits can reach a global audience of over 10 million viewers.

Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI)
The unique collections on display in SPRI's Polar Museum enable over 50,000 visitors a year to find out how past discoveries in the Polar Regions help today's scientists investigate the Earth's changing environment. Specialist staff deliver a programme of teaching, exhibitions, workshops and outreach events and provide mentoring for trainee teachers. The Museum has developed a multi-disciplinary learning approach and offers in-service training to help integrate current research in polar studies into the new national curriculum. Over 10,000 individuals engage directly with education and outreach events each year and staff provide a range of in-gallery activities, online resources, trails, audio guides and handling collections for groups from nursery schools to higher education. Audience development is particularly aimed at hard to reach communities (e.g. 18-30 year olds, areas of social deprivation, the homeless, BAME, young mothers, people with dementia and young carers).

SPRI's comprehensive polar library and exceptional archival collections help museum staff engage the widest audience and raise public awareness of polar research. As a leading collections holder, SPRI has forged links with the University of Cambridge Museums and Festivals; other polar museums, libraries and archives worldwide; local, national and international educational institutions; BAS and UKAHT, and the Antarctica100 umbrella group, for whom SPRI hosts the A100 website. The collections attract partnerships with scientists, artists and writers, and deliver over 30 outreach events, including international touring exhibitions, new music commissions (with the City of London Sinfonia) and a children's opera (with ETO).

United Kingdom Antarctic Heritage Trust (UKAHT)
The UK Antarctic Heritage Trust exists to advance the preservation, enhancement and promotion of Antarctic heritage and to engage, inform and inspire a global audience. The Trust achieves this through the care and conservation of historic buildings and artefacts and delivering and supporting innovative programmes to engage and inspire people of all ages with the history of human endeavour in Antarctica.

The main activities of the Trust are:
    • Actively conserving six heritage sites, buildings and their collections on the Antarctic Peninsula.
    • Providing high quality visitor experiences at the heritage sites on the Antarctic Peninsula, notably the museum and Post Office at Port Lockroy – the most visited site in Antarctica.
    • Working in partnership to deliver a range of public programmes to inspire people to pursue a lifelong engagement with Antarctic heritage, such as public event, exciting new and feature stories to the national and international media.
    • Providing grants to support other organisations that have a connection to Antarctic heritage through its collections or through education and outreach with heritage projects which support the UKAHT mission.

Other Antarctic-related education and outreach activities
In addition to the above organisations, there are also a range of UK-based independent and charitable organisations that undertake and promote Antarctic education and outreach initiatives. Examples include the International Polar Foundation UK (IPF UK), which provides resources for education and outreach; the “Antarctica Day” initiative; and www.coolantarctica.com. 

