





Workshop on Education and Outreach -Education and Outreach in the Australian Antarctic Programme









Education and Outreach in the Australian Antarctic Programme
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Outreach and education are key Antarctic objectives for Australia. The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) is responsible for delivering the Australian Antarctica programme, including leading and coordinating education and outreach activities. The AAD manages media interactions, public relations and multi-media, maintains a comprehensive website and increasingly supports engagement with social media. The AAD also runs an education program – a key initiative of which is enabling students to make a virtual visit to Australian Antarctic stations from their classrooms.
Introduction
This paper looks at the range of media, public relations and education activities utilised by the AAD including products, programs and partners. As the mass media environment changes, we have a focus on equipping and supporting Australia’s Antarctic scientists and researchers to effectively develop and deliver messages about their research, including  through social media and online channels.
Education and Outreach activities for Australian Antarctic Division 
An organisational objective of the Australian Antarctic Division is to “promote understanding of the importance of Antarctica to Australia and the world”. Activities are guided by a Communication Strategy which targets key stakeholders in the government, scientific, educational and other sectors. The aim is to provide clear, authoritative information about Antarctica and the Australian Antarctic program (AAp) to the community and key stakeholders.

Strategies include:
    • generating information about Australia’s Antarctic activities through media and web channels;
    • building effective communication skills in the participants across the AAp, particularly scientists; and 
    • building partnerships where there is a common goal to achieve an objective.
Wherever possible the AAD measures performance and audience reach to ensure resources are utilised for the best possible return. 
Products
Key printed documents remain fundamental to the AAD’s outreach activities.  Promotional material includes: 
    • Australia in Antarctica: a brochure about the AAp;
    •  an Antarctic map and information on the program;
    • a twice yearly edition of the Australian Antarctic Magazine (http://www.antarctica.gov.au/about-us/publications/australian-antarctic-magazine)which also goes on-line and forms the basis for a new newsletter: Antarctic insiders (http://www.antarctica.gov.au/news/antarctic-insider) which profiles stories on the web site. 

The AAD’s website (http://www.antarctica.gov.au/) receives some 150,000 hits per month.  It is used to profile projects and programs, and is regularly updated with news stories and articles. All new stories are automatically tweeted to draw followers back to the web site. Twitter followers (@AusAntarctic) are nearing 4000 and growing daily. 
Programs
i) Arts fellowship
Like other Antarctic programs, the AAD runs a competitive arts fellowship program (http://www.antarctica.gov.au/about-antarctica/antarctic-arts-fellowship) taking artists south. Many Arts Fellows become life-long ambassadors of the program, continuing to produce books, artworks and other products many years after their Antarctic experience.

A recent Arts Fellow was an Australian artist now based in Ireland, John Kelly.  In just a few weeks, Mr Kelly painted a prolific body of work (55 paintings) which he is now exhibiting around the world. Mr Kelly also did a very successful blog with the Guardian newspaper, producing five articles.  Australia’s arts fellowships are awarded based on the reach and profile, through multiple outlets, that fellowship winners can offer.
ii) Media
In the last 12 months the AAD’s media program (http://www.antarctica.gov.au/news/media-program) has resulted in a very successful children’s television program “Antarctica: Secrets from the Giant Freezer” which ran on a children’s TV channel and was also available online. This summer a news reporter and cameramen from a national commercial TV station travelled to Casey. They produced a series of reports for news bulletins.

Throughout the year the media team works to get stories about Australia’s Antarctic related activities run in the mainstream media. The objective is to maintain a constant level of Antarctic stories interspersed with major highlights, particularly focussed on science achievements. 
	
AAD’s approach to media has evolved to respond to the changes in the Australian media industry. The Australian Science Media Centre estimates that Australian newsrooms employ around 2000 fewer journalists over the past three years, and those remaining are not able to focus in depth on specific issues and content generation. Many of the journalists that have left were specialist writers, particularly in the science and environment area. These changes mean that more effort is required to get stories into the media, such as packaged stories ready to file through multiple media channels, with accompanying still pictures and video. The AAD’s media team also has a capacity to support media interest in reactive incidents such as a rescue or medical evacuation from Antarctica, where there is a high demand for well-presented content including images and video.

All science applications through AAp are required to   have an outreach component which is proving a good incentive for the scientists to acquire media related training. 

On larger scientific projects, the AAD’s media team works with the science team from the start of a project. In-house media training sessions are used to ensure scientists can communicate messages simply and clearly, identify audiences, and train the scientists in the communication tools through which they can best profile their work. A very successful example of this has been an underwater ocean acidification experiment at Casey station this summer where the dive team took underwater footage which attracts media outlets to cover the story. So far there has been very good media coverage which would not have occurred without great pictures.
iii) Education
A key entry point for understanding Antarctic issues for many Australians is through the classroom.  Many Antarctic scientists and expeditioners talk of a school experience sparking a life- long interest in Antarctica. The AAD’s Classroom Antarctica (http://classroom.antarctica.gov.au/) has run for a number of years.  This site was recently tailored to the new Australian Educational Curriculum to support teachers in using Antarctic issues to help achieve the curriculum’s required learning outcomes. A next step is restructuring the site to better align with the new curriculum themes and developing some new classroom resources. Like journalists, teachers are also time poor and the better information is packaged and presented, the better the take-up in classrooms.

In 2014, the AAD began a new initiative to link schools to Australia’s stations through video conferencing.  With a small investment in iPad air technology and tripods, we partnered with a national education initiative which specialises in giving students virtual access to cultural institutions and learning experiences. Four interactive video conference sessions with two Antarctic stations reached around 3,500 students giving them a rare and valuable opportunity to interact with station personnel. The plan is to expand this project as video conferencing into schools has radically changed the ability of teachers to improve learning outcomes.

In addition, the use of twitter is being trialled with students. Last year during Australian Science Week scientists from AAD’s headquarters in Tasmania and stationed in Antarctica held very successful twitter conversations with students about their work. 
Partnerships
Beginning in 2011, Australia has marked the centenary of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) of 1911-14. AAD officially closed the centenary celebrations at the beginning of 2014 with a final showing of a travelling exhibition which was held at various venues – including in Ireland - during the centenary period. The final showing of the Mawson’s men exhibition – which features the photographs of the original expeditioner party – was held at the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery and viewed by around 12 000 people.  Over its three years it was seen by many thousands of people.

A major centenary project was a partnership with the National Archives of Australia: Traversing Antarctica featuring a collection of rare Australian Antarctic artefacts.  The exhibition travelled to 12 venues in six Australian states and territories over more than three years.  It was viewed by more than 370,000 people.
AAD also has a strong working relationship with Australia Post. After a very successful centenary series of stamps, their latest issue was an eye catching set showing the colours of Antarctica.

The AAD is currently working with the Australian National Maritime Museum on an exhibition entitled Shackleton: Escape from Antarctica which will go on tour after opening in Sydney in April this year.

Currently under development, in partnership with the World Wildlife Fund is a Southern Ocean ecosystem display, which will enhance understanding of the Southern Ocean and its importance to Australia. This display will be at the visitor centre of a well-known Australian little penguin colony at Phillip Island in Victoria, and will be seen by many thousands of visitors to the centre. 
Further information
Any Parties seeking further information on these activities are kindly invited to contact the Australian Antarctic Division.

