





An Update on Status and Trends Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Recent Policy Developments at the International Level








An Update on Status and Trends Biological Prospecting in Antarctica and Recent Policy Developments 
at the International Level

    1. Introduction

This Information Paper provides an update on the status and trends of biological prospecting in Antarctica, as well as a review of recent relevant policy developments at the international level. Biological prospecting continues to be a topic of interest and concern to the Parties of the Antarctic Treaty System, with discussions having taken place at nearly every meeting of the ATCM in recent years. Notably, Resolution 7 (2005) recommended that governments continue to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and exchange on an annual basis information and views relating to that question as appropriate. In addition, Resolution 9 (2009) recommended that Parties keep this matter under active consideration, including in relation to obligations under Article III(1)(c) of the Treaty.

The paper demonstrates that there continues to be considerable and growing activity in patenting of uses and applications based on Antarctic genetic and living resources, highlighting the need to continued consideration of this topic.

At the same time, discussions in international policy fora, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity and its Nagoya Protocol, as well as the United Nations Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, continue to make progress in addressing genetic resources, including access and benefit-sharing issues. Thus, keeping biological prospecting on the agenda of future ATCMs ensures that Parties can discuss these developments, and where needed, find solutions that are specific to the situation in Antarctica. 

Section 2 of this document provides a brief analysis of trends in biological prospecting in Antarctica based on fifteen years of data sources from publicly available patent databases and other sources. Section 3 provides highlights of patents and applications that date from the period between ATCM 36 and ATCM 38, covering the time period from March 2013 to April 2015. The analysis provides an update on developments since Information Paper 22 of ATCM 36. Section 4 provides updates on recent policy developments relevant to genetic resources, biological prospecting, and access and benefit-sharing which have taken place in relevant international fora.


    2. Trends in biological prospecting in Antarctica

Antarctic species have become an increasing focus of commercial and policy interest. Patent data provides an important proxy indicator for commercial research and development involving Antarctic species. A comprehensive review of patent information, scientific literature and publicly available material relating to products led to the development, by the Government of Belgium with assistance of United Nations University, of the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database, and a review of its contents was submitted to ATCM 32 in the form of Working Paper 11 (the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database), with an update on findings submitted to ATCM 35 as Information Paper 63. While these papers mainly use patents filed as a proxy of commercial intent, it should be noted that not all patents become commercially viable products in the end, and that not all products on the market were patented first. Both of these papers found that there is significant commercial interest in Antarctic genetic resources.

Working paper 2 submitted by SCAR to ATCM 33 found that, based on a survey, a substantial proportion of SCAR members are involved in research in the Antarctic region that could be considered biological prospecting. The paper concluded that based on a conservative assessment of current published literature and from the survey of SCAR members, bioprospecting research in the Antarctic region and/or involving Antarctic organisms is extensive and widespread. As an illustration of this, the SCAR lecture at ATCM 33 addressed the biochemical properties of cold-loving micro-organisms and gave examples of their application in biotechnology.

Most recently, Information Paper 22 submitted to ATCM 36 presented existing data for Antarctic species within the Access and Benefit-Sharing Patent Index (ABSPAT). The data was based on large-scale text mining of 11 million patent documents for 6 million species names in the patent collections of the United States, the European Patent Convention and the Patent Cooperation Treaty. The data covered the period 1976-2010 only. Species identified in patents were then mapped using available distribution data from the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF). A total of 439 species appearing in patents were recorded. These species are known to be distributed in Antarctica from GBIF records. They included both cosmopolitan and potentially endemic species. Figure 1 provides a summary of trends from Information Paper 22.



Figure 1: Trends in applications and grants, top applicants and areas of technology for the overall data involving species recorded in Antarctica (1976 to 2010). A. Patent Trends All Species Recorded in Antarctica (GBIF records). B. Species Recorded in Antarctica. C. Top Applicants Ranked on Publications. D. Technology Areas. Source: Access and Benefit­ Sharing Patent Index (ABSPAT, 2012 edition).


Collectively, the papers discussed above show that there is significant scientific and commercial interest in Antarctic genetic resources and their biotechnology potential. This interest is not new, but has been present for decades, with the earliest patents dating from the 1970s as shown in the analysis in Figure 1. The patenting trend shows an additional increase when data from 2011 to 2014 is included, as demonstrated in figure 2 below.  The data in figure 2 were compiled through keyword searches of existing patent databases, and the resulting trends confirm those resulting from the large-scale text mining shown in Figure 1.




Figure 2: Number of patents by biennium.

Figure 2 should be interpreted only as indicative of the commercial interest in Antarctic genetic resources, since it is likely that our surveys have missed some patents that have been filed, particularly in countries where the language of filing is not English. Similarly, it is also likely that numbers of actual inventions can be artificially inflated by a recent strategy by companies of applying for many patents that are only slight variations of the same invention. Regardless, the trend shows an increase in patenting.

A diverse range of Antarctic species have been the source of commercial interest, and have contributed to patented innovations. The map in figure 3 below (from Information Paper 22 submitted to ATCM 36) shows species recorded in patents that to date are only recorded in the GBIF database as being distributed in Antarctica, and are thus potential endemics. It should be emphasised that these data are tentative, because GBIF distribution records are not complete. That is, GBIF depends on collections submitting species information and distribution data. We regard these data as simply providing an indication that a species or sample in a patent may have originated from Antarctica.  A total of 77 species appear in this map and are clearly dominated by Bacteria.



Figure 3: Species only recorded in Antarctica in patents. A total of 77 species appear in this map and are clearly dominated by Bacteria. Note that this distribution underrepresents Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba). Patent applications generally refer to Antarctic krill by its common name rather than its scientific name, and thus data mining based on scientific names likely misses many krill-related patents.


Figure 4 shows the proportion of more specific species groupings that have led to patents and applications. The update includes data from 2011-2014, which was also adjusted to include the multitude of patents relating to Antarctic krill. The results show that krill dominates the patent landscape, with microorganisms as the second most common source organism for patents.


Figure 4: Patents per species groupings. Of the patents and applications studied in detail, 42% relate to krill, 19% to microorganisms, 16% to yeasts and molds, 6% to lichen and fungi, 4% to invertebrates (mainly sponges and tunicates), 4% to plants and grasses, 3% to fish (mainly antifreeze proteins) and other vertebrates, 3% to algae, and 2% to other, generally unidentified sources.

A number of different industries use Antarctic genetic resources. Of these, the pharmaceutical industry remains the largest user, with other industrial applications also prominent. Other uses include, but are not limited to, enzymes that function at cold temperatures and are used for industrial applications, antifreeze proteins, aquaculture and agriculture, environmental remediation, biotechnology and molecular biology, cosmetics, skin care and nutritional supplements. The category of nutritional supplements consists almost entirely of krill-related products, particularly Omega 3 supplements from krill oil. A considerable number of companies and research organizations from several countries are involved in the commercialization of Antarctic genetic resources.

Many of the filed patents and already-developed products are of actual or potential benefit to society. Examples include Variolin, a potential anti-cancer compound originally isolated from an Antarctic marine sponge, as well as the Antarctic bacteria Nocardiaceae, which has the ability to degrade hydrocarbons in soils, making it of potential use in bioremediation. The box below provides examples of other patents and products from Antarctic genetic resources.


Examples of uses of Antarctic genetic resources

In 2007, the Spanish company PharmaMar SA claimed for an anti-tumour treatment produced from indole alkaloids derived from the tunicate Aplidium cyaneum (WO2007054748). The tunicates were collected by bottom trawling in the Weddell Sea at a depth ranging between 220 and 300 metres. This species is distributed around the Antarctic in waters of the continental shelf and slope from 75 down to about 1,000 metres. Compounds isolated or derived from tunicates have been and are being subjected to clinical trials and are perceived as being a potentially valuable part of the ongoing search for specific anticancer drugs.

WO2001009387A1 from 2001 by Northeastern University from the USA is an example of the use of novel genetic properties of marine organisms in diagnostics. Fish samples were collected from Antarctic waters near Low and Brabant Islands in the Palmer Archipelago by bottom trawling. The inventors discovered that a unique family of Antarctic fish, (the hemoglobin-lacking icefish Chaenocephalus aceratus, Pseudochaenichthys georgianus and Chionodraco rastrospinosus), failed to express hemoglobin, due to deletion of most of the juvenile and adult globin gene complexes.
The so-called ‘white-blooded’ icefish also no longer produce red blood cells. The claimed invention is a method for identifying novel hematopoiesis-related genes, especially erythropoiesis-related genes, by screening for and identifying genes that are expressed by red-blooded fish but not by white-blooded fish. The invention is useful for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases such as sickle-cell anaemia, thalassemia or clinical anaemia following chemotherapy.

A product called SeaCode (Lipotec, Barcelona, Spain) contains an exocellular polysaccharides (EPS) from a Pseudoalteromonas sp. isolated in intertidal coasts of Antarctic waters. Seacode is marketed to significantly enhance synthesis of key dermal proteins (collagen I) and reduce skin roughness. Lipotec produces a number of marine derived cosmetic skin care products in addition to Seacode, such as Antacticine and Hyadisine.

Source: Oldham, P; Hall, S; Barnes, C; Oldham, C; Cutter, AM; Burns, N;
Kindness, L (2014) Valuing the Deep: Marine Genetic Resources in Areas Beyond
National Jurisdiction. Defra Contract MB0128 Final Report Version One. London:
Defra.

Information Paper 22 from ATCM 36 also demonstrated that it is possible to map the exact geographic locations where species occurring in patents have been recorded. As an experiment, a small sample of georeferenced data was downloaded from GBIF for species appearing in patents, and can be seen in figure 5. As such, this figure does not present a full picture for Antarctic species. It merely demonstrates that it is possible to map georeferenced data. This approach should be developed in any future work and cross-referenced with data on collection sites that might appear in patent texts.




Figure 5: GBIF occurrence data for Antarctic species in patents (Test Sample of Georeferenced Data).


The interest in Antarctic genetic resources will not disappear, but rather is likely to increase in the future, given that the biotechnology potential of extreme and isolated environments has not yet been fully exploited. The next section provides an update of the most recent examples of biological prospecting in Antarctica since the last ATCM.


    3. Some recent examples of biological prospecting in Antarctica

This section of the paper provides highlights of patents and applications that date from the period between ATCM 36 and ATCM 38, roughly covering the time period from March 2013 to April 2015. The analysis is not comprehensive, but rather aims to provide examples of developments since Information Paper 22 of ATCM 36. 

As has been demonstrated in previous studies on this topic, cold-loving organisms that have adapted to the extreme Antarctic environment often have unique cellular, physiological and biochemical adaptations that are of interest to biotechnology. The patents and applications filed during the past two years can be roughly broken down into four categories: (a) pharmaceuticals, (b) industrial applications and biotechnology, (c) cosmetics and skin care products, and (d) krill-related patents.

    (a) Pharmaceuticals

Several discoveries made from Antarctic organisms relate to pharmaceuticals. One interesting example consists of recently isolated pigments from extremophilic microorganisms from the Lakes of Schirmacher Oasis located in the East Antarctic Dronning Maud Land, which exhibit anticancer and antimicrobial properties. It is thought that they can be used as basis for new therapies for the treatment and prevention of cancer and microbially-mediated diseases (US patent 8,956,669, University of Alabama at Birmingham Research Foundation, USA).

Another microorganism, Bacillus sp. N11-8, collected and isolated from Antarctic Ocean water, has shown to have anti-tumor activity, and thus may have promise as a cancer medication (Patent CN103667097 by Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute at the Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences). Another microorganism, a strain of Streptomyces species, isolated from a soil sample collected from Schirmacher Oasis in Antarctica, and subsequently sourced from a culture collection, is the source of an invention relating to treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis, multidrug resistant tuberculosis, methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus pneumonias and methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus pneumonias (US patent 8,697,653 by Priamal Enterprises Limited, India).

Antarctic lichens are known to produce unique secondary metabolites different from those produced by higher plants. A number of patents have been filed relating to pharmaceutical compositions derived from the Antarctic lichen Ramalina terebrata, which contains the compound Ramalin as an active ingredient. Ramalin has been shown to have an anti-inflammatory effect, making it potentially suitable for the treatment of inflammatory and immune diseases. Ramalina terebrata grows naturally in the Antarctic King George Island. The inventors have made extensive efforts to develop a method for chemically synthesizing ramalin, making the compound more stable and easier to store (see, for example, patents and applications EP2578214, US 20140235719, US 20140235719, US 8,865,934 and US 8,809,578 by the Korea Ocean Research and Development Institute and patent CN103140222 by an entity in China).

Another Antarctic lichen, Stereocaulon alpinum, has been found to be the source of a compound that has antibiotic activity. The active ingredients extracted from the lichen are lobaric acid as a depsidone type natural compound, and lobarstin as a pseudodepsidone type natural compound. In addition to its potential use in treating infectious diseases, the composition also has antioxidative properties (see, for example, KR 1020140015956 and KR 20140015956 by Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology).  Stereocaulon alpinum extract has also shown promise for preventing and treating obesity (see patents US 8,846,750, US 8,703,814 and US 8,697,745 by Korea Ocean Research and Development Institute).  Further, Diterpene furanoids, which are extracts of Antarctic lichens, have shown promise for treating type 2 diabetes and obesity, and for lowering blood glucose (Patent application WO/2013/058631 by Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology). The lichen was collected from the area around the King Sejong Station on Barton Peninsula, King George Island, Antarctica. Earlier patents on this same research were reported on in IP 22 for ATCM 36.

Extracts from a third Antarctic lichen, polytrichastrum alpinum, have shown potential for preventing or treating arteriosclerosis (patent application WO/2013/058632 by Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology). 

Tunicates have proven to be an important source of bioactive natural products. Groups of compounds derived from the Antarctic tunicate Synoicum adareanum collected from the shallow waters around Anvers Island on the Antarctic Peninsula, have shown toxicity against several different cancer cell lines. These compounds, known as Palmerolides are useful in the effective treatment of cancers, particularly malignant melanomas, colon cancer, and renal cancer cell lines (Patent US 8,669,376 by University of South Florida).

Several of the patents based on krill and its components also relate to development of pharmaceuticals and/or health supplements. Details about these patents are provided in the section relating to krill.


    (b) Industrial applications and biotechnology

Patents in this category generally relate to enzymes that catalyze various industrial processes or to proteins and other substances used in biotechnology and industry. One example is a patent based on Antarctic ice algae CPD photolyase, which has applications in fields relating to cosmetics and biopharmaceuticals, and may actively repair disorders caused by ultraviolet rays. The patent in question relates to cloning of the algae CPD photolyase gene for the first time, successfully cloning said gene into the expression vector, and thereby obtaining a large quantity of CPD photolyase (patent WO2014166137 and 103160488, Qingdao Hengsheng Biological Pharmaceutical Development Co., Ltd, China).  Antarctic ice algae is also the basis of another invention, which relates to industrial processing and storing of fish meat using a composition that incorporates the algae (patent CN103719935 by Zhejiang University, China).

Similarly, a patent by the Korea Institute of Ocean Science Technology relates to a novel lipase from Bacillus pumilus separated from Antarctic microorganisms, which have high activity at a low temperature and under a high alkali state (patent Kr1020140096466). Another patent by the Korea Institute of Ocean Science Technology relates to a Flavobacterium frigoris PS1-derived anti-freezing protein, which can prevent specimens from freezing, and which are thus useful for a wide variety of industrial applications. 

Cold-activated amylases such as those secreted by the Antarctic bacterium Alteromonas haloplanctis have been found to be useful for removing bioorganic stains from surfaces (patent 8,679,825 by Toyota Motor Engineering & Manufacturing North America, Inc., Regents of the University of Minnesota, USA, and Toyota Motor Corporation, Japan).

Leucosporodium antarcticum PI12 strain sourced from a culture collection is the source of a patent for a cold-active enzyme (US patent 8,623,996 by University Putra Malaysia). The strain has the capability to produce a novel bifunctional enzyme isolated and characterized from a psychrophilic microorganism.

A newly identified polynucleotide sequence from Alicyclobacillus pohliae NCIMB14276 strain, which was discovered in Antarctica, comprises a gene that encodes the alpha-amylase enzyme. The source of improved alpha amylase has been patented by DSM IP Assets B.V. (Netherlands) for use in industrial processes, for example in food industry, and specifically in the baking industry (US patent 8,426,182).

Information Paper 22 of ATCM 36 reported on patents granted to the University of Chile for a method of preparing a cold- adapted xylanase, and on nucleic acid and corresponding amino acid sequences of a cold- adapted subtilisin-like protein. Two new patents relate to these same inventions. They include a patent (US 8,679,814 by the University of Chile, Santiago) for a method of preparing a cold adapted xylanase by use of recombinant DNA techniques. The xylanase was extracted from an Antarctic marine bacteria, Psychrobacter sp., and is expected to be useful in a variety of industrial contexts and for a variety of commercial purposes including more complete hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass into simple sugars that can then be fermented to products, such as liquid fuels and chemical feedstocks. The enzymes are also useful in the production methods of other industries, such as the animal feed, baking, and paper industries. The second patent (US 8,759,065) relates to nucleic acid and corresponding amino acid sequences of a cold adapted subtilisin-like activity protein, insolated from Antarctic marine bacteria Polaribacter, sp. that can be used in a variety of industrial contexts and commercial purposes, including laundry detergents, food processing, leather processing and skin care products.

Subtilases for use in the detergent industry are the source of another patented innovation. In this case, the patented subtilase is a variant of TY145 like subtilases that include the psychrophilic subtilisin protease S41 derived from the Antarctic Bacillus TA41, and the psychrophilic subtilisin protease S39 derived from the Antarctic Bacillus TA39. The new Bacillus sphaericus "sphericase" subtilases are very homologous with the TY145 subtilase structure, but contain extra ion-binding sites (US patent 8,546,122 by Novozymes A/S, DE).

Finally, strains of psychrophilic bacteria isolated from the rizosphere of Deschampsia antarctica have been patented for use as part of biofertilizer compositions (US patent 8,415,271 by Uxmal S.A., Santiago, Chile).


    (c) Cosmetics

Information Paper 22 of ATCM 36 discussed a set of patents relating to a skin care product from an extract of the plant Deschampsia Antarctica. The compound was found to be effective in protecting the skin from the sun’s UVA and UVB rays. Further patents have been filed in the past two years for the culture and micropropagation of Deschampsia Antarctica in vitro. This invention provides for sustainability of the process of producing the aforementioned skin care product. It provides for producing large quantities of biomass of plant metabolites without the need for continuous harvesting (Patents and applications US 20130344528 and 2638798, US 20130344528 by University Santiago Chile).

A cosmetic composition containing biomass from the red yeast producer Sporobolomyces salmonicolor AL1 from Antarctic soil samples, and sourced from a culture collection, has been patented for its antioxidant activity, which leads to slowing the process of aging of the skin (Patent BG1856 (U1) by BODI D ET, Belgium).


    (d) Krill-related patents

There have been a multitude of krill-related patents and applications filed in the past two years. This study counted a total of 42 patents and applications, many relating to similar (or in some cases the same) inventions (see details below) but it is likely that more have been filed. Most relate to krill oils as nutritional supplements, but other uses and applications have also been patented. Together these patents show a considerable and increasing interest in harvesting and processing Antarctic krill for a variety of uses.

Patents that relate to krill oil include its use to alleviate joint pain (patents US 8,962,924, US 8,945,608, US 8,524,980, US  8,507,757 and US 8,481,072 by U.S. Nutraceuticals); its use to improve blood lipid profiles and reduce low density lipoprotein (patents US 8,728,531 and US 8,663,704 by U.S. Nutraceuticals); its use in various omega-3 supplements (patents and applications WO/2014/207571, WO/2014/140873, WO/2014/057362, WO/2014/045127, WO/2024/013335, and WO 2878786 and 20150030718 by Aker Biomarine Antarctic, Norway, and US 8,829,215 by Pronova Biopharma Norge AS, Norway); its use to treat risk factors for cardiovascular, metabolic, and inflammatory disorders (US patent  8,697,138 by Aker Biomarine, Norway); its use in memory improvement (Patent CN103585305 by Qingdao Better Bio-Technology Co., Ltd., China); as an ingredient in healthy food (CN103385493 by Qingdao Silver Century US Marine Biotechnology Co., Ltd., China); and to prevent injury from overuse of alcohol (US 8,691,297 by Nippon Suisan Kaisha, Ltd., Japan).

Another batch of krill patents relate to techniques of processing krill, either for krill oil or for proteins and other substances. Patents include methods for extracting krill oil (patent US 8,758,829 by Emerald Fisheries AS, Norway; patent US 8,568,819 by Nippon Suisan Kaisha, Ltd., Japan; patent US 8,624,046 by Dae Duck FRD Co., Ltd, Korea; patent US 8,557,297 by Olympic Seafood, Norway; and US 8,865,236, US 8,772,516 and US 8,609,157 by Tharos Ltd, Chile); methods for refining krill oil from krill powder (patent CN103981021 by Shandong Qianqingxiangtai Biological Product Co., Ltd., China and patent CN103589507 by Qingdao Fuchuang Environment Technology Co., Ltd., China); method of preparing Antarctic krill protein hydrolysate (patent CN103834711 by East China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy Of Fishery Sciences); method for preparing the chitosamine hydrochloride from Antarctic krill (patent CN103823015 by Shandong Normal University); method for preparing high-purity Antarctic krill proteins for food and health care products (patent CN103583787 by Rizhao Hdby Marine Bio-Technology Co., Ltd., China); and a process of extracting phosphatidylcholine, which is used as a nutritional supplement or in cosmetics, from krill (patent CN103509047 by Acerchem International Inc., China).

Krill also provides source material for pharmaceuticals, for example in the use of enzymes from krill to treat soft tissue inflammation and associated biofilm (patents and applications EP2833906, WO/2013/149809 and WO 2869353 by Arcimboldo AB, Sweden); preparation of hemostatic powder from krill shell (patent CN103690956 Shenzhen Institute Of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy Of Sciences, China); and as a source of octacosanol, an antiviral and anti-inflammatory compound (patent CN103439451 by Shandong Normal University, China).

Other patented uses of krill include as part of carp bait (CN103583491 by Anhui Sanfenzhong Fishing Tackle Co., Ltd., China); as krill meal in cultivating rotifers (patents CN103155905 and CN103141441 by East China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences); as the main ingredient in Antarctic krill soy sauce (patent kr1020130122105 by Pukyong National University Industry-University Cooperation Foundation, Korea); and in a hamburger-type patty made of krill meat (patent kr1020130121356 by Pukyong National University Industry-University Cooperation Foundation, Korea).


    (e) Summary of patenting activity since last ATCM

The pie chart below summarizes the fields of invention for which Antarctic patents have been granted and applied for since the last ATCM.  As can be seen, krill-related patents dominate the landscape (42 out of a total of 74 patents assessed), with pharmaceuticals the second most common application (16 out of 74 total assessed). It should be noted here that our patent search should not be considered comprehensive, but only indicative of the developments that have taken place. 



Figure 6: Fields of invention for which Antarctic patents have been granted and applied for since the last ATCM.


The same pattern of krill patents (42 out of a total of 74 assessed) dominating the landscape can be seen in the chart below, which looks at the organisms that have been subject to patenting. Other organisms of commercial interest since the last ATCM have been lichen (13 patents and applications) and microorganisms (11 patents and applications). Ice algae, other plants (in this case Deschampsia antarctica) and tunicates have also yielded patented innovations.



Figure 7: Organisms that have yielded patented applications since the last ATCM.


    4. Recent policy developments at the international level

Recent policy developments relevant to genetic resources, bioprospecting and access and benefit-sharing have taken place in a number of international fora. Of particular note are the developments within the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the UN Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group on conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction, and the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, which are described below.


    a) The Convention on Biological Diversity – Nagoya Protocol

The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity (Nagoya Protocol) entered into force on 12 October 2014 during COP 12 as anticipated. This followed its earlier adoption by the tenth meeting of the CBD Conference of the Parties (COP-10) in Nagoya, Japan, on 29 October 2010. The Nagoya Protocol is an international agreement which aims at sharing the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources in a fair and equitable way, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by appropriate funding, thereby contributing to the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components. The Nagoya Protocol applies to genetic resources that are covered by the CBD, and to the benefits arising from their utilization. As at 20 April 2015, 58 countries plus the European Union are Contracting Parties to the Protocol. 

The Nagoya Protocol sets out core obligations for its Contracting Parties to take measures in relation to access to genetic resources, benefit-sharing and compliance. The Protocol creates greater legal certainty and transparency for both providers and users of genetic resources by establishing more predictable conditions for access to genetic resources, and by helping to ensure benefit-sharing with the provider country of the genetic resources that are accessed and based on mutually agreed terms. The Protocol only applies to genetic resources within national jurisdictions of countries, and provides for bilateral transfer of genetic resources between provider countries and users. However, Article 10 of the Protocol leaves open the possibility for developing a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism for other genetic resources in the future.

Following the Nagoya Protocol’s adoption, and prior to its entry into force, considerable work was undertaken by the Intergovernmental Committee for the Nagoya Protocol (ICNP) to prepare countries and international institutions for its operationalization. Its first meeting took place in June 2011. The Committee adopted four recommendations in preparation of the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Nagoya Protocol (COP/MOP1), namely on the Access and Benefit-sharing clearinghouse, capacity building and development, awareness raising, and compliance procedures, setting in motion a series of intersessional activities to advance the preparations for the Protocol’s entry into force. The second meeting of the ICNP was held from 2-6 July 2012, in New Delhi, India. It was preceded by a capacity-building workshop on ABS, co-organized by the Secretariats of the CBD and the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGR), held from 30 June - 1 July 2012.

ICNP 2 adopted eight recommendations in preparation of the COP/MOP1 of the Nagoya Protocol, namely on: modalities of operation of the ABS clearing-house; measures to assist in capacity building, capacity development and strengthening of human and institutional capacities in developing countries; measures to raise awareness of the importance of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge; cooperative procedures and institutional mechanisms to promote compliance with the Protocol and address cases of non-compliance; the need for, and modalities of, a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism; guidance for the financial mechanism; guidance for resource mobilization for the Protocol’s implementation; and future work in preparation for the first meeting of the COP/MOP1.

ICNP 2 served its objective to prepare for implementation and entry into force by identifying questions that demand clarification at the international level. Although entry into force was expected to take at least another two years, many countries showcased impressive legislative and policy developments, highlighting that the Protocol is already making a difference at the domestic level.

In October 2012, the 11th meeting of the Convention on Biological Diversity (Hyderabad, India), endorsed the intersessional work towards the COP/MOP1 and a third meeting of the ICNP took place in February 2014 and made 8 recommendations including an agenda and rules of procedure for the Protocol’s first meeting, the need for, and modalities of, a global multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism, the modalities for an ABS Clearing House Mechanism, measures for capacity building, addressing cases of non-compliance and utilising model contractual clauses, voluntary codes of conduct, guidelines, best practices and standards. 

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the first Meeting of the Parties (COP/MOP1) was held in Pyeong Chang Korea from 13–17 October 2014. It adopted the ICNP recommendation for the ABS CHM, agreed to guidelines for national reports, adopted cooperative procedures for addressing cases of non-compliance, encouraged Parties to submit tools on model clauses and best practices and guidelines, adopted strategies for capacity building and awareness raising, invited views on a multilateral benefit-sharing mechanism and provided guidance to the financial mechanism (GEF) on eligibility of developing countries that are parties to the Protocol or committed to becoming members and gave recognition of the MOU between the COP and the GEF Council. 

Since then countries have been actively developing draft ABS legislation or enacting ABS laws to implement their obligations under the Protocol or to enable them to ratify the Protocol. Development assistance has been provided through the Nagoya Protocol Implementation Fund and the GEF, through UNDP, UNEP, GIZ and the ASEAN Biodiversity Center and other bodies. Work is progressing within the CBD Secretariat on the ABS CHM.  

Independently, the science community has been revising guidelines to ensure compliance with the Protocol and introducing technical innovations to facilitate the operation of the Protocol. For example, the World Federation of Culture Collections and the World Data Center for Microorganisms have established a monitoring and tracking system that enables the provenance of microbial stains and species to be verified and their utilisation to be tracked. This is the Global Catalogue of Microorganisms and includes 68 collections from 33 countries involving 334,445 strains from 43,795 species. The information in the Global Catalogue of Microorganisms is not just microbial strain catalogue information, but also the global research efforts on those strains, including their related global papers, patents and sequences information.


    b) The Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group on conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction (The Working Group)

The discussion related to marine genetic resources beyond national jurisdiction has been taken up at the highest policy level of the United Nations, i.e. the General Assembly. In 2005, the General Assembly established an Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as the Working Group). Since the first meeting of the Working Group, in 2006, issues related to marine genetic resources beyond areas of national jurisdiction, and in particular the applicable legal regime, have been a central element of the discussions.

All issues under consideration by the Working Group, including marine genetic resources and benefit-sharing, marine protected areas (MPAs), environmental impact assessments (EIAs), capacity building and technology transfer were bundled into a “package” as an outcome of the 2011 meeting of the Working Group (endorsed by General Assembly resolution 66/231), and continue to be considered together.

The 2012 meeting of the Working Group recommended, and the General Assembly subsequently decided, that some of the aspects discussed at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-Ended Informal Working Group will be further addressed in intersessional workshops to be held in 2013 with a view to improving understanding of the issues and clarifying key questions as an input to the work of the Working Group. The intersessional meetings took place 2 to 3 May 2013 and
6 to 7 May 2013, and provided time for expert presentations and technical discussion on topics relevant to the 2011 “package” of issues.

Following the intersessional meetings, the Working Group met four more times. The sixth meeting took place from 19-23 August 2013, and resulted in a consensus recommendation on establishing a preparatory process within the Working Group to fulfill the Rio+20 commitment by focusing on the scope, parameters and feasibility of an international instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). The seventh meeting took place from 1-4 April 2014, the eighth meeting from 16-19 June 2014; and the ninth meeting from 20-23 January 2015. The last three meetings focused on the scope, parameters and feasibility of an international instrument under UNCLOS.

The ninth meeting of the Working Group recommended that a decision be taken at the sixty-ninth session of the UN General Assembly to develop a new legally binding instrument on biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction under UNCLOS, with a PrepCom convening in 2016 and 2017. The PrepCom would be tasked with making substantive recommendations to the General Assembly on the elements of a draft text of an international legally binding instrument, taking into account the reports of the Co-Chairs on the work of the Working Group. Further, the Working Group recommended that the General Assembly, before the end of its seventy-second session (2017), and taking into account the PrepCom’s report, decide on the convening and on the start date for an intergovernmental conference to consider the PrepCom’s recommendations and elaborate the text of an international legally binding instrument under UNCLOS. The negotiations shall address the topics identified in the package agreed in 2011 on the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction in particular, together and as a whole, marine genetic resources, including benefit-sharing questions, measures such as area-based management tools, including MPAs, EIAs, capacity building and the transfer of marine technology.


    c) The International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA)

The ITPGRFA, which entered into force in 2004, is a comprehensive treaty whose objectives are the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture (PGRFA). The centrepiece of the Treaty is a ‘multilateral system for access and benefit-sharing’ which for certain categories of PGRFA guarantees facilitated access in return for benefit-sharing.

Since March 2013 there has been the fifth session of the Governing Body (GB) of the ITPGR convened from 24-28 September 2013 in Muscat, Oman, which was preceded by a High-Level Ministerial Conference, organized by the Government of Oman on 21 September.  The meeting launched an intersessional Ad Hoc Working Group to Enhance the Functioning of the Multilateral System of Access and Benefit-sharing (MLS), which is mandated to develop measures to increase user-based payments and contributions to the Benefit-sharing Fund, as a priority, as well as additional measures to enhance the functioning of the MLS.  Delegates described this outcome as pivotal for the future development of the Treaty, noting that the process will provide much needed direction towards enhanced implementation, in view of the Convention on Biological Diversity’s Nagoya Protocol. 

The MLS represents the most sophisticated attempt for operationalizing inter-State benefit-sharing of genetic resources.  Given the lengthy time periods required for research, development and commercialization to take place, commercial benefits arising from the use of genetic resources in the MLS are yet to materialize.  The Treaty’s Benefit-sharing Fund has so far mainly relied on government donations.  Some innovative ideas have included Norway’s tax on seed sales, which funds its contribution to the Benefit-sharing Fund. In general the flow of income to the Benefit-sharing Fund is far from regular or predictable, while no benefit-sharing payments resulting from the use of the standard material transfer agreement, either mandatory or voluntary, were received in the last biennium. The Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group to Enhance the Functioning of the Multilateral System of Access and Benefit has met twice (December and May 2014) and will have its third meeting in June 2015.

In addition, GB 5 adopted a work programme on sustainable use and a resolution of farmers’ rights that was welcomed as significant progress towards implementation. The GB also resolved outstanding issues on compliance, thus rendering the Treaty’s compliance mechanism fully operational.

Since the fifth session of the GB, the Ad Hoc Technical Committee on Sustainable Use of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture has met (March 2015), and the Consultation on the Global Information System on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture took place (January 2015).

In March 2015, the final selection of the projects to be funded under the Third Call for Proposals of the Treaty’s Benefit-sharing Fund was made by the Bureau of the Sixth Session of the GB.  The third round consisted of 22 projects worth over USD 10 million to help farmers in developing countries maintain their crop diversity and to support member countries with technology transfer programs.  The Benefit-Sharing Fund has already benefitted over 700,000 farmers, researchers, technicians and policy-makers around the world. 

The Sixth Session of the GB will be held in Rome, Italy, from 5 to 9 October 2015 and will be preceded by two days of regional consultations and related events.


    5. Conclusions

This paper demonstrates that there continues to be considerable and growing activity in patenting of uses and applications based on Antarctic genetic resources, and that discussions related to genetic resources, including access and benefit-sharing, are ongoing in international policy fora.

