





Special WG on competent Authorities session - Experiences and examples from the Norwegian competent authorities 










Special WG on competent Authorities session – experiences and examples from the Norwegian competent authorities 



In this Information Paper Norway will share some issues and experiences of relevance to the agenda of the Special Working Group on competent authorities issues relating to tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica as requested in Circular No. 5/2015 concerning "ATCM XXXVIII Special Working Group on Competent Authorities issues".

    I. What issues have Parties’ competent authorities encountered when handling activities involving participants from multiple nations and/or multiple organizations? 

Some of the issues Norway has encountered pertaining to activities involving participants from multiple nations/organizations occurs when participants or entities from different nations are, or may seem to be, responsible for different parts of the activity. When participants from different nations have different roles in an activity, it may also be difficult to decide who is responsible for the activity with regard to the Environmental Protocol. The following examples from each of these categories are provided, followed by issues arising from these examples:

Sub-charter of cruise: A Norwegian tour operator sub-chartered an entire cruise from a cruise operator from another Party. This operator already had a permit from their own national competent authority for its cruises for the season, including this particular cruise. The cruise operator provided all services on board and had the control of the vessel. They provided the zodiacs, and decided when and where landings could take place. The Norwegian tour operator specialises in photo expeditions. To facilitate opportunities for under-water photographing, they wanted to offer the opportunity to snorkel. After communication between both operators and both Parties’ competent authorities it was decided that the Norwegian operator would send their own notification for these activities to the Norwegian competent authority, who handled this as a separate activity. 

TV-production:  A TV-team from another Party planning to make a production in Antarctica hired a Norwegian registered production company for organisation, coordination and location management. The Norwegian production company chartered a yacht for the transportation. This yacht was registered in a country of a third Party and had a permit from their own competent authority for sailing in Antarctica. This permit did not cover the land-based activities. The owner of the yacht seemed to be reluctant to take responsibility for the activities on land, and it was no option that they applied for an authorisation for this. One approach would then be that the Norwegian company would get the permit/approval because of their role as described above. However, competent authorities in the country where the TV-team was registered and the Norwegian competent authority agreed that the permitting procedure should be handled by the former, since the TV-team organised the activity and therefore was responsible for the rest of the activity pertaining to the Environmental Protocol.     

Questions based on these examples:
From the Norwegian perspective, a joint assessment of all aspects of an activity would provide the best approach to the issues that must be considered, for example environmental impact, contingency plans and insurance, cf. paragraph IV. On the other hand it is also important that all aspects of an activity are considered, without being considered by more than one Party. 

Have other Parties met similar issues, and if so how were they handled? 
How can one on the one side ensure that all aspects of an activity have been considered duly in accordance with the Environmental Protocol, and on the other side that no part of the activity has been considered (and approved) by more than one Party?
Are there, or should there be, ways to require that participants in the same activity agree on one responsible operator for the activity as a whole? Should the competent authorities in the countries involved engage in this?   

What information should be exchanged when different Parties’ competent authorities handle different parts of an activity? 

Which criteria should decide who is responsible for a certain part of an activity?

    II. What issues have Parties’ competent authorities encountered when handling activities where various elements of the activity have been handled/approved/permitted by different national authorities?

If we from the Norwegian perspective only handle one or some of the elements of an activity, it is difficult to define exactly what the Norwegian participant is responsible for. The Norwegian part of the activity may be mixed with the other parts of the activity in a manner that makes it difficult to distinguish what elements should be handled by Norwegian authorities. It may also be difficult to consider one part of the activity isolated, keeping in mind that all aspects of the activity must be sufficiently considered against protocol legislation and to avoid double permitting/approval.

The first example mentioned above (ie. sub-charter of cruise) illustrates this. The cruise operator decided when and where to land, and was also in charge of the use of zodiacs and of the activity on land. The snorkelling was planned to take place when on land, and only with a small group of people. Therefore, the formal concern for Norwegian authorities was only the short period these persons were to be in the water.  

When handling this notification it was challenging to separate the activities, especially with respect to contingency plans and insurance for search and rescue. Should a potential search and rescue operation be limited to getting people back on dry land or back to the main vessel? Should medical evacuation due to incidences in the water be covered by the insurance of the Norwegian operator?  To what extent can an operator responsible for a very limited part of the activity lean on the contingency plans and the insurance for search and rescue of the main operator?

    III. What issues have Parties’ competent authorities encountered when assessing safety issues related to activities?

We will mention a few examples, which we have encountered in our application process, and invite other Parties to share their views on how safety should be assessed for these activities: 

Snorkelling: Assessing the case mentioned above, it was found challenging to assess the contingency plans, especially when it came to which precautions should be made to limit the risk of attacks from leopard seals. In our example, the operator had developed guidelines for snorkelling, which included requirements for diving licence, experience and equipment for the participants, how the snorkelling would be organised, respect of animals in the water and precautions against leopard seals. 

Kayaking: The only Norwegian cruise operator active in Antarctica currently offers kayaking on an increasing number of locations. The main safety concern relates to risks associated with leopard seals. In addition to the question of which precautions should be made, one could ask if it should be considered to be taken into the site guidelines whether it is advisable to use the area associated with this site for kayaking. Another safety concern might be fast changes in the weather conditions. Should there for example be requirements pertaining the distance from the kayaks to the vessel or to accessible land?



    IV. What issues/challenges of wider implication/interest have Parties’ competent authorities handled with regard to various types of activities?

Last austral summer Norwegian authorities handled a notification for a solo skiing/kiting trans-Antarctic expedition. The expeditioner had agreements with two of the logistic- and SAR-providers in Antarctica in order to be covered fully geographically speaking. Because of slow progress at the start of the expedition, the company that provided SAR-services for the first part of the expedition requested that the expeditioner returned. The reasoning behind this request was to avoid the risk of potential dangerous SAR-operation too far south too late in the season and after the period defined in the SAR-agreement. The expeditioner refused to follow these instructions. 

The challenge in this situation was that Norwegian authorities had no formal grounds to ensure that the expeditioner followed the request. A worst-case scenario would be that one of the operators would be forced to go out on a hazardous rescue mission. This situation could have been avoided if the request had been followed. The contingency plan was sufficiently precise, but the plan was not followed. Since neither the Norwegian national regulations nor the Environmental Protocol regulate this, we seem to lack the possibility to follow up such situations. 

Have other Parties encountered similar situations? If so, how where they handled? If not, have other Parties any opinions on how this situation could be handled?	 

    V. Have Parties’ competent authorities encountered challenges/issues considering of activities in light of the purpose and principles of the Protocol and other relevant ATCM recommendations?

In this section we will share a few examples. It would be useful to know whether Parties have encountered similar situations. If so, how where they handled? If not, have other Parties any opinions on these situations?

Dogs: A Norwegian expedition planned in 2011 was to recreate Roald Amundsen’s expedition in 1911 and in that context planned to use the traditional gear and clothing from that original expedition. For this purpose, they also wanted to use dogs1. They presented comprehensive plans to avoid the dogs from escaping, which might have been sufficient to get an approval, if it had not been for the prohibition to bring dogs to Antarctica, cf. Article 4 number 2 in Annex II to the Environmental Protocol. The main purpose for this prohibition was to forbid unguarded dogs at the research stations. The original reasoning behind the ban was that dogs might escape and spread diseases. In this case, the expedition leader argued that they had planned adequate precautions to avoid dogs from escaping, that the dogs would not survive for long if they escaped, and that the expedition would take place in areas with practically no local wildlife.  The Norwegian competent authority refused to grant exemption from the prohibition. The expedition leader appealed, and the Ministry of Environment concluded that it would be in contradiction with the purpose of the national Regulations and the Environmental Protocol to grant exemption from the ban, particularly considering the overarching aim of protecting the Antarctic environment as well as Norway’s international responsibilities in this context. Nor was the Ministry aware of any other Party having made exemptions from the prohibition of the introduction of dogs into Antarctica, as stipulated in article 4 in the Annex II of the Environmental Protocol. 

Statues/art installations: A Norwegian art gallery wanted to place an exhibit at the ice shelf in Dronning Maud Land, close to the Neumayer Station. The exhibit consisted of 100 cast iron men, each weighing 730 kilos, and would occupy an area of three squares kilometres for a period of twelve months. The exhibition was not approved by Norwegian authorities. The environmental impacts were minor and transitory, but it was an extensive project that would have significant visual impacts for a considerable amount of time. This did not seem to be in compliance with the principles of the Environmental Protocol, but it was challenging to find the suitable legal basis to prohibit the exhibition. The gallery had not documented plans to remove the statues after the exhibition. However, even if the gallery had presented such plans, the competent authority found that the exhibition would not be consistent with the purpose to protect the intrinsic value of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values, cf. Environmental Protocol Article 3 paragraph 1. 


Requirement of insurance for SAR-operations and medical transport for sailing expeditions: The Norwegian competent authority has developed guidelines for how to fulfil these requirements. For the small-scale sailing expeditions to the Peninsula, the insurance must cover costs for up to 1,5 million NOK (approximately 176 000 Euro). We have seen that it might be difficult for these expeditions to obtain an insurance that covers both SAR-operations and medical evacuation. A combination of a SAR- insurance and travel insurances for the crew has therefore been accepted. Another issue is insurance coverage in connections with landings, when the SAR-insurance for the yacht might not apply. How have other Parties considered these questions?

