





Workshop on Education and Outreach 

Portugal’s Antarctic Education and Outreach Activities








Portugal’s Antarctic Education and Outreach Activities
Information Paper submitted by Portugal
Summary
The paper outlines the education and outreach activities undertaken by Portugal since 2005, in preparation to the International Polar Year (2007/08) involving national educational organisations, the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) and Polar Educators International (PEI).  Highly successful projects included LATITUDE60!, ‘Profession: polar scientist’ and ‘Education PROPOLAR’,all of which highlight Portugal’s commitment to education relating to the polar regions and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Introduction
At ATCM XXXVI, Portugal and Brazil stressed the importance of education and outreach as a potential issue for discussion at future ATCMs (para 234 in ATCM XXXVI report). Belgium provided a background paper emphasizing the importance of education and outreach (ATCMXXXVI/BP 22). Moreover, the topic ‘Education and Outreach’ was elevated to Priority 2 in the Five-Year Work Plan of the CEP (CEP XVI, final report, para. 166). At ATCM XXXVII, Brazil, Belgium, Bulgaria, Portugal and United Kingdom, along with other Parties, further emphasised the relevance of education under the Antarctic Treaty System (ATCM XXXVII/IP2 and ATCM XXXVII/WP09). Here we describe work related to Antarctic education carried out by Portugal since 2005.
Portugal´s education and outreach related activities since 2005
Portugal joined the IPY Youth Steering Committee (IPY-YSC) and the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) in 2006 and 2007, respectively.  Portugal has been an active member of the APECS Council from 2007 to the present day and was part of the interim executive committee of APECS (up to 2009). Several Portuguese scientists continue to act as mentors for early career scientist in APECS.

Complementing the Portuguese Polar Program PROPOLAR, the educational program LATITUDE60! was established in 2007 to produce a number of educational activities to inform schools, media, politicians and the general public about the importance of the Polar regions, while explaining the relevance of Antarctic research. As a non-polar country, it was crucial to explain to the general public, politicians and students: 
    1) why the polar regions are important;
    2) why Portugal should have polar scientists; and 
    3) the relevance of their science, while providing basic information about the polar regions.

The activities included a national contest whose top prize was a trip to the Antarctic on the ‘Students on Ice’ expedition.  Participants were at all levels of education (from kindergarten to university students) and could contribute as individuals or groups. To participate, students could produce a film, design a website, write a science poster, write a narrative, or produce a piece of art.  Other activities included the production of a theatre play, educational games and films, a website, pamphlets, blogs of polar expeditions and a televised publicity film which was broadcast by the national television station. During the IPY, stamps were produced that featured polar organisms (predominantly seabirds) that visit Portuguese waters, in an attempt to trying to connect the polar regions with warmer parts of the planet, including Portugal.  The program directly involved more than 8,000 students and 400 teachers from 180 schools nationally. It was considered to be a particularly successful case-study of the IPY.

Portugal worked closely with the IPY Sub-committee on Education and Outreach, joining members from numerous countries including Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, India, Malaysia, Netherlands, Norway, United Kingdom and the United States of America.  The committee aimed to: 
    • Help scientific projects include an education and outreach component
    • Encourage participation by countries with a shorter history of activity in polar regions (such as Portugal)
    • To leave a positive long-term legacy; and 
    • Invest in the next generation of Polar early career scientists. 

Portuguese scientists received a Certificate of appreciation” for valuable contributions to the success of Portugal in the International Polar year (awarded by the World Meteorological Organization, WMO, and International Council for Science, ICSU), whose contribution on education and outreach played an important part, along with the science.

The project ‘Profession: Polar scientist’, was established in 2013 as part of the next generation of educational projects in Portugal.  The project aimed to maintain the high level of educational activities in Portugal, in cooperation with other countries, and to bring polar scientists into classrooms through talks, skype calls (if in the field or in another country), debates and other educational activities. It involved scientists, teachers, educators and students from 11 countries worldwide (Portugal, Angola, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, France, Norway, Netherlands and United Kingdom), gathering 21 291 students, 397 teachers/educators, 75 schools and 27 scientists directly. Interactions with early career scientists was stimulated by engaging scientists from APECS, along with teachers/educators from Polar Educators International (PEI). This project was integrated with POLAR WEEKS, a world educational activity coordinated by APECS and PEI, in collaboration with the PROPOLAR nationally. 

The project “Education PROPOLAR”, also established in 2013, aimed to provide educational materials to schools such as a polar science pamphlet (to be distributed in schools and educational institutions), games, educational posters (for information and as part of an exhibition), educational films (e.g. polar scientists explaining science concepts while addressing major science questions (including their science)) and workshops on polar education by bringing together teachers/educators and scientists. Education materials were predominantly in Portuguese but various materials were also produced in other languages, particularly English (many are available online at www.propolar.org). Also, a polar science photographic exhibition was produced, based on photographs provided by numerous teams from across the country, which toured the country. The interactions between Universities, research centres and educational centres aimed to promote the potential that polar science has to stimulate students for STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) disciplines.

Portugal is highly committed to education relating to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, by co-leading the workshop on education (see ATCM XXXVII/WP09), with Bulgaria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile and the United Kingdom, planned for the ATCM XXXVIII, in Sofia, Bulgaria.

