





Workshop on Education and Outreach – New Zealand Ice-Reach: Inspiring Communities to Connect with Antarctica









Workshop on Education and Outreach – New Zealand Ice-Reach: Inspiring Communities to Connect with Antarctica

Information Paper submitted by New Zealand

Summary

For nearly 60 years New Zealand has maintained a permanent presence through its research station Scott Base, in the Ross Sea region of Antarctica. It is the longevity of our presence and experience which empowers us to support world-class science and deliver operational excellence. What is often under-resourced is the need to translate what all of our research means for New Zealanders, and what we have learnt as a result of our work on the frozen continent. To do this, our communications need to be strong and targeted, with our education and outreach goals globally connected, ambitious and inspiring.

This paper includes a high-level summary of work from three organisations based in Christchurch, New Zealand’s gateway to Antarctica, connecting national and international communications, outreach and education initiatives. 

Antarctica New Zealand – Delivering Antarctic education and outreach objectives

Education and outreach programmes form a significant part of the operational work at Antarctica New Zealand, New Zealand’s Antarctic Programme. This engagement spans from agencies sharing resources through to live-streaming Antarctic science into classrooms. A strong, active and engaging social media platform is essential in a world where many people are increasingly informed through digital channels.

Antarctica New Zealand has recently undertaken a review of its Artist and Media Programme. As a result, the Programme was replaced with a much more transparent and improved Community Engagement Programme. By requiring demonstrable examples of Antarctic reporting or displays, the New Zealand media and art communities have become invigorated to prove their active reporting on the continent. This enhances our overall outreach capability, but it also builds enthusiasm within the various media expressing interest in the Programme. 

The Antarctica New Zealand pictorial collection is another example of an effective outreach tool. Created in 1957 to serve as a photographic record of New Zealand's involvement in the Trans-Antarctic Expedition and International Geophysical Year activities, it contains more than 40,000 images and spans a history of nearly 60 years. To the best of our knowledge, no other Antarctic nation has such a comprehensive pictorial record of their activities so this is a significant international achievement. Preserving the collection is important, but making it easily accessible for all New Zealanders to enjoy is our priority. That’s why the decision was made to bring the images into the modern world, through a user-friendly, online graphical database.  As such, the Antarctica New Zealand Digital Asset Manager project (ADAM) was launched in 2013. This tool enables individuals from across the world to take a step back in time during their studies, and see images of Scott Base, in 1957 and iconic mountaineer Sir Edmund Hillary who led the New Zealand contribution to the Trans-Antarctic Expedition. The ADAM project will be formally launched on Thursday 18 June 2015 in Christchurch. The database can be accessed here: http://adam.antarcticanz.govt.nz/ 




Christchurch City Council, NZ IceFest – Delivery of a festival celebrating Antarctica

The city of Christchurch is the logistics hub for the New Zealand, Italian, Korean and American Antarctic programmes. Christchurch actively promotes its gateway city status, which contributes to an estimated 2,300 jobs with a value to the local economy of more than NZD100 million.

NZ IceFest, a biannual Festival driven by Christchurch City Council, celebrates New Zealand's unique relationship with Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. Through creative and interactive experiences the Festival brings Antarctica to the general public, the Antarctic community and international visitors. Its two primary goals are to showcase the scientific and cultural importance of Antarctica and to work collaboratively through Antarctic partnerships to provide world-class public education. 

During 2014, the Festival followed the SCAR Open Science Conference in Auckland and COMNAP annual general meeting in Christchurch. It was well-timed to showcase New Zealand’s commitment to education and outreach related to Antarctica. More than 60,000 people visited the festival over its two-week period. An additional 31,000 people were attracted to visit Antarctic-associated exhibitions during the build-up to NZ IceFest. 

The Festival works with six core partners and a further 38 contributors to deliver a diverse programme of activities. Examples included a virtual field trip to Antarctica where you were guided by scientists studying climate change. Participants in the field trip became part of a virtual group completing an Antarctic survival training course, living at Scott Base, joining morning meetings to discuss the day's activities, travelling during the day to collect data, and seeing how science is done in Antarctica. 

Another example of interactive engagement was a competition involving a social media classroom. Each student was tasked to research an Antarctic endeavour and write on the topic in a social media format suitable for a Facebook Post or a Twitter Tweet.  The top thirty Year 12 (16 year-old) students and two teachers won an Antarctic experience, including a flight over Christchurch in a C130 Hercules thanks to the Royal New Zealand Air Force and Antarctica New Zealand. 

The Festival offers something for everyone and has become an iconic event on the Christchurch calendar. It is an essential outreach and education tool. More information the Festival is available online: http://nzicefest.co.nz/festival-programme 

Gateway Antarctica, University of Canterbury – Delivering a world-class learning environment
If students are to embark upon a lifetime of success, they must be actively engaged and empowered to know that their knowledge, when used effectively, can make a difference in our communities. Gateway Antarctica is the Centre for Antarctic Studies and Research at the University of Canterbury (UC) and plays a leading role in the quest for knowledge in a diverse range of national and international Antarctic research projects. This includes areas such as engineering in extreme environments, Antarctica as driver of (and responder to) climate change, connections between Antarctica and New Zealand, and the scope, scale and impact of human engagement with Antarctica.

As an Antarctic-focussed research department, multi-disciplinary undergraduate courses (three introductory courses at first-year level and one second-year course) draw students from across UC and bring in international exchange students. One of the first-year courses is delivered entirely online, and is open to interested participants from across the world, independent of their location, profession or age.

At postgraduate level, Gateway Antarctica, in collaboration with Antarctica New Zealand, runs a unique 14-week summer programme (the Postgraduate Certificate in Antarctic Studies, commonly referred to as PCAS), which critically examines contemporary scientific, environmental, social and political debates focussed on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. PCAS enables its participants to immerse themselves in intensive study and active debate of Antarctic issues while experiencing living and working in Antarctica during a short, 12-day fieldtrip to the Ross Sea region. More information on PCAS is available online: www.anta.canterbury.ac.nz/courses/pcas/

In addition to its educational activities, Gateway Antarctica also hosts monthly Antarctic Research Group meetings, bringing together UC staff, members of the New Zealand (and sometimes overseas) Antarctic community, and postgraduate students for short presentations about ongoing Antarctic research followed by lively collegial discussions. Gateway Antarctica is also co-hosting a public Antarctic speaker series which, so far, has been very well received by the Christchurch community.

Gateway Antarctica’s outreach activities are inspired and carried out by many of its past and present postgraduate students.  These students have created teaching resources for primary and high schools, continued their involvement in Antarctic-related postgraduate research, nurtured Antarctic careers, been involved overseas in Antarctic education and outreach activities, and have contributed to national and international Antarctic conferences.  These students have run online public webinars and held workshops at Antarctic Science Conferences. They are also active at the community-level giving public talks and providing news articles about Antarctica and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme to a variety of publications.  

Gateway Antarctica is honoured to host the COMNAP secretariat, one of only four global secretariats that support the Antarctic Treaty System, and the Secretariat of the International Antarctic Institute, a global consortium of 20 universities which provides university education and conducts research in Antarctica.

Further Antarctic-related education and outreach activities

Across New Zealand there are many important partners contributing to Antarctic education and outreach. Other examples include:

The Antarctic Heritage Trust supports a diverse range of outreach and education activities which enable people to connect with the tales of early polar explorers. As well as protecting the physical legacy of the expedition bases, the Trust has delivered a range of outreach projects. These include the acclaimed photographic book Still Life: Inside the Antarctic Huts of Scott and Shackleton which was the platform for an inspiring digital expedition of the same name that is currently showing internationally, the opportunity to tour the historic sites through Google’s World Wonders project, an online game for young explorers and other initiatives detailed in WP023 (2015). More information on AHT is available online: www.nzaht.org 

The New Zealand Antarctic Research Institute (NZARI) which partners with research agencies to develop effective future leaders in polar research, education and outreach. NZARI does this through supporting a global understanding of Antarctica’s impacts and vulnerability in a changing climate. NZARI's vision is to inform industry, government and community alike so that we can plan for impacts of change and, where possible, mitigate them. More information on NZARI is available online: http://nzari.aq 

New Zealand is proud of its Antarctic education and outreach programmes, some of which this paper highlights. We are always interested in learning from the experiences of other National Antarctic Programmes to further expand and strengthen our own communication and outreach initiatives.

