





Special Working Group on Competent Authorities issues - Examples and Issues from the United Kingdom











Examples and issues from the United Kingdom for the Special Working Group on Competent Authorities issues

Information Paper presented by the United Kingdom
Summary

This paper highlights some recent issues arising from the work of the United Kingdom’s competent authority for the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection.  The ATCM XXXVIII Special Working Group on Competent Authorities may be interested to discuss some of the issues raised below.

Background

    1. The UK has established a permitting regime for British activities in Antarctica and this is outlined in ATCMXXXVIII/IP004.  The competent authority for the UK (including its Overseas Territories and Crown Dependences) is the Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO), which receives all applications for the undertaking of activities in Antarctica.  The FCO assesses whether the information provided by the applicants meets the requirements of the UK domestic legislation, seeks advice, where relevant, from other experts and agencies (e.g. Maritime Coastguard Agency), and liaises, as appropriate, with other international competent authorities.  The FCO adopts a policy of engaging with the applicant throughout this process, and encourages the applicant to modify their plans on the basis of the FCO’s assessment and wider advice and recommendations.  Once the FCO is content that the plans fully meet the UK’s legislation, which includes compliance with the Environmental Protocol and all subsequent adopted Measures and Resolutions relating to activities in Antarctica, the FCO will issue a permit.  The undertaking of activities in Antarctica which are not in accordance with the permit may constitute a criminal offence.

Permitting Example 1:	Applications for additional activities within expeditions authorised by another Consultative Party

    2. A number of British nationals have contacted the FCO in recent years to inquire about obtaining a permit to undertake a specific activity whilst they were visiting Antarctica on a cruise ship that had been authorised by another Treaty Party.  Specific examples include requests for permits to use remote-operated aerial camera systems (UAVs) and swimming in Antarctic waters.  The UK has taken the policy position that it will not issue separate permits for individuals to undertake such activities, as such activities should, wherever possible, be identified and assessed within the context of overall environmental impact assessment for the whole activity, as envisaged by Article 8(4) of the Environmental Protocol.  The UK has therefore advised that any such arrangements should be made directly with the cruise ship operator who has the overall Antarctic authorisation.  We would be interested in hearing the views of other Parties about how they handle similar requests. 

Permitting Example 2:	Applications involving relatively novel or potentially high risk activities

    3. The UK regularly receives a range of applications each season for large motor yachts to visit Antarctica and for land-based expeditions in the Antarctic interior.  The UK finds the Checklist of yacht specific items for preparing safe Antarctic voyages in Resolution 10(2012) and the Checklist for visitors’ in-field activities in Resolution 11(2012) extremely useful.  However, in recent years, many of these applications have involved a range of relatively novel or potentially high risk additional activities, such as the use of helicopters (one or two), submersibles (remote and manned) and vehicles (traditional and bespoke).  Applications are also increasing including requests to undertake a range of other activities in Antarctica such as diving, kayaking, skiing, snow-boarding etc.  As there are no specific tourism-industry or ATCM-approved guidelines or checklists covering many of these activities, the UK has negotiated specific permit conditions directly with each applicant to ensure safe and environmentally responsible operations.  The UK now has a range of specific permit conditions in order to try to ensure a level of consistency across British permits.  The UK would be interested in the views of Parties on how competent authorities might seek to ensure greater consistency in the standards and requirements for all those undertaking specific activities in Antarctica.

Permitting Example 3:	Applications involving non-Treaty Party assets or operators

    4. The UK regularly receives applications for the operation of British-registered vessels in Antarctica, whether or not the operator of a vessel is British, or is based in the UK or a UK Overseas Territory.  As flag-state for the vessel, issuing such permits is relatively straight-forward.  More complex applications arise where there is a British operator or British-based expedition, but where they intend to use assets registered to non-Treaty Parties, or sub-contract with operators who are not based in a Treaty Party.  In such instances, whilst the UK can make an assessment of the whole activity on the basis of UK domestic law, it is not always clear that the UK would be able to fully exercise jurisdiction if the non-Treaty Party operator does not stick to the agreed permit conditions.  In one recent case, a non-Treaty Party operator was keen to ensure compliance with the environmental impact assessment procedures under the Environmental Protocol (partly to meet membership conditions for IAATO) and subsequently opened an office in London in order to be eligible to apply for a UK permit.  However, there may be other non-Treaty Party operators undertaking activities in Antarctica with whom British expeditions may engage in the future and the UK would be interested in the views of other competent authorities as to how they handle expeditions which involve non-Treaty Party actors.


Permitting Example 4:	British activities in Antarctica for which no application was received

    5. The British media often reports on forthcoming expeditions to Antarctica and the UK competent authority has subsequently been able to contact the organisers of such expeditions to ensure they are aware of the UK’s permitting requirements.  The FCO has also undertaken a range of outreach activities, including through the GOV.UK website, and through expedition and yachting magazines, to promote the UK’s permitting procedures.  There have, however, been a number of British expeditions and British registered yachts who have undertaken activities in Antarctica without having a British permit. The UK competent authority has commenced several investigations into such activities (which is both time-consuming and potentially costly) and in most instances, it has transpired that authorisation/approval had actually been granted by another Treaty Party.  Where the UK is considering an application involving assets registered to another Treaty Party, the UK does seek to engage with that Treaty Party, in line with Resolution 3(2004), although this is not always straight-forward.  The UK would be interested to discuss with other Parties how our respective competent authorities can keep each other better informed when considering activities which involve the interests of another Party.


