





Search and Rescue Incident: Antarctic Chieftain (2015)









Search and Rescue Incident: Antarctic Chieftain (2015)

Information Paper submitted by New Zealand


Introduction:  New Zealand’s Search and Rescue Responsibilities in the Antarctic Treaty Area:

As a Party to the 1974 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) and its 1978 and 1988 Protocols, the 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue and the 1944 Convention on Civil Aviation, New Zealand has undertaken to provide aeronautical and maritime Search and Rescue co-ordination and certain services within a part of the Antarctic Treaty area including the Ross Sea.

The New Zealand Search and Rescue Region (NZSRR) is that defined by the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).  It includes all that area bounded on the west by meridian 163E, on the east by meridian 131W, extending south to the South Pole and bounded on the north by a line joining 25S 163E, 25 S 180E, 05S 171W, 05S 157W, 30S 157W, 30S 131W.    The ICAO defined NZSRR incorporates the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) defined NZSRR which differs only in the north-west corner adjacent to the New Caledonia Sub-Flight Information Region.


Antarctic Chieftain Incident:  Outline 

On 11th February 2015, following notification from Australian Long Line (the vessel’s owners),  Joint Rescue Coordination Centre (JRCC) Australia informed Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) that FV Antarctic Chieftain (photograph at Appendix 1) had become trapped in the ice pack, within the NZSRR and had declared an Urgency1 situation.

In accordance with the 1979 Maritime SAR Convention RCCNZ assumed coordination, established communications with the vessel and confirmed that the vessel, with 26 people on board, had become trapped in pack ice consisting of thick multi-year ice.  The hull was not damaged and not in contact with the ice, however the ice had contacted the propeller resulting in damage to three of the four blades.  There was no immediate threat to safety of life.

At the time of reporting, the captain advised there had been no ice movement for five days and assessed they would not be able to free themselves from the ice pack without assistance.  Further, once free of the ice pack it was not known whether their damaged propeller would allow them to make an unassisted safe passage to port.

Response Options – One of the initial actions for RCCNZ was to establish a surface picture of potential resources in the vicinity. A graphical depiction of these vessels is at Appendix 2. 


There were fishing vessels and National Antarctic Programme ships in the Ross Sea, but only three vessels had ice breaking capability:

    • USCGC Polar Star 430 nautical miles west of the location,
    • RV Nathaniel B Palmer 530 nautical miles west, and
    • RV Araon 920 nautical miles west.
  
Plan - Given the situation it was likely that this SAR operation would require a two staged approach:

    1. Identify a vessel capable of breaking through the ice pack.  The multi-year sea ice was going to be challenging to all but the most capable ice breaking vessels.
    2. Identify a vessel capable of either towing or escorting FV Antarctic Chieftain to the closest appropriate port; likely to be in New Zealand.

USCGC Polar Star was the closest and most capable vessel to achieve Stage 1.  As per the guiding principles within the RCCNZ Antarctic SAR Response Plan, RCCNZ approached the United States Antarctic Programme to discuss the situation and request the tasking of this ship. This request was passed through the Unites States Coast Guard chain of command and the tasking was quickly approved.  USCGC Polar Star diverted from their intended route (the ship had been on return voyage to Seattle, Washington) to assist FV Antarctic Chieftain.

Concurrent to this Australian Long Line approached the New Zealand fishing company Talley’s to assist with Stage 2 – tow or escort operations.  FV Janas was 800 nautical miles to the north and with Talley’s agreement commenced recovering their fishing lines in preparation to rendezvous with FV Antarctic Chieftain.

Outcome – On 14th February USCGC Polar Star arrived on scene and commenced breaking the ice pack around FV Antarctic Chieftain.  The fishing vessel was then towed/escorted clear of the ice to the rendezvous point.

On 16th February FV Janas arrived at the rendezvous with FV Antarctic Chieftain.  Over the next 24 hours sea trials were undertaken and once their propeller proved capable FV Antarctic Chieftain commenced their voyage to New Zealand in company with FV Janas.

On 3rd March both vessels arrived safely in New Zealand.

Acknowledgements

Three key elements increased the likelihood of this SAR operation achieving success:

The proximity and availability of the USCGC Polar Star.  RCCNZ thanks the United States Coast Guard for approving the tasking request and commends the crew for demonstrating the best traditions of seamanship.

The well-established relationship between the United States Antarctic Programme and RCCNZ that plays an integral part in many SAR operations in the Ross Sea region.

The cooperative relationship within the fishing industry that facilitated the tasking of the New Zealand flagged FV Janas to provide assistance to the Australian flagged FV Antarctic Chieftain.



Appendix 1: FV Antarctic Chieftain




Appendix 2: Surface Picture



