





Tourism Management Policy for Brown Scientific Station

English version provided by the author




Tourism Management Policy for Brown Scientific Station 
Information paper presented by Argentina
Background
In 2010 Argentina presented Working Paper 49 “Proposal for the elaboration of guidelines for stations that receive visitors” in order to promote Parties to elaborate guidelines for tourist visits to the stations managed by them.
As a result of debates, many Parties supported the proposal that stations should have written regulations related to visitors (paragraph 245 Final Report XXXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting). Through the IP 86 “Tourism Management Policy for Brown Scientific Station” of the XXXVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Argentina presented its guidelines for the above-mentioned station. 
The different guidelines that Parties have been communicating to govern visits to their Antarctic stations, have been incorporated to the IAATO “Field Operations Manual”, in order to apply them during visits to those facilities by their associated operators. It would be appreciated that these guidelines also be included in the above Manual. 
Brown Scientific Station
Brown Station (64º53'S 62º53'W) is a seasonal Argentine station located in the northern area of the Sanaviron Peninsula, at the coastal strip of Punta Proa – Gerlache Strait. It was founded on April 6th, 1951, originally as a meteorological observatory.
In 1984, a major fire destroyed the main lodging quarters and the station’s shop/warehouse. The emergency house, the aquarium, the tide gauge and the main power house remained intact. 
Over the course of time and as the station reassumed its functions, projects related to studies on the physicochemical parameters of water column, costs geology and primary productivity were developed.
At present, this Argentine station continues with its scientific role, although it is worth mentioning that for many decades it has concentrated the highest number of tourist visits to an Argentine Station. Thus, it is ranked within the ten most visited tourism sites in Antarctica, while Paradise Harbour remains ranked fifth according to recent statistics. In recent years, the number of visitors by season, according to IAATO records indicates an average of 8,500 visitors, with occasional summer seasons with higher numbers.
At present, current scientific and tourist activities, are both affected by reconditioning and cleaning tasks of facilities and the surrounding area. 
Tourism Management Policy for Brown Scientific Station
In this context of intense logistic activity being undertaken at the station and taking into account the scientific activity every season, Argentina has decided to implement a controlled reception of visits, or a schedule for the reception of visitors so that all the activities carried out at the station do not interfere with each other.
This has also been assessed in line with Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994) “Tourism Guidelines”, Regulation 5 (2007) “Tourism in the Area of the Antarctic Treaty”, Resolution 7 (2009) “General principles of Antarctic Tourism”, la Resolution 4 (2007) “Maritime tourism”, among others. Likewise, Measure 15 (2009) “Disembarkation of people from passenger vessels in the Area of the Antarctic Treaty”, was considered although it has not yet entered into force. 
The guidelines annexed to this document, aim at regulating visits to Brown Station, preserving both the scientific and logistic activities being undertaken, as well as the environmental assets of the area, and at the same time providing for a safe visit by tourists in the areas of the station’s facilities. These guidelines apply to the station facilities while Paradise Harbour and the trips on Zodiac type boats that take place in the area are excluded.
During the period when the station is open, the guidelines for visitors will be complemented with lectures on the environment and the Station’s management issues, delivered by the Station’s Environment Officer.
Meeting with these guidelines will be mandatory for every visitor visiting Brown Station, both if the visit is within the framework of an organized activity by a IAATO member, or for any other visitor arriving at the station. 











