





Bioremediation on the Brazilian Antarctic Station area









Bioremediation on the Brazilian Antarctic Station area
Information Paper submitted by Brazil
Introduction

Environmental monitoring of the Brazilian Antarctic Station ("Estação Antártica Comandante Ferraz – EACF") has identified hydrocarbons soil contamination caused by diesel spills. Thereby, in accordance to Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the Clean-up Manual, the Brazilian Antarctic Program begun to develop a remediation plan for the area of the EACF, with the aim of minimizing impacts on the Antarctic environment.
Background and techniques applied

Since 2012, soil and water samples have been collected annually and analyzed to determine the level and extension of contamination.

The technique chosen to clean-up the soil was  bioremediation, which is based on the ability  certain indigenous microorganisms have to use  petroleum hydrocarbons as energy source. These techniques are appropriate for polar soils, considering their cost-effectiveness and the safety for the Antarctic environment. 

The first intervention was done in the 2013-14’s summer, when an in situ bioremediation technique was applied over an extension of thereabout 700 m3 of oil-contaminated soil. Detailed description of this intervention was presented in  IP 7/ CEP XVII (“Remediation Plan for the Brazilian Antarctic Station area”). 

The second intervention took place earlier this year, in January 2015. At this time, an ex situ bioremediation technique was undertaken with the construction of a conventional biopile. Contaminated soil was removed from an area between the area treated in the first phase and the shoreline and deposited in another impacted area, previously prepared for this purpose. Then, fertilizers were added and the biopile was covered with a geomembrane. This intervention was over a volume of 450m3 of oil-contaminated soil.

Soil samples of these biopiles are being collected in the beginning and in the end of each summer season, in order to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of these trials. Results will provide important information to contribute to better understanding the technique of bioremediation. 



