





The yacht Sarah W. Vorwerk within the Antarctic Treaty area during the season 2014/2015 









The yacht Sarah W. Vorwerk within the AntarcticTreaty area 
during the season 2014/2015
Information Paper submitted by Germany and Argentina
    1. Introduction
This paper is submitted with reference to Article 13, paragraph 4 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) regarding the sharing of information on activities affecting the implementation of the Protocol.
This paper presents a factual account of the activities of the yacht Sarah W. Vorwerk. It is suspected that in December 2014, the yacht performed a journey within the Antarctic Treaty area without authorisation. 
During this journey, a group of divers from the Russian Geographic Society were also aboard the yacht with the stated aim of “develop(ing) relatively safe methods of deep diving in the Antarctic conditions to improve the effectiveness of underwater exploration” (www.rgo.ru/en/article/expedition-antarctica-100-0). Two dives were performed near Deception Island. 
    2. Background
Sarah W. Vorwerk is registered in Hamburg, Germany, and is operating under the German flag. 
The owner and skipper is a Dutch national who sometimes used to stay in Argentina as a tourist from where he has probably organised cruises to Antarctica. Until the Antarctic season 2013/2014, the Federal Environment Agency (UBA), the German competent authority, had issued permits for Antarctic activities of the yacht, given that the skipper had formerly resided in Germany. 
In February 2014, UBA informed the skipper that it would no longer process his permit applications given that his case did not fall under German legislation implementing the Environment Protocol. Neither was he a German national nor was he domiciled or habitually resident in the territory of Germany. UBA advised him to apply for permits with either the Netherlands or possibly Argentina, and to contact those competent authorities in order to ensure that a permit for the upcoming season would be granted on time. In addition, UBA sent a letter to the Dutch and Argentine authorities, informing them about potential permit applications by the operator of Sarah W. Vorwerk for the next season 2014/2015.
In January 2015, IAATO inquired with UBA and the Russian competent authority whether the yacht journey and diving expedition had been conducted with a permit from either the German or Russian competent authorities. Following e-mail correspondence, Argentina, Germany, the Netherlands and Russia confirmed that neither of them had authorised the yacht expedition including the Russian divers. It could not be clarified whether the yacht or divers had been given a notification or permit by any other Party.
    3. The Legal Status of the Sarah W. Vorwerk’s Activities in Antarctica
In accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and national implementing legislation, the Sarah W. Vorwerk Antarctic expedition was required to submit a notification and an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of its intended expedition to Antarctica to a competent authority. It seems that no advance notification or EIA was submitted to any competent authority prior to the expedition’s departure for Antarctica.

This raises concerns about unauthorised activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. It is recommended that the Parties concerned consider how to proceed further on this particular episode.
