





Towards a Comprehensive, Proactive and Effective Antarctic Tourism Policy: Turning Recommendations into Action









Towards a Comprehensive, Proactive and Effective Antarctic Tourism Policy: Turning Recommendations into Action
Abstract

The critical importance of ‘institutional memory’ (who said, what, when and why at various ATCMs) notwithstanding, a detailed analysis of various IPs and WPs submitted over almost five decades is far beyond the scope of this paper. What this IP intends to do instead is to selectively map out the origins and evolution of ATCM dialogue on ‘regulating’ Antarctic tourism, highlighting (through selective italicization of certain sections of text1) the recommendations (formal and informal) made in this regard by the three categories of stakeholders; Regulators, Organisers and Monitors. It is hoped that this exercise will shed some light on durability and consistency of various issue-areas as perceived, framed and flagged by various stakeholders over a rather long period. The IP is structured as follows:

1. Introduction; 
2.Origins of Key Enduring Concerns and their Evolution during 1960s and 1970s
3. The Decade of ‘No-Recommendations on Tourism Issues’: 1982-1992
4. Post-Madrid Protocol: Interventions and Recommendations by the Antarctic Tourism Monitors/Experts
5. Return to the ATCM (1994 to 2004)
6. 2005 – to date
7.India’s Sense of the Need for a Comprehensive, Proactive and Effective Antarctic Tourism Policy 
Annexes: A, B, C

1. Introduction
Acknowledging at the outset the critical importance of putting into place a comprehensive, proactive and effective Antarctic tourism policy, anchored in the precautionary principle2, India would like to put on record its deepest appreciation for the contributions that distinguished National Delegations, Observers (SCAR, COMNAP and CCAMLR) and Invited Experts to the ATCMs, especially IAATO and ASOC, have made to the ongoing dialogue at the ATCMs, ever since the subject of Antarctic tourism was first discussed in 1966.3At the Brasilia ATCM last year India, while commending Netherland’s recommendation for a ‘more proactive approach by identifying the growth of activities and cumulative impacts before they happened’, ‘also noted the importance of moving from Resolutions to Measures, to put into force building blocks to address the risks posed by future activities’4. India enthusiastically welcomes the convening of the ‘Special WG session on Competent Authorities issues relating to tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica’ during the Sofia ATCM and is hopeful that deliberations of this important session will further act as a catalyst for turning the ‘Strategic Vision’ for Antarctic Tourism into a proactive, comprehensive and effective Antarctic tourism policy through a building-block approach.
For the purposes of this IP, we borrow the classification deployed by a seminal study to identify key Antarctic tourism stakeholders.5 These are: (a) Regulators: ‘government representatives directly involved in Antarctic policy’; (b) Organisers: ‘tour operators and industry representatives’; and (c) Monitors: ‘representatives of environmental NGOs and Antarctic tourism researchers’.6 While acknowledging the usefulness of this classification, we remain conscious of the fact that (i) within each category of stakeholder prevails a remarkable diversity of perspectives and priorities, with significant implications for Antarctic tourism policy; (ii) the texts framed and flagged by various stakeholders from time to time have been dictated and driven to some extent by the wider regional and global geopolitical, geoeconomic and legal contexts; and (iii) the Antarctic tourism policy environment is increasingly shaped by the forces of globalization7, flows and networks operating both within and across state actors. 
2. Origins of Key ‘Enduring Concerns’ and their Evolution during1960sand 1970s
Given a context marked by the pre-eminence of science as the ‘first order value’ to be pursued and promoted in the Antarctic, some of the early interventions on the issue of tourism at the ATCMs were dictated overwhelmingly by the concern that tourist activities may affect the conduct of science and scientific stations (enduring concerns till date). At the 4thATCM (Santiago, 3-18 November, 19668), the draft Recommendationproposed by the United States of America pointed out that even though ‘not expressly mentioned in the Antarctic Treaty, tourism in the Antarctic must be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty and Recommendations which have become effective’. In November 1966, the first resolution on Antarctic tourism was passed by the ATCM, urging states to withhold permission for tourist groups to visit Antarctic stations in the absence of assurances being given of ‘compliance with the provisions of the Treaty, Recommendations then effective and the conditions applicable at the stations to be visited’ (Recommendation IV-27 (1966): Effects of Antarctic Tourism). All that the 5th ATCM (Paris, 18-29 November 1968) had to report on ‘Tourism Activities in Antarctica’ was that ‘there was a useful exchange of views on the effect of tourism in the Antarctic. Reports were circulated about certain trips which have been made recently and about the conditions which various countries have made applicable to any tourist groups wishing to visit their stations.’9
It was against the backdrop of the first newly built expedition ship MS Explorer ushering in the modern expedition cruise industry in 1969 and regular flights starting from Argentina to Antarctica a year later, that the 6th ATCM was held in Tokyo (19-31 October 1970).10Recommendation VI-7 (1970): Effects of Tourist and Non-Government Expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area’ noted the ‘increase in recent years in the number of tourists and also in the number of visitors who are not sponsored by the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty Area.’ Considered that ‘such activities can have lasting and harmful effects on scientific programmes, on the Antarctic environment, particularly in Specially Protected Areas, and on historic monuments’, and recommended to the Governments of the twelve ATCPs that: ‘They should exert appropriate efforts to ensure that all tourists and other visitors do not engage in any activity in the Treaty areas which is contrary to the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty or Recommendations made under it.’ The reference to ‘exert appropriate efforts’, despite the obvious lack of clarity, was perhaps thought to be sufficient at a time when the ‘Lindblad Way’ of Antarctic Tourism was the norm.11
The 7th ATCM (Wellington, 30 October-10 November 1972) witnessed growing concerns over the minerals issue and the ATCPs (noting ‘the technological developments in polar mineral exploration and the increasing interest in the possibility of there being exploitable minerals in the Antarctic Treaty Area’ and recognizing ‘problems of an environmental nature’ arising from mineral exploration) were to recommend to their Governments: ‘that the subject “Antarctic Resources-Effects of Mineral Exploration” be carefully studied and included on the agenda of the Eighth Consultative Meeting.12 Over the next decade and a half, the issue of the regulation of Antarctic tourism would very much remain on the agenda of the ATCMs but under the shadow of complex resource and sovereignty issues.13
Recommendation VII-4 (1972): Effects of Tourists and Non-Governmental Expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area (Wellington, 1972), urged the ATCPs to ‘keep under review, in the light of existing Recommendations, the effects in the Treaty Area of tourists and other visitors who are not sponsored by Consultative Parties; consider drawing up at the Eighth Consultative Meeting a statement of those accepted practices and relevant provisions about which all visitors to the Treaty Area should be aware; consult each other well in advance about the possibility of designating at the Eighth Consultative Meeting an adequate number of areas of interest to which tourists could be encouraged to go, and about the criteria to be used to determine such areas; use their best efforts to ensure that the provisions of the Treaty and subsequent recommendations relating to the conservation of fauna and flora are applied in practice to all visitors who are not sponsored by Consultative Parties, as well as to tourists.’
It is worth recalling that agenda item 12 of 8th ATCM (Oslo, 9-20 June 1975) was listed/titled as ‘Areas of Special Interest to Tourists’. There is little documentary evidence, however, to suggest that the matter was discussed at some length in Oslo by the ATCPs. Concerns regarding the Antarctic marine (to be followed by mineral) resources had obviously registered themselves on the agenda of the Oslo meeting with greater sense of urgency. The Oslo meeting, while ‘acknowledging that tourism is a natural development in this [Antarctic Treaty] Area and that it requires regulation’, recommended to their Governments that: 

    1. ‘They use their best endeavours to ensure that all those who enter the Antarctic Treaty Area, both those sponsored by Governments and those not so sponsored, are aware of the Statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty in Annex A to this Recommendation; 
    2. They request all organizers of tourist groups, except in an emergency, to: (a) visit only those Antarctic stations for which permission has been sought and granted in accordance with Recommendation IV-27; (b) land only within the Areas of Special Tourist Interest listed or defined in Annex B to this Recommendation; 
    3. When granting permission for tourist groups to visit Antarctic stations, which they maintain, Consultative Parties shall require tour organizers to report their activities within the Treaty Area. These reports shall be made at the end of the season to the Consultative Parties whose stations they have visited, in accordance with the requirements listed in Annex C to this Recommendation. The Consultative Parties shall transmit any such reports received by them to the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting; 
    4. They keep Annexes A, B and C to this Recommendation under review at successive Consultative Meetings’.14
The 9th ATCM (London, 19 September-7 October 1977) ‘owing to lack of time for full discussion’ could not take any action to ‘list or define areas of Special Tourist Interest for inclusion in Annex B of Recommendation VIII-9’.15
At the 10thATCM (Washington D.C., 17 September-15 October 1979) a working document  submitted by the Chilean delegation listed out a number of Do’s and Don’ts for the tourists, including protection of the environment and its ecosystems (e.g. contaminating the environment with waste matter, introducing alien species, conservation of flora and fauna), prohibitions on entering specially protected areas, places of special scientific interest (without a special permit issues by the ATCP), Historic monuments, New Islands (to prevent their contamination by human contact).16 Whereas the ‘Draft Statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty’ submitted by the US, outlined a number of principles of guidance for visitors to the Antarctic, while pointing out that ‘scientists still know very little about the ecological situation in the Antarctic. At the present early stage in research on these matters, some provisional restrictions and precautions may seem unnecessary harsh, but preliminary studies indicate the need for great caution. By following a few very simple requests, you [tourists] can help preserve this region for future generations to enjoy’.17
The tourist flights over Antarctica occurred as early as 1956 when a Douglas DC-6B of LAN Chile flew over the South Shetland Islands and Trinity Peninsula carrying 66 passengers. Qantas (using Boeing 747 aircraft) and Air New Zealand (using Douglas DC-10) began over-flights in 1977 and by February 1980 had made a total of 44 excursions. 
On 28 November 1979 (in less than two months after the 10th ATCM in Washington D.C.) two hundred and fifty seven people of several nationalities died when Air New Zealand Flight 901 crashed into the slopes of Mount Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica, adding a unprecedented sense of urgency to the challenge of regulating Antarctic tourism, especially considerations related to human safety, search and rescue in exceptionally challenging southern polar environment.18This was a rather harsh and emphatic reminder that tourism in the Antarctica, even though accepted by consensus as natural, legitimate and peaceful human activity had to be ‘tourism with a difference’ and thus in need of comprehensive regulation through stringent, proactive, precautionary legally binding mechanisms.19
The 11th ATCM (Buenos Aires, 23 June-7 July 1981), held against the sad backdrop of the 1979 tragic air crash, passed ‘Recommendation XI-3 (1981): Air Disaster on Mount Erebus’ and the ATCPs apparently resolved to respond/react by underlining the need for designating ‘Areas of Special Tourist Interest’. The Final Report of the 11th ATCM noted: 
In Plenary discussion of this Agenda Item attention was drawn to the need to consider whether steps should be taken to designate Areas of Special Tourist Interest provided for in Recommendation VIII-9 and to the increasing number of non-governmental expeditions seeking help from some Consultative Parties.

Regarding Areas of Special Tourist Interest, work was begun on the principles that might be adopted if such Areas were to be designated but discussion indicated a measure of doubt as to whether it would be prudent to proceed further with the designation of such Areas. It was agreed that there should be further study of the issues raised in discussion with a view to further consideration of the topic at the Twelfth Consultative Meeting.20

Regarding non-governmental expeditions the value was recognized of adopting a common response to inquiries when a Consultative Party was approached with a request for assistance from such an expedition. It was agreed that this matter should be taken up again at the next Consultative Meeting.21
It will be instructive to note in passing that there was no further consideration of ‘Areas of Special Tourist Interest’ at the next 12th ATCM held in Canberra in September 1983 and this important issue-area would have to wait a thorough scrutiny for quite some time. 
3. The Decade of ‘No-Recommendations on Tourism Issues’: 1982 to 1992
Given the overwhelming importance of the complex minerals issue on the ATCM agenda and the crisis of consensus that preceded the negotiations leading to the Madrid Protocol, the ATCM dialogue on tourism continued but no recommendations on this subject were passed between1982 and 1992; a decade that also saw a noticeable increase in the number of ATCPs from Asia. This period also witnessed the crowding of agenda related to polar science policy and diplomacy in terms of both Antarctic-specific and international/global events/agreements.22
The Final Report of 12th ATCM (Canberra, 13-27 September 1983) noted that ‘non-governmental expeditions and tour operators should be covered by adequate insurance and some form of guarantee that would demonstrate their responsibility for their activities’. It was further noted that ‘since there was no agreement as to where responsibility for non-governmental activity should lie, the draft recommendation which had been tabled was withdrawn’. ‘It was agreed’ at the same time, that ‘the isolation of the region meant that assistance by national programs to such activities was expensive, disruptive to research programs and sometimes hazardous to life and equipment’. 
At the 13th ATCM (Brussels, 7- 18 October 1985), engagement with tourism issues was rather brief. The IP submitted by Federal Republic of Germany (originally intended for the use of its own authorities) while highlighting the obligations of member states in cases of tourism and non-Governmental expeditions to Antarctica, noted that earlier recommendations in this regard ‘had been developed over the years and responded to developments as they had occurred’. IP 15 presented by the Federal Republic of Germany emphasised among other things the need for adequate insurance cover ‘against the risk of incurring financial charges or material losses’ and ‘except in emergencies’, visitors landing ‘only within the ‘Areas of Special Tourist Interest’. The delegation of the United Kingdom expressed the view that ‘it might then be appropriate to attempt to codify the existing recommendations’. The IP presented by the United States set out public US policy towards non-Governmental expeditions. The Final Report of Thirteenth ATCM noted that, ‘some delegations recalled that tourism was one of the legitimate uses of Antarctica and the relevant regulations should tend to harmonize this use with other peaceful activities in Antarctica, in particular the scientific activities and that they should also tend to assume the compatibility of touristic activities with the need to protect the environment of Antarctica.’23
By the time the ATCPs assembled for the 14th ATCM (Rio de Janeiro, 5-16 October 1987, the focus on Antarctic tourism had become sharper.24 The Meeting noted that ‘so far tourism and non-governmental activities have had minimal adverse impact, very significant numbers of people were now involved in these activities and, given the concentration of such activities in various areas, there was potential for serious impacts, both in environmental terms of possible damage to fragile ecosystems and compounding existing waste problems and in scientific terms on national research programs.’25 The Meeting noted the concerns expressed by several delegations over some inadequacies/gaps in the existing measures (some of which were perceived as complex) and information (especially with respect to small private expeditions) and ‘the need for an improved procedure for receiving reports from operators and private expeditions, and for exchanging information among Treaty Parties.26’ Some of the key issues highlighted by ‘several delegations’ included ‘their own policies and conditions governing tourist activities’27, based on recommendations from ATCMs, which included ‘requirements and procedures for requesting permission to visit scientific stations, including prior notice; use of station facilities and rules of conduct: supervision and briefings from lecturers and professionally trained guides; safety and self-sufficiency of expeditions; and observance of restrictions of access to protected areas.’ It was noted that ‘SCAR had produced a useful guide for visitors to the Antarctic’28. It is worth mentioning that Final Report of Rio de Janeiro also noted:
Possible accidents requiring search and rescue operations were of particular concern. These can be expensive and hazardous and demanding on the limited resources and facilities available. In this connection, it was noted that there have been accidents involving both tourist operations and also private expeditions. Some delegations stressed that in this respect, it was non-governmental expeditions that caused them most concern in relation to safety of human life and potential disturbances of the normal operation of scientific and logistic activity in Antarctica. In this connection problems of liability and insurance were mentioned as well as the need for ice capable vessels.29
At the 15th ATCM (Paris, 9-20 October 1989), there was overall acceptance among the ATCPs that as ‘the scale of tourism and non-governmental activities continued to increase…Antarctica should in general be open to such activities, which could be valuable in broadening public awareness and appreciation of the continent.’30 Having noted that the ATCPs were however concerned that ‘such activities, if uncontrolled or excessive, could have potentially serious adverse impacts on scientific investigations and the Antarctic environment.’31 In this context, ‘some delegations indicated that a distinction should be drawn between tourism and non-governmental activities’.32 The Meeting therefore agreed that ‘a comprehensive review of the issue of the issue was required, taking account of the relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and existing Recommendations (IV-2, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9, and X-8), as well as relevant Recommendations adopted at the present Meeting which could contribute to an amelioration of the situation’.
The following questions raised by the delegation of the United Kingdom in a WP presented at the Paris Meeting33 resonate well even today in terms of their enduring significance, despite the fact that over the intervening three decades the context within which Antarctic tourism has to be regulated has become increasingly complex and nuanced. Hence theydeserve to be reproduced/recalled verbatim:
1. How should the activity under consideration be defined?
2. Is the purpose to limit the amount of activity or, irrespective of the amount of activity, to provide for regulation in the interests of environmental sustainability?
3. For purposes of exchanging information about such activity, in advance, what are or should be the obligations of:
(a) All Contracting Parties?
(b) Consultative Parties?
(c) Contracting Parties in relation to activity organised in their territory?
(d) Contracting Parties in relation to activity not organised in, but departing for the Antarctic from, their territory?
4. What rights does or should a Contracting Party have to refuse, limit or place conditions on, visits to its stations by an activity?
5. 5. How can it be ensured that an activity is made aware of such refusals, limitations or conditions at the planning stage?
6. What rights do or should station commanders have with regard to an activity intending to visit or visiting their stations?
7. Should activity be subject to environmental impact assessment procedures? If so,
(a) how and by whom should assessments be prepared?
(b) to whom should they be communicated?
(cl how and by whom should they be monitored?
8. What obligations should rest with an activity to report on what is has done?
9. What roles should Areas of Special Tourist Interest or the management of activity within designated areas have with respect to recreational activity?
10. How are regulations to be enforced? In particular, what role in securing compliance should be played by:
(a) all Contracting Parties?
(b) Contracting Parties with which an activity has some special connection?
By the late 1980s, a number of Antarctic specialists felt that regulations in the form of ‘Recommendations’ were rather ‘inadequate and open to questioning’.34 There appeared to be a mismatch between growing sense of concern, bordering urgency at times, and the political will to conceptualize and operationalize specific legally binding measures in the form of regulatory building blocks. ‘With the escalating trends in tourist numbers, the mood of the Treaty parties by 1989 was that something needs to be done; precisely what, in regulatory terms, could not be collectively agreed upon.’  
In the 30th anniversary year of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, and against the encouraging backdrop of the ‘Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty’ declared open to signatures in Madrid on 4 October 1991, the16th ATCM, held in Bonn (7-18 October 1991),witnessed an unprecedented return and rise of a large number of ‘enduring concerns’ (but not without some disagreement among the ATCPs) in pursuit of a‘ comprehensive review of the issue of tourism and non-governmental expeditions’ (as per the decision of 15th ATCM) of Antarctic tourism.35 Several longstanding issue-areas were revived and revisited in the new context of the Madrid Protocol and its Annexes. Recommendation ATCM XVI-1336 (Bonn, 1991) eventually would not enter into effect but its text was quite revealing in terms of both the mounting sense of urgency and the dawning of realization among the ATCPs that the task of a ‘comprehensive regulation’ of Antarctic tourism was not a matter of choice but necessity from the standpoint of overall authority, legitimacy and effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty System. Recalling that the 15th ATCM had agreed on the point that ‘a comprehensive review of tourism and non-governmental activities was required’ and acknowledged that ‘the Protocol constitutes the framework for further progress in Antarctic environmental protection’ the Recommendation urged the ATCPS to convene a informal meeting of the Parties ‘with a view to making proposals to the XVIIth Consultative Meeting on the question of a comprehensive regulation of tourist and non-governmental activities in Antarctica in accordance with the Protocol’ to address:  

(a) Environmental issues: implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annexes; number of tourists / carrying capacity; homologation of standards relating to vessels; permanent infrastructure for tourists; concentration/dispersal of tourist activities; access to unexplored areas; (b) Operational issues; notification and expansion of information to be exchanged; system for granting permission to visit stations; self-sufficiency; insurance, including search and rescue insurance; information obligation of Parties; preparation and training of tour guides, and visitors’ guides; -examination of the need for specific kinds of control and monitoring; requirements for organisational procedures.37
The intervention by ASOC at the Bonn meeting38 further revealed the broad spectrum of the nature and scope of issue-areas demanding as well as deserving upscaling further consideration from the stand point of Antarctic tourism policy. These issue-areas included the‘major impacts of tourism activities possibly involving ‘marine pollution from accidents, inadequate waste disposal practices, arid harmful interference with wildlife and the natural environment, due to the frequency of visits, concentration of visitors and lack of awareness’. ASOC strongly recommended that ‘tourist activity be managed within the category of "Special Managed Areas" (SMAs)’ and ‘Tourist activities should be regulated by area-specific Management Plans.’ ASOC further noted that for the purposes of regulating ‘commercial tourism’ in the Antarctica, it ‘does not support the provision in existing Recommendations for the establishment of Antarctic Special Tourist· Interest Sites (ASTIs), as exclusive zones for tourists.’ ASOC also expressed its ‘opposition to the establishment of land-based tourist facilities’ and proposed that ‘such a prohibition be directly expressed within a management plan.’ Apparently, diverse perspectives on how best to operationalize regulatory concerns into effective policies had started surfacing. 
On the menu of burgeoning recommendations on Antarctic tourism regulation, those made by the WTO in an IP39deserve some recollection. Emphasising that realizing ‘sustainable tourism’ requires ‘the co-operation of Antarctic Treaty Parties, non-governmental organizations, and tourism industry representatives’, the IP presented by WTO underlined the value of self-regulation by the tourism industry and search for best practices from the rest of the globe:
Antarctic tourism depends on the environmental protection of the Antarctic. In upholding this principle, several tour operators have voluntarily accepted strict guidelines for themselves, as well as for visitors to the Antarctic. Their high degree of voluntary compliance and self-regulation could serve as a model for other tour operators, not only in the Antarctic, but throughout the world. These guidelines, which are accepted and promoted by the recently formed International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators, represent a significant foundation for comparable guidelines that could be officially endorsed by the WTO and ATS…The WTO can assist in the implementation of a plan by serving as a neutral framework or mechanism for gathering and distributing information pertinent to tourism policy in the Antarctic (ibid.).  
Even though the Bonn ATCM could not reach consensus over a separate annex integral to the Protocol on tourism, there was a shared concern to regulate the problem within the framework of the ATS. The following issues came up for immediate consideration: ‘supervision of tourists on the continent, registration and licensing of shipping, provision of air-navigation arrangements and emergency and rescue services, the need to educated those involved in all aspects of tourism, the scientific tourists sites as to avoid interference with the sites of scientific research and the need to integrate both existing and new recommendations in a single code.’
An informal two-day Meeting on Tourism was held during the 17th ATCM Venice, on 9-10 November 1992, to address Recommendation XVI-13 and try to hammer out a consensus over on the best way to move forward on Antarctic tourism regulation by addressing the following key question: Does Antarctic tourism need a specific policy, contained in a single legally binding document form and ‘not scattered’ throughout a number of such documents? 40 What emerged in response was a sharp disagreement between two groups of ATCPs: the ‘Group of Five’ (Chile, France, Germany, Italy and Spain) and the United States, United Kingdom and Australia.41 France, on behalf of the ‘Group of Five’, introduced a preliminary draft Annex VI to the Protocol and ‘from a legal point of view’ advanced ‘three arguments for the adoption of an Annex:
A comprehensive framework regulating tourism and non-governmental activities, agreed to between the Parties to the Protocol, would allow States at their national levels to enact a coherent and homogeneous body of laws and regulations, thereby avoiding the danger of serious inconsistencies. The provisions of the Protocol, with the exception of Annex I related to the environmental impact evaluations, are too general and imprecise on the subject of tourism and non-governmental activities; this may lead to the negative result that national laws and regulations in this field may become inconsistent enough so as to fail to meet the goals of the Antarctic Treaty System, and may also be exploited by travel organisers.

Furthermore, an Annex to the Protocol would offer the advantage of creating a rule with indisputable legally binding force. Considering how important these activities are in connection with the protection of the environment, the joint adoption by the Parties of comprehensive regulations on tourism and non-governmental activities should not be implemented by means of a recommendation. Indeed approved recommendations are seldom applied because some States do not attach a legally binding nature to them. Thus in matter relating to tourism and non-governmental activities, the requirement for prior information, as set forth in recommendation IV-27 and VI-7, has not often been met. Moreover, the list of sites of special tourist interest specified in recommendation VIII-9, though adopted in 1975, has never been drafted. Under these circumstances, an Annex to the Protocol appears to be, from the legal point of view, the most appropriate form to regulate tourism and non-governmental activities in a comprehensive manner.

Finally, the adoption of an Annex to the Protocol addressing these matters and its indisputable binding force, would enable all the States Parties to the Protocol, and not just those with the largest numbers of nationals travelling to Antarctica for non-scientific or unofficial activities to be involved in regulating these activities.

Finally, the aim of the five countries which are jointly proposing the draft Annex enclosed herein is to answer a need. They are not attempting to add further constraints to those set forth in the Protocol, but to render the Protocol more clear and precise in light of acquired experience. There is no question, in any event, of banning, or restricting in any arbitrary way tourist and non-governmental activities, but the idea is to regulate them in compliance with the Protocol, by means of clear provisions so that the natural Antarctic environment and its value for the purposes of peaceful activities and scientific research will be preserved in a reasonable and consistent manner.42
The proposal invited a strong opposition. The United States delegation was of the firm view that the Protocol applies to all human activities in Antarctica, and thus provided regulation in a comprehensive way.43 Any new regulation of tourism would lead to either duplication of provisions already existing in the Protocol, or inconsistency with such provisions.  The UK delegation was of the view that any assessment about the adequacy of the existing framework, as embodied in recommendations, should be made only after assessment of the nature and scale of the potential problems and impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities, and the adequacy of existing provisions. In response to the French proposal, the UK’s point was that, ‘There is no disagreement amongst Treaty Parties that tourism and non-governmental activities must be regulated. Unregulated activities in Antarctica would lead to unacceptable impacts on the fragile Antarctic environment and criticism of the ATCP ability to provide for the effective governance of Antarctica. It is therefore not a question of whether tourism and non-governmental activities should be regulated but how’ 44(emphasis in original). Moreover, since ‘a comprehensive assessment of the potential problems and impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica has not been undertaken by the ATCM, though a number of recent papers (e.g. XVI ATCM Info 77, and WP 29) provide valuable pointers in the right direction’ it was felt that, ‘The creation of further regulation in the absence of such an assessment is likely to lead to, at best, a duplication of existing legal measures and, at worst, to provisions which do not specifically address the predicted problems and impacts.’45Australia too found little justification for a new legal instrument dealing specifically with tourism but did underline the need to develop a clear guiding statement applicable to all tour organizers. In short, no consensus emerged. The Venice Meting achieved little against the backdrop of ATCPs reiterating their respective positions. The outcome of the meeting left a great deal to be desired.46As pointed out by the United Kingdom, it was obvious that the disagreement that had surfaced among the ATCPs was not over whether to regulate tourism and non-governmental activities but over how.47
4. Post-Madrid Protocol: Interventions and Recommendations by the Antarctic Tourism Monitors/Experts 
It may be useful to pause and pay attention to academic-scholarly engagement with the Antarctic governance issues in general, and with the challenge of an effective tourism policy in the Southern Polar Region in the post-Protocol period; throughout 1990s and beyond. There was an acknowledgement at the outset by the polar experts that managing/regulating tourism in extremely scenic but ecologically exceptional/sensitive Antarctic was now a ‘front-burner issue’,48 and the increasing number of tourists visiting specific (or select, more accessible and (logistically) safe areas on the continent or its surrounding islands had given rise to serious concerns about the likely environmental, legal and geopolitical implications. Kees Bastmeijer49 would insightfully argue that, ‘in the absence of undisputed sovereignty claims on the Antarctic continent, the legal and practical protection of Antarctica depends heavily on the collective efforts of all the 28 parties to the Protocol’. Also, ‘the Protocol itself may give rise to differences in the ways in which states implement the Protocol in the national legal order or in practice. One problem is that the Protocol, just like many other international (environmental) conventions, contains some vague and unclear provisions, either as a result of political compromise or because some more specific provisions were not feasible in view differences in the legal systems or the sensitivity of the subject. Moreover, state parties might consider the Protocol as incomplete and might feel the need to include additional provisions in the national legislation”50 (emphasis in original). Writing on the ‘legitimacy of the Antarctic Tourist Regime’, Davor Vidas would draw attention to the fact that, 

International tourism represents an important economic phenomenon which includes a notion of a recipient (or host) state. Yet it is difficult to imagine a recipient state in Antarctica, even if we should accept that sovereignty claims evidence the real existence of sovereignty over the Antarctic. Which state would be a recipient on the Antarctic Peninsula and which in the unclaimed area? Only the notion of a recipient base could be applicable in Antarctica. When this is viewed in connection with problems of jurisdiction in Antarctica, the problem of enforcing the regulation of Antarctic tourism become more apparent.51
	
Jurisdictional and liability-related uncertainties of Antarctic tourism are further complicated when third parties are involved.52It was also pointed out that the dilemma that the ATPs continue to face in terms of all third-party activities in the Antarctic---but more so in case of tourism, due to its multinational character—is that it is generally accepted in international law that no treaty creates obligations for nay third party without its consent.53Peter J. Beck54 cautioned that, ‘Future problems can be anticipated because of the multinational character of tour groups, the predominance of seaborne tourism, the registration of tour ships in non–ATP states like Liberia, and doubts about their liability and will to enforce requisite safety and conservation standards.’Don Rothwell55would agree and argue that, ‘Even more challenging legal issues arise when consideration is given to the tourist from a non-Antarctic Treaty party. In that instance there is likely to be no national law which purports to have specific extraterritorial application to Antarctica. In the absence of a law, there is no law enforcement interest triggered for the relevant state. As a result, and given the limitations created by the Antarctic Treaty, there is every likelihood that a visiting tourist from a non-Antarctic Treaty party would escape the sanction of the law with respect to actions which took place on the continent. Different considerations apply to crimes and other acts which occur on board ships or aircraft as the laws of the flag state, both criminal and civil, will apply in those settings. When consideration is given to the relatively limited time tourists actually spend on the continent, that some visitors may fall into a legal lacuna when they are ashore may not prove to be such a significant gap in the law. Nevertheless, it does highlight some of the generic challenges faced with Antarctic law enforcement.’
While acknowledging and applauding the good track record of the ATCPs in addressing difficult issues, Debra L. Enzenbacher56would argue that keeping in mind the given recent tourism trends and developments, it would be prudent to ‘implement appropriate regulations well before issues become even more complex and difficult to address.’ In her view, ‘the challenge to Antarctic policy makers is to identify the tourism issues that can be negotiated to the greatest effect within a consensus system, ensure regulatory appropriateness and move forward.’ Some of the key obstacles in the way include political, cultural and economic differences between Treaty parties, ambiguous terminology, and non-compliance with reporting procedures. According to Enzenbacher, ‘Comprehensive regulations for Antarctic tourism can be achieved in the Treaty forum provided policies acknowledge these differences, consider the current scale and scope of tourist activity and remain flexible to respond to future levels and forms of tourism.’57
Writing in the mid-1990s, polar experts analyzed the trends in Antarctic tourism with remarkable bipolar insights and visualized various probable futures of and for Antarctic tourism. Bernard Stonehouse and Kim Crosbie58, writing about tourism impacts and management in the Antarctic Peninsula Area, acknowledged that ‘Antarctic tourism is a growing industry’, emphasised that ‘prudent management must take into account the strong possibility that growth will continue’ and cautioned that Lindblad model/pattern of tourism was likely to be undermined by two factors: the ‘difficulty of promoting its ‘expedition spirit’, (a) on the larger ships that, for economic reasons, are becoming more popular, and (b) now that so many ships are involved. The second is its inherent passiveness: it does not allow for activities other than rigorously controlled visits ashore, and there are already growing demands for such other kinds of adventure tourism as hiking, climbing, bird-watching and photography –-currently catered for in airborne parties—that seem likely to intensify.’ Stonehouse and Crosbie concluded on the note: ‘It remains to be seen whether the Antarctic Treaty System can cope, reactively or proactively, with future developments in this lively industry.’59
5. Return to the ATCM (1994 to 2004)
At the 18th ATCM, held in Kyoto (11-22 April 1994), the idea of a tourism annex to the Protocol was abandoned and replaced by a set of proposed solutions in the form of a recommendation with the guidelines as an attachment to it.60 It was pointed out in an information paper presented by the United Kingdom that, ‘Antarctic tourism is evolving at an ever-increasing pace. More than 7,000, a record number, entered the Antarctic Treaty Area during the 1992/93 season’ and ‘this represented an increase of more than 11% over the previous session’s record high of 6,946 tourists in the Antarctic’.61  The IP by the UK concluded on the note: ‘the face of Antarctic tourism is changing. With these changes come new challenges for Antarctic policy makers. New operators are entering the market, often with little or no experience of the area, resulting in an increased number of passengers carried aboard such ships. The days when only a handful of operators brought tourists to the Antarctic aboard expedition-sized vessels appear to have ended.’62The only general agreement was that ‘the objective at this Meeting was not to create new rules and regulations but to provide guidance to those existing Antarctica and those organizing and conducting tourism and non-governmental activities there.’63Accordingly, some of the obligations listed out under Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994): Tourism and Non-governmental Activities64 addressing organizers and operators were as follows: (1) to provide prior notification of, and reports on, activities to the competent authorities of the appropriate Party or Parties; (2) to conduct environmental impact assessment of planned activities; (3) to ensure effective response to environmental emergencies, especially with regard to marine pollution; (4) to respect scientific research and the Antarctic environment, including restricting regarding protected areas, and the  protecting of flora and fauna; and (5) to prevent the disposal and discharge of prohibited waste. 
The major outcome of the 19th ATCM (Seoul, 8-19 May 1995) was ‘Resolution 3 (1995): Reporting of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities’, the draft format of which was provided by Argentina, Chile, New Zealand and the United Kingdom in a Working Paper.65 The ATCPs had realized that whereas the existing requirements for tourism and non-governmental activities covered advance notice of such activities, there was a gap in terms of post-activity reports. The Final Report of Nineteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting noted the diversity of concerns66 including IAATO delegation commenting ‘that the reporting burden for tourism should be no greater (or less) than for other activities’, the Delegation of Canada pointing out ‘that there may be value in having some information concerning on-board waste production and disposal at gateway ports’ and the Delegation of Russia expressing concern about ‘the impact of tourism on science’. The Delegation of the Netherlands drew attention of the Meeting to ‘the issue of compliance enforcement for gateway ports’. The Report noted that ‘existing information generally is insufficient either to predict or to serve as a baseline for detecting environmental impacts of Antarctic Tourism’ and mentioned some of the recommendations made by the Meeting on the basis of the information papers (especially highly commended information provided by the United States on an Antarctic Site Inventory) received regarding the nature, frequency and sale of tourism activities in Antarctica. These recommendations related to (a) general data and information needs, (b) site inventories and (c) cumulative impacts and (d) monitoring67.
The 20th ATCM (Utrecht, 29 April-10 May 1996), it may be useful to note in passing, did not pursue further the issues raised in the previous ATCM with regard to port state control. The Meeting ‘stressed the importance of effective self-regulation by the tour industry’ and urged IAATO to ‘ensure that its members conform fully to the provisions of the Protocol; disseminate ATCM Recommendations and other texts relevant to tourism; produce further guidelines and codes of conduct where appropriate; and encourage all tours companies operating in Antarctica to become members of the Association.’68 ASOC ‘urged all non-governmental operators to start producing Environmental Impact Assessments consistently now as the best way to be prepared when the Protocol comes into force’ and ‘to use all possible means to encourage compliance with the provisions of Annex I, for instance by making station visits conditional upon such compliance.’  One finds a number of concerns related to ‘cumulative effects of tourism activities’, ‘navigational safety’ and ‘safety of ships’ being expressed at the 21st ATCM (Christchurch, 19-30 May 1997) but few statements recommending policy or action or both. Some Delegations did refer to the IMO ‘Polar Code’ for ‘ships sailing in polar waters, and considered that the technical issues raised by this Code should be discussed by ATCM XXII.’69 There is no evidence in the Final Report of the 22nd ATCM (Tromsø, 25 May-5 June 1998) to suggest that, as desired by the previous ATCM, there any discussion of the technical issues raised by the IMO ‘Polar Code’ took place. Whereas the key focus of tourism related discussions was on the important ‘Antarctic Visitor Site Project’ lead by the US, UK and Federal Republic of Germany, ‘the importance of using accurate place names in site visit reports was noted by several Delegations.’70 The information presented in the IAATO report was highly appreciated but ‘several delegates asked questions about the flagging of tourist vessels and the number of tourists visiting various sites. It was noted that it would be useful if future reports also included information on the flag state of tourist vessels and information on the number of tourists that visit the various sites each season, in order to have information on the distribution of the possible effects of tourism on the individual sites.’71
By the time of 23rd ATCM (Lima, 24 May-4 June 1999) the concern over the ‘number of large passenger vessels and vessels of countries that are not Party to the Antarctic Treaty, or the Environmental Protocol, now entering Antarctic waters’ had gained considerable visibility. It was also noted by a number of delegations that the ‘safety of operations and the risk of accidents are related more to the training of ship’s crews and the areas of operation than the size of ships. All delegations recognized the need for design operation, and manning standards appropriate for Antarctica.’72COMNAP73 concluded that while fuel spills in the marine environment have a low probability of occurrence, they pose a far greater magnitude of risk to wildlife and the environment than terrestrial spills. Consequently the apparent trend to introduce large tourist vessels to Antarctic waters is of concern to COMNAP because of the large volume of fuel carried by such vessels and the likelihoods that the fuel would be stored adjacent to the hull.’74 COMNAP emphasised the enormous difficulty of ‘responding to a major marine disaster involving a large tourist vessel in Antarctic waters with the potential for serious environmental damage and risk for life’.75 ASOC too expressed its concern about the likely significant environmental impacts of large-scale tourism and proposed that ‘consideration be given to introducing strategic impact assessment as means of assessing the possible environmental impact due to the growth in tourism and other activities in Antarctica.’76The Final Report of 24th ATCM (St. Petersburg, 9-20 July 2001) graphically revealed a rather short engagement with Antarctic tourism policy matters. A number of delegates and IAATO expressed concerns ‘about the practical management of adventure tourism on national programs and tour operators that may become involved in search and rescue for unsupported adventure tourists.’77 While the Meeting noted that ‘there is an increase in the diversity of tourism activities, which may present new management challenges78,’ ASOC suggested that ‘tourism policy should not be left to the industry’ and the ‘time had come for the Antarctic Treaty Parties seriously to debate future moderation, and practical management, of Antarctic tourism.’79
From the 25th ATCM (Warsaw, 10-20 September 2002), two useful suggestions are worth recalling. COMNAP noted that‘ the interaction between national Antarctic operators and tour operators had been positive with few impacts on national programs’ and conveyed it ‘intention to continue to develop such liaison.’80 And ASOC ‘suggested that one mechanism to improve compliance with Protocol obligations by yacht operators was provided by the navigational guides or pilots produced by Parties’.81 It also goes to the credit of ASOC that it brought back on the agenda of the ATCMs a number of complex but compelling issues regarding port state jurisdiction in IP 063, the executive summary of which noted: ‘International law has recognized that port states may affirmatively take measures to inspect vessels visiting their waters and enforce internationally-recognized maritime standards for ship operations and other environmental rules. Such port state regimes are in place in virtually every other part of the globe. In order to provide an added element of enforcement of maritime standards and the provisions of the Madrid Protocol, merchant and tourist vessels, bound for the Antarctic Treaty Area, and calling at gateway ports, should be subject to inspection.82The Final Report of the Meeting noted:

A wide-ranging and in-depth discussion took place on the papers presented. A number of Delegations considered that a new Annex to the Environmental Protocol concerning regulation of tourism and non-governmental activities as proposed by France, is not required. They considered that the Protocol deals effectively with the environmental aspects of tourism. There were concerns, however, about a number of issues such as health, safety and insurance, particularly of high-risk adventure tourism expeditions and expeditions organized by companies where are not members of IAATO, especially if they require search and rescue by national operators. COMNAP and other Delegations complemented IAATO on its management efforts and its collection of data.83
The 26th ATCM (Madrid, 9-20 June 2003) saw some broadening and deepening of ongoing discussion on Antarctic tourism regulation issues84, but little movement forward in the direction of arriving at a consensus on how best to turn, both enduring and emerging, multifaceted concerns (as expressed by the Regulators, Organizers and Monitors) into regulatory policies. At times, it appeared as if many important issue areas (ranging from safety, insurance, port state control, search and rescue, cumulative environment impacts, information data base etc.) were competing with one another for greater visibility and attention rather than collaging under various building blocks. There had been no formal collective articulation and assertion of priorities and policy directives since 1995 when the ‘Resolution 3: Reporting of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities’ stood adopted. On the issue of a ‘new legal instrument’, the Final Report of the Meeting noted: ‘Some delegations questioned whether a new legal instrument was necessary for a targeted and efficient approach to these issues. In this respect, options appeared to be: i) the elaboration of a new Protocol on Tourism, ii) the elaboration of a new Annex to the Madrid Protocol, iii) the adoption of a specific Measure, iv) The use and review of the existing guidelines on tourism activities.’85
The 27th ATCM (Cape Town, 24 May-4 June 2004) stood out both in terms of its backdrop and in terms of plans to move forward (hopefully closer to more effective regulation) for a number of reasons. The ATCPs had to hand the Report of the highly successful intersessional Group of Experts Meeting (under Recommendation IV-24) held in Tromsø and Trondheim in March 2004. Here were a number of extremely useful recommendations (reproduced verbatim under Annexure-A of this IP) for the ATCPs to discuss and debate during the meeting of the Working Group on Tourism along with the issues divided into two broad categories, namely those related to (a) regulations covering tourism activities and (b) the assessment of the consequences of tourism on the environment and national programmes. The former included adventure tourism, accreditation and the latter included monitoring and environmental impact assessment, quarantine measures, the construction of permanent facilities in Antarctica and related legal matters. The ATCPs, while acknowledging the difficulty in defining ‘adventure tourism’ ‘emphasised that the nature of adventure tourism required an immediate exchange of information.’86
The Cape Town Meeting adopted two key Resolutions: Resolution 3(2004): ‘Tourism and Non-governmental Activities: Enhanced Co-operation’ and Resolution 4(2004): ‘Guidelines on Contingency Planning, Insurance and Other Matters for Tourist and Other Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area’. At the heart of Resolution 3 (2004) is one of the enduring concerns, that there is a need to ensure ‘more rigorous monitoring and control’ of Antarctic tourism activities and pre-empt some individuals circumventing national legislation by seeking approval for their activities from more than one national authority’. Accordingly the Representatives recommended that: ‘1. All Parties nominate to the Secretariat a single contact point for information about tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica; 2. Parties exchange information about such activities as and when they are notified, particularly where there are potential implications for other Parties; 3. Where Parties are notified, or become aware, of an activity involving a vessel or aircraft flagged or registered with another Treaty Party; or where the organisers are nationals of another Treaty Party, that they consult those relevant Parties as appropriate during the process of evaluating such activities and, where applicable, prior to any decision to authorise the activity or permit to proceed.’
Resolution 4(2004) can also be seen as the logical but somewhat overdue culmination of longstanding concerns articulated at the ATCMs over the potential impacts ‘including the imposition of additional costs, that tourist or other non-governmental activities may have on national programmes.’ It is aimed at ensuring that such activities undertaken in Antarctica are carried out in a safe and self sufficient manner and that related risks are ‘fully identified in advance and minimized. The key recommendation then becomes: ‘That Parties should require those under their jurisdiction organizing or conducting tourist or other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, for which advance notification is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, to follow the Guidelines attached to this Resolution.’ 
6. 2005 – to date
It will take two more ATCMs after the Cape Town Meeting, for two more Resolutions to emerge, but the 28th ATCM (Stockholm, 6-17 June 2005) did begin with an unequivocal statement by the Chairman of the Meeting, Ambassador Hans, that highest priorities for the XXVIII ATCM were the ‘conclusion of the negotiations on the Liability Annex to the Environment Protocol and the issues of tourism and bio-prospecting.’87The issues to be discussed under agenda item 12 were divided into four broad categories: Site specific guidelines; Land-based tourism; Creation of areas of special tourist interest; and Accreditation. One of the key issue areas that received considerable attention and discussion related to the issue of tourist infrastructure on land in the overarching context of Land-based tourism. The following paragraph from the Final Report does graphically reveal (without naming names) that the Regulators perceived issues involved quite differently:

While many delegations were prepared to recommend that Parties implement the Environmental Protocol in such a way as to prevent the construction of infrastructure to support activities primarily for the conduct or support of tourism, some requested a more in-depth analysis, and felt the ATCM should devote more time to discuss the issue before deciding whether or not to take binding actions. Several delegations expressed concerns about the limited time to “close the door” on such developments. Various delegations stated however that under their current domestic laws it was difficult to prohibit permanent and semi-permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental activities. One delegation proposed that it was open to the Parties to voluntarily decline to authorise any applications to construct permanent land-based infrastructure to support tourism and non-governmental activities. There was strong support for this approach pending the conclusion of further discussions on this matter.88

One could witness at the Stockholm Meeting the return and rise of some old concerns such as the ‘creation of areas of special tourist interest’ and new issues such as Accreditation. As noted in the Final Report: ‘France introduced IP 12 Creation of Areas of Special Tourist Interest, noting that the issue had already been discussed in 1972, and stressed that the increase in tourism may bring Parties to considering limiting tourism to certain areas. The Meeting welcomed this paper and agreed that such an option should be kept in mind when dealing with the regulation of tourism.’89The 29th ATCM (Edinburgh, 12-23 June 2006) did return to the issue of tourist infrastructure but the quest for consensus remained rather illusive:

The United Kingdom tabled a draft Resolution on Limiting Permanent Non-Governmental Infrastructure in Antarctica. This proposed that Parties should refrain from authorizing permanent land-based facilities in Antarctica that are not in support of national Antarctic science programmes or associated with a government operator. Whilst many delegations supported the draft some delegations believed that clearer definitions were needed. Despite lengthy debate, consensus on the draft, or any alternative draft considered, could not be reached. The Meeting decided not to establish an inter-sessional contact group, but instead to address this issue again atATCM XXX.90

At the 30th ATCM (New Delhi, 30 April-11 May 2007), the issues to be discussed were divided into the following broad categories: Overview of Antarctic Tourist Activity in the 2006/07 Season; Ships Carrying More than 500 Passengers; Management of Maritime Traffic; Use of Sites; Tourist Vessels Flagged to Non-Parties and Other Matters. The 2006/07 season was marked, on the one hand, by the fact that ‘both IAATO and non-IAATO Antarctic tourism activities resulted in an estimated total of 37,506 tourists entering the Antarctic Treaty Area, a 14% increase in visits over the 2005/06 season,’91 and the M/S Nordkapp incident; the grounding of a Norwegian tourist vessel during passage of Neptune’s Bellows, Deception Island, Antarctic Peninsula, in January 2007. As mentioned in the Final Report of the Meeting: ‘Norway noted the main lessons learned from the incident which were related to types and use of response equipment, type of fuel used in Antarctic waters to reduce the consequences of an oil spill, preparation of passenger ships for SAR capabilities in remote areas, communication and cooperation during incidents, and issues related to information exchange by Treaty Parties.’92
In the light of the above, a significant step forward was taken by the ATCPs with the passing of two Resolutions: Resolution 4 (2007): Ship-based Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty AreaandResolution 5 (2007): Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The initiative for the first was taken by the United States. 

The US introduced WP 6 Approaches to Tourism Policy, which contained a number of concrete proposals for action on the issue of tourism, as well as a draft resolution for consideration by ATCPs. It first proposed, based on a UK proposal introduced in Edinburgh, to establish a policy to limit landings by ships carrying 500 passengers or more, and also proposed a non-binding statement of policy endorsing for use by all tour operators a series of regulations that have proven necessary and successful for IAATO. The US also outlined a proposal to seek advice from appropriate expert bodies regarding issues related to vessels and necessary maritime standards to ensure passenger safety and minimize potential adverse effects of maritime activities on the Antarctic environment.93
Resolution 4 (2007) recommended that: ‘Parties, consistent with their national law, 1. discourage or decline to authorize tour operators that use vessels carrying more than 500 passengers from making any landings in Antarctica; and 2. encourage or require tour operators to: a) coordinate with each other such that not more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site at any one time; b)restrict the number of passengers on shore at any one time to 100 or fewer, unless otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures or Resolutions; and c) maintain a minimum 1:20 guide-to-passenger ratio while ashore, unless otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures or Resolutions.’ Whereas Resolution 5 (2007) recommended that: ‘the Parties discourage any tourism activities which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.’ Both the Resolutions, by their very nature and scope, raised highly pertinent issues related to need for inspection and compliance. 
Also quite visible at the New Delhi Meeting was a mutually rewarding exchange of views between the CEP and the ATCM on Antarctic tourism. The Final Report of the Meeting noted:
On the question addressed to the Committee by the 29th ATCM, "whether the proposal to prevent ships carrying more than five hundred passengers from landing in Antarctica was an environmentally responsible and precautionary approach or whether they would recommend an alternative", the vast majority of the CEP members had endorsed the proposal to prevent ships carrying more than five hundred passengers from landing. However, the Committee recommended that more consistent and dedicated monitoring of tourism be undertaken to ensure that data and information are available to support such decision-making.94

At the New Delhi ATCM, it was possible to discern a widely shared and ever growing concern, bordering urgency, among the ATCPs over the issue of the ‘significant proportion of tourist vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty area that are not flagged to Antarctic Treaty Parties’; an issue area so ably addressed by New Zealand in WP 14 ‘Tourist Vessels Flagged to Non-Parties; Implications for the Effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty System.’ The IP identified some challenges that could arise from such vessels ‘in implementing some requirements of the Environmental Protocol such as requirements for environmental impact assessment’ since, ‘according to Article 94 of UNCLOS, it is the flag state which has the duty to "effectively exercise its jurisdiction and control in administrative, technical and social matters over ships flying its flag"; concerning emergency response action (Article 15 of the Protocol), there was no agreement to provide a response action in an emergency involving a non-Party vessel; non-Party vessels were not obliged to submit to inspection procedures under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.’95 The meeting agreed to re-visit the matter at ATCM XXXI; which was not to be the case. 
At the 31st ATCM (Kyiv, 2-13 June 2008), the dialogue on Antarctic tourism took place in the wake/shadow of the sinking of M/S Explorer and for obvious reasons (including those emanating from the M/S Nordkapp incident of the year before) focused overwhelmingly on the issue-area related to safety, human and environmental risks, passenger ship security (IP 115 by Norway, IP 8 by Chile) and search and rescue operations. 
The presentation by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), which emphatically underlined the ‘paramount importance of hydrography in Antarctica to ensure safety of navigation of life at sea, protect the marine environment, support scientific research, contribute to search and rescue operations and enhance the decision-making process,’96 was in many ways an ‘eye opener’, further undermining the critical importance of a common-collective preemptive approach. Final Report of the Thirty-first ATCM noted:

On the basis of actual examples, the nature of maritime accidents in Antarctica was explained. The risk of ships grounding represents the main threat for human life and the environment. It was pointed out that the main question relating to a major accident involving a tourist vessel was not if it would happen, but when. The HCA representatives pointed out the dramatic increase of tourism activities in relatively unknown waters and recalled the crucial importance of available and precise bathymetric and topographic data. They urged the Parties to increase information exchange and collaboration. The Meeting welcomed the important information presented in the seminar.97

It was further noted that ‘many factors, including the proximity of other vessels, contributed to the fact that there was no loss of life’98 and ‘many parties mentioned the amount of good fortune involved in making this a successful rescue, and that in other circumstances this could have been a major tragedy. IAATO thanked those parties who assisted with the response to the M/S Explorer incident. Initial response was provided by IAATO vessels, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, and later by the United Kingdom. The coordination and cooperation between all parties involved was appreciated’.99 ASOC noted ‘that Annex VI on Liability is not yet in force and asked how the Annex would apply to the Liberian-flagged vessel.’100 Adding to the pool of anxiety were the unsettling facts that ‘a significant percentage of flagged vessels are to non-ATCPs’ and that ‘Annex VI would cover operators from ATCPs even they are operating non-ATCP flagged vessels.’101
One major outcome of the Kyiv ATCM, in the direction of effective Antarctic tourism regulation, could be largely attributed to the initiative taken by New Zealand; namely the adoption of ‘Resolution 6 (2008) Enhancing the role of Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres with Search and Rescue Regions in the Antarctic Treaty Area’. ‘New Zealand noted that having up to date information would enable an MRCC to directly contact vessels known to be in the area of an incident, achieving a quicker result. New Zealand therefore proposed a Resolution that, in recognising the important role of the five MRCCs with Search and Rescue Regions in the Antarctic Treaty Area in coordinating responses to SAR incidents, recommended regular vessel position reporting to MRCCs while within the Antarctic Treaty area. Parties welcomed this paper, which was widely supported, recognizing the important role of MRCCs.’ 102
It will be both insightful and rewarding to ‘conclude’ this brief recollection of Kyiv ATCM’s engagement with Antarctic tourism regulation issues a very important intervention by the United Kingdom through WP 51 Developing a Strategic Vision of Antarctic Tourism for the Next Decade. The WP noted that ‘Measures and Resolutions agreed during recent years were largely directed at the conduct of tourism within Antarctica, and that there had been little discussion about whether Parties should place greater controls on the overall size, geographic limits or diversity of tourism activities in Antarctica.’103 The UK proposed that ‘the ATCM take a proactive approach through the development of a strategic vision of tourism. The United Kingdom had discussed options for developing such a strategy with government, NGOs and industry, and found general support for the overall concept.’ The UK further ‘proposed that development of the vision should include general principles for the overall development of tourism in Antarctica and should aim to articulate, as far as was practicable, a more precise volume and form of tourism that Parties would wish to see in the future. Essentially, the aim of the vision would be to clarify: what the ATCM expected tourism activities in Antarctica to look like – for example, in terms of volume, geographic and seasonal limits, and diversity; how tourism in Antarctica would be managed in order to deliver such a vision; how information about tourism activities would be collected, analysed and reported; and how the Antarctic environment would be monitored to identify any potential impacts of tourism activities.’104 The UK proposed that ‘such a vision, as a non-mandatory and aspirational tool, be developed in time for ATCM XXXII to form part of the celebrations of the 50th Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty.’
The 32nd ATCM (Baltimore, 6-17 April 2009) saw further discussions on the concept of ‘Strategic Vision’ for Antarctic tourism.  ASOC (IP 53 ‘Key Elements of a strategic vision for Antarctic Tourism’), argued ‘that there is an urgent need for Antarctic Treaty Parties to develop a clear vision of tourism in the Antarctic, and to agree on a Tourism strategy that delivers step by step on that vision through time.’105 ASOC ‘characterised tourism as a whole system composed by a departure region, a transit region, a destination region, the tourism industry, and the tourists themselves, which helped to conceptualise tourism as more than visitation of certain landing sites’ and ‘considered that the unending growth of Antarctic tourism was not desirable, required or inevitable.’ ASOC’s contention was that ‘Tourism activities in Antarctica should demonstrably have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment. A precautionary approach should be used to manage tourism in the absence of conclusive scientific evidence about tourism impacts. Certain types of commercial tourism would need to be discouraged or prohibited.’106
One concrete major move forward (due for quite some time) was at the initiative of the US in the form of WP 17 Proposal to make binding certain limitations on landing of persons from passengers from making any landings in Antarctica. ‘The United States proposed that it is timely to incorporate the recommendatory provisions from Resolution 4 (2007) into binding obligations through a Measure, and that such a Measure would serve both immediate and longer term objectives of the Consultative Parties with respect to tourism in Antarctica. The United States stated that the adoption of a binding Measure would make clear that all operators are subject to the same standards. The US further noted that the provisions outlined in WP 17 are already practiced by IAATO members and represent the best practices of industry.’107 The Meeting adopted Measure 15 (2009); demonstrating beyond doubt that ‘where there is a Will there is a Way’. 
Yet another notable feature of the Baltimore Meeting was the renewed offer of New Zealand (WP 30Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area) to host a Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area against the backdrop of mounting concerns about ‘humanitarian and environmental risks associated with the increase of ship-borne tourism and the recent incidents that occurred in Antarctic waters.’108
Even a quick glance at the Final Reports of the five post-Baltimore ATCMs would reveal that the long-standing dialogue among Regulators, Organizers and Monitors on the multiscalar and multi-faceted challenge of regulating Antarctic tourism has somewhat matured over the years. As various issue-areas have been taken up for further discussion year after year, the linkages and overlaps among them have also been revealed. 
By the time the ATCPs assembled in Punta del Este for the 33rd ATCM (3-14 May 2010), the challenge of prioritizing issue-areas for further detailed discussions and making specific policy recommendations had also surfaced. No less compelling seemed to be the need for ‘Supervision of Antarctic Tourism’. WP 48 presented by Argentina on this subject noted that ‘Parties had currently three mechanisms for supervising various aspects of tourist activities on board cruise ships: Inspections conducted under Article VII of the Treaty; National Antarctic Programmes deploying observers on cruise ships flying the Party’s flag or whose operator has a legal address on their territory; and deploying observers at sites regularly visited by tourist cruise ships.’109 Given the complex but compelling nature of the subject, Argentina proposed an Intersessional Contact Group to ‘discuss possible additional tools, or modifications to existing tools, that would serve to ensure better supervision of the management of Antarctic tourism on board cruise ships.’ It was rightly pointed out by several delegations that small vessels and yachts should be brought within the purview of any proposed mechanisms for such supervision. Chile (WP 68 rev. 1, Recommendations for controlling yachts under a third flag navigating in the Antarctic Chilean SAR area) underlined the need for ‘port states to become more vigilant and promoted the idea of strengthening the port authority to be applied in the case of small vessels that are unsuitable for navigation in Antarctica.’110
At the 34th ATCM (Buenos Aires, 20 June-1 July 2011), IAATO’s ‘Overview of Antarctic Tourism’ (IP 106) noted ‘that the overall number of tourists carried by IAATO operators during the 2010-11 season was 33,824, an eight percent decrease from 2009-2010. For the 2011-12 season, IAATO forecasts a further decrease of 25% to 25,319 visitors, due primarily to withdrawal from the market of several IAATO members that are affected by new IMO fuel regulations. Despite the decrease, IAATO noted trends increasing in several smaller segments: air-cruise, land programs and yacht expeditions. It expressed concern about activities of some non-IAATO yachts, pointing to the great value of the competent authority process and action against those who do not comply with Treaty Party requirements.’111 On the issue of yacht activities in the Antarctic, a number of delegations offered useful suggestions/recommendations. ‘China suggested that a first step was to regulate yacht activities in the Antarctic waters within the competence of the ATCM, and then the related regulations can be suggested to the IMO for its consideration in the development of the Polar Code.’112 The Buenos Aires Meeting also saw some movement forward on how to further advance the ‘strategic vision’ for Antarctic tourism. A large number of delegations expressed their views on the subject. ‘India, supported by several other Parties, suggested that it was important for the ATCM to focus not only on the adequacy of current measures, but also on the adequacy of their implementation by national authorities.’113 India, (supported by several Parties), also ‘referred to the importance of consideringAntarctic issues within a wider global context, and highlighted the valueof developing linkages with other relevant international instruments andorganisations.’114‘Netherlands felt that the development of certain forms of extreme tourist activities in Antarctica should be discouraged. It feared that the ATCM, by not developing tourism policies fast enough to keep up with developments in the industry, would face shifting baselines for decision making. It felt that the Parties have the right to withhold permits for activities they deem incompatible with the intrinsic or wilderness values of Antarctica, even if such activities do not cause direct environmental harm, and that the ATCPs should, in the Netherlands’ view, jointly or individually, prevent that Antarctica become a playground for extreme activities that Parties would prohibit in their own national natural reserves.’115
The Meeting agreed that ‘it was highly desirable to take a more strategic approach to the ATCM’s review of tourism policies, identify gaps, and set priorities for future discussion, taking into account existing regulatory instruments and guidelines and implementation thereof.’116
At the 35th ATCM (Hobart, 11-20 June 2012), the subject of ‘supervision and management of tourism’ continued to invite attention and interventions, along with the long felt (and flagged) need for information exchange. Argentina introduced WP 43, Final Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Supervision of Antarctic Tourism, ‘which proposed a draft checklist aimed to support inspections of the on-ground conduct of visitors’ activities, under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol. Information obtained in this way would supplement (but not be a substitute for) information obtained from environmental assessment processes, information exchange, reports by Parties and Experts to the ATCM and CEP, and from documented industry practices and procedures (where applicable).’117Resolution 11 (2012) Checklist of Visitors’ in-field activities was adopted after further discussion and noting that ‘the use of checklist was neither mandatory nor restrictive.’118 It was pointed out by ASOC that ‘currently 25 per cent of Parties did not appear to be exchanging information through the database and expressed its desire to see Parties fully utilising the system in the next year.’119 On the issue of the ‘Review of Tourism Policies’ the intervention by Netherlands (WP 27 rev. 1, Report of the Intersessional Contact Group ‘Outstanding Questions’ on Antarctic Tourism) listed out the following five priority questions as identified by the ICG: improving information exchange and cooperation; measuring and managing cumulative impacts of visitation; the merits of regulatory instruments to prevent or regulate the further expansion of tourist activities; the increasing diversity of activities in Antarctica; and the potential development of regulations in respect of permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica.120 On the issue of ‘cumulative impacts’ this is how the Final Report of theMeeting summed up the discussion:

In summary there were two sets of concerns that required different approaches. The first concern was the possible cumulative impact of tourism on sites already visited, particularly but not limited to those where visits were increasing. Under this concern, the challenges of data limitations and data access were identified, as was the concern that the environmental impact assessment process addressed the impacts of a proposed activity on a visited site, but not the cumulative impact of many visits. The second concern was the possible diversification and expansion of activities, particularly in previously unvisited areas. This raised questions on how the Protocol was being applied, and it would be useful at a later stage to compare practices in this respect.121
With several ‘enduring concerns’ still under active and open consideration, the 36th ATCM (Brussels, 20-29 May 2013), adopted Decision 5 (2013) Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, under which it was agreed that the priorities to be given a particular focus at ATCM XXXVII should be: Cooperation on: ‘conducting a comprehensive review of existing requirements for information exchange and the functioning of the Electronic Information Exchange System and the identification of any additional requirements; strengthening cooperation among Parties on current Antarctic specific air and marine operations and safety practices, identifying any issues that may be brought forward to IMO and ICAO, as appropriate; and reviewing and assessing the need for additional actions regarding area management and permanent infrastructure related to tourism, as well as issues related to land-based and adventure tourism, and addressing the recommendations of the CEP tourism study.’ 122 The Review of Tourism Policy undertaken by the ICG, lead by Netherlands, ‘provided examples of the types of activities that are being conducted in the Antarctic and that illustrate the diversification of tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica. Examples were cited under the categories of: airborne and seaborne modes of transportation; expeditions with the primary purpose of accomplishing a certain (often challenging) route; specific categories of activities, including sports and larger expeditions; overnight accommodation for tourism on land; and other non-governmental activities.123
At the 37th ATCM (Brasilia 28 April-7 May, 2014) a number of important decisions were made with regard to possible future directions. It was resolved that at the 38th ATCM a particular focus will be placed ‘on competent authorities issues relating to tourism and non-governmental activities.’124 The United States (WP 44 Toward a Risk-based assessment framework when assessing activities in Antarctica) introduced in a meaningful way the notions of ‘risk and risk assessment into Antarctic tourism policy’.125 How these notions will be approached, understood and operationalized by the three categories of stakeholders remains to be seen of course. The argument put forward by the United Kingdom was that ‘risk assessment was already part of the British permitting system’ and ‘wording of the draft Resolution should acknowledge the existence of various risk assessment systems, as well as the fact that risk assessment should be applied not only for land-based and adventure tourism, but for all activities carried out in Antarctica.’126 And Argentina was quite persuasive in its argument that ‘a diversity of national regulations made it difficult to standardize risk assessment systems across Parties.’127 IAATO encouraged the Parties ‘to include in the draft Resolution mention of non-governmental activities as well as tourism, since certain expeditions did not classify themselves as tourists, but would need to be included in the process of risk assessment. It also noted that risk assessment was not an isolated process and needed to be carried out alongside other existing processes.’ 128 France raised ‘specific questions on the risk criteria. It identified issues with the legitimacy of authorising an activity that had a specific risk that could not be mitigated; and the legal liability of Parties and competent authorities in authorising such high risk activities.’129The Meeting passed two important resolutions on Antarctic Tourism: Resolution 6 (2014) Toward a Risk-based Assessment of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities and Resolution 7 (2014) Entering into Force of Measure 4 (2004).
7. India’s Sense of the Need for a Comprehensive, Proactive and Effective Antarctic Tourism Policy
What makes Antarctic tourism different from tourism in other parts of the globe is the peculiar and challenging geographical legal-geopolitical setting of the region. Despite the remarkable improvement in technology and logistics in recent years, it is the physical geography of the area (environmental constraints) that dictates the when and where of the Antarctic tourism. As a result, tourists tend to visit the most accessible parts of the Antarctic (as such, the Ross Sea region, and particularly the Antarctic Peninsula and the Subantarctic or peri-Antarctic islands (these last, of course, outside the Antarctic Treaty area), and coincide -even clash- with the most productive period for scientific research, the Antarctic summer. In the prevailing circumstances it is clear that regulation of Antarctic tourism will continue to take place at (1) the ATS level, (2) the governmental level and (3) the touristindustry level. All three have their own contributions to make to Antarctic Tourism policy.
India is of the view that the ‘strategic vision’ of regulating Antarctic tourism (Tourism with a Difference) is integral to the kind of ‘ common futures’ that the Antarctic Treaty parties would want to visualize and realize in the best interest of humankind. It looks like many issue-areas such as the Port State Control deserve much more robust and regular engagement than has been the case so far. Many such issue-areas have remained on (and for some time off) the agenda of the ATCMs for a long time and have invited rich and rewarding interventions by delegations to the ATCMs. In an extremely well researched, thought-provoking and forward-looking study the authors point out succinctly:

Overall, there is a clear anticipation of a further growth and diversification of Antarctic tourism, which will not only involve increasing numbers of tourists visiting Antarctica but also larger ships being utilised and additional activities being offered. The risks of serious incidents and accidents to occur might rise along with a higher concentration of vessels and tourists in the Southern Ocean and on the Antarctic continent. Along with the potential loss of life, the environmental consequences of potential future incidents and accidents could be significant. What is most pertinent in light of the recent report on the sinking of the M/S Explorer (Republic of Liberia, 2009) is the avoidability of some of the causes for incidents as well as the potential for the consequences of incidents turning from disruptive into catastrophic.130
This paper has shown that many of the issue-areas related to the regulation of Antarctic tourism have stayed on the ATCM agenda and in some cases repeatedly discussed and highlighted over several decades. In a number of cases the contexts in which to approach and analyze what this IP has described as ‘enduring concerns’ have changed; and in a few cases rather dramatically. As the numbers of stakeholders and their concerns multiply, a building-block approach to the ‘Strategic Vision’ would necessitate in the first place making good use of the institutional memory to avoid duplication of debate on certain issues on the one hand, and to underline the urgency to continue to discuss several such issues in their fast changing contexts, on the other. It appears that it is not so much a question of whether but when the ATCPs would turn to a more focused discussion of how best to formalize, institutionalize and operationalize the insights, resolutions, recommendations (including those mentioned in Annexes A, B and C to this IP) and measures that have accumulated over the decades at various ATCMs. There is not an iota of doubt that the major onus of responsibility/accountability/action lies on the part of Antarctic tourism Regulators since there are obvious (at times not very obvious) limits to self-regulation by the Organizers, as also pointed out by many Monitors131 from time to time. 
It is worth noting that according to the United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO),132 ‘Despite occasional shocks, international tourist arrivals have shown virtually uninterrupted growth --from 25 million in 1950 to 278 million in 1980, 528 million in 1995, and 1087 million in 2013.’133 According to the UNWTO’s long term forecast Tourism Towards 2030, ‘international tourism arrivals worldwide are expected to increase by 3.3% a year from 2010 to 2030 to reach 1.8 billion by 2030’. Once again, it is not a question of whether but when (more likely sooner than later) some of the ATCPs from Asia would find themselves far more engaged and involved with the challenge of Antarctic tourism regulation; as increasing number of Asians from some of the fastest growing economies in the world would be heading to the Southern Polar Region as tourists. A political economy perspective on tourism in the era of climate change134 and ‘resource scarcities’ compels all the three categories of Antarctic tourism stakeholders to ensure continuity of a multi-sectoral, multi-disciplinary research, dialogue and constructive critique on the one hand, and a robust science-diplomacy directed at implementing and enforcing legally binding measures on the other. 






Annexure-A
Chairman’s Report from Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica 
The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and non-governmental activities (ATME) was attended by 57 representatives of 21 Antarctic Treaty Parties, and seven invited experts from five organisations. It started at the Polar Environmental Centre in Tromsø on 22 March and continued on the Hurtigruten express steamer along the Norwegian coast from Tromsø to Trondheim from 23-25 March 2004. The ATME was convened in accordance with Decision 5 of ATCM XXVI, which requested the meeting to examine the following topics: 
    • Monitoring, cumulative impact and Environmental Impact Assessment; 
    • Safety and self-sufficiency, including search and rescue and insurance; 
    • Jurisdiction, industry self-regulation, and an analysis of the existing legal framework and identification of gaps; 
    • Guidelines; 
    • Adventure (extreme) tourism and government sponsored tourism; 
    • Co-ordination amongst national operators. 
The following summarizes the findings of the Meeting and the advice for actions for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to consider. 
Monitoring, cumulative impact and Environmental Impact Assessment 
It was agreed that the CEP should address the issue of monitoring and provide the ATCM with recommendations for the coordinated monitoring of activities in Antarctica including the establishment of a consistent methodology and central data collection process. 
Argentina noted the difficulties of applying the Environmental Protocol’s provisions on environmental impact assessments in the case of tourist activities, and undertook to develop this issue further. 
Safety and self-sufficiency, including search and rescue and insurance; 
The Meeting agreed on the need of insurance for non-governmental expeditions and to the principle that all ATCPs should require proof of adequate insurance for such expeditions. It therefore recommended that the Parties at XXVII ATCM should discuss and agree to a mechanism that will require non-governmental expeditions to provide evidence that they have both obtained sufficient insurance to meet the costs of search and rescue and medical care and evacuation from Antarctica, and the necessary contractual agreement for back-up and contingency support before the proposed activity may proceed. 
There was general agreement on the need for requirements regarding ice classification and experience of crew, but not consensus on how these matters might be taken forward. Because it may take a long time to get Antarctic shipping guidelines adopted by the IMO it was suggested that the ATCM should consider adopting a decision to ensure implementation by the ATCPs in the meantime. Because a spill of heavy fuel will lead to more serious environmental damage than lighter fuels it was further suggested that the ATCPs should consider recommending the use of lighter fuel oil for all cruise vessels in Antarctica. 
Jurisdiction, industry self-regulation, and an analysis of the existing legal framework and identification of gaps 
The Meeting agreed that within the ATS there is the need to consider further the question of a regulatory framework for tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica. It further agreed that there is merit in a strong industry association to ensure high standards amongst its members. It was stressed, however, that establishing the regulatory basis for the industry was the primary responsibility of the State Parties. 
The Meeting agreed that an industry accreditation scheme is an interesting and useful way forward to ensure consistent standards of operation between tour operators, and therefore recommended that this issue be further discussed and elaborated at ATCM XXVII. The Meeting recognized that there are several unsolved issues that would need to be taken into account in further discussions on accreditation. Australia was tasked to elaborate on the issue of accreditation and report to ATCM XXVII. 
The Meeting recommended that the ATCM establish a framework that can form the basis for having observers onboard tourist vessels. In this regard two possible approaches were identified: either establishing an ATS observation scheme or relying instead on a national ATCP initiated observer scheme. New Zealand was tasked to develop this issue further for submission to the ATCM XXVII for further discussion. 
Guidelines 
It was agreed to consider further a UK proposal that Parties urge IAATO to extend to its members operating non-Treaty flagged vessels any guidelines relating to Antarctic shipping adopted by future ATCM, following consideration of the COMNAP recommendations on the adaptation of the IMO Guidelines for Arctic shipping at the forthcoming ATCM XXVII. 
Adventure (extreme) tourism and government sponsored tourism 
The Meeting recommended the drawing up of a list of requirements for adventure tourism expeditions to Antarctica that will oblige Parties not to authorize adventure tourism expeditions to Antarctica unless certain stringent criteria can be met. The Meeting tasked the UK to further develop such a list of requirements with the view of discussing and adopting it at ATCM XXVII. 
Co-ordination amongst national operators 
The importance of liaison and co-operation among Parties with regard to adventure tourism was noted, and for this purpose the Meeting agreed that a draft Resolution prepared by the UK should be presented to the ATCM for consideration and adoption. It was also noted that National operators that interact with yacht expeditions during their operations in Antarctica should notify relevant national authorities of such interactions. 

Annexure-B
Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area 
9-11 December, 2009 Wellington, New Zealand 
Recommendation 1: Incidents involving tourist vessels in the Antarctic Treaty Area should be considered by the Antarctic Treaty Parties for the Antarctic specific lessons they may provide for the avoidance of similar incidents in the future. Parties with relevant links to such incidents (especially flag or authorising States) should be asked to provide information to assist such considerations. 
Recommendation 2: Drawing on the checklists currently available for other Antarctic operations, the Treaty Parties should consider the development of a specific checklist for Antarctic Treaty inspections of tourist vessels and tourist activities in Antarctica. 
Recommendation 3: That the Treaty Parties make use as appropriate of the views expressed in discussions amongst experts about the proposed IMO mandatory Polar Code in their preparations for the upcoming meetings of the IMO Sub-Committee on Ship Design and Equipment and the ATCM, and discuss at the ATCM how the Treaty Parties might best input into the IMO discussions. 
Recommendation 4: That the Treaty Parties should continue to contribute to hydrographic surveying and charting information and consider advising vessels intending to operate in the Antarctic Treaty area that many areas have not been surveyed to modern standards. 
Recommendation 5: That the Treaty Parties should continue to contribute to the continuation and improvement of sea ice services in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
Recommendation 6: That the Treaty Parties proactively apply to tourist vessels bound for the Antarctic Treaty area the existing regime of port State control (PSC), through PSC memoranda of understanding or agreements if appropriate, so that they can meet all applicable legally binding international standards. 
Recommendation 7: The Meeting agreed that the five Parties with Search and Rescue coordination responsibility in the Antarctic area should share their plans and further coordinate with national programmes, and IAATO. 
Recommendation 8: That all crew on vessels planning to navigate in Antarctic waters should be required to undertake relevant training appropriate to the conditions expected to be encountered, and where appropriate in accordance with Chapter 14 of the IMO’s Guidelines for Ships Operating in Polar Waters. 
Recommendation 9: The Antarctic Treaty Parties should continue to encourage tourist and non-governmental organisations’ vessels not participating in the IAATO or COMNAP vessel monitoring schemes to report their positions regularly to the relevant MRCC. All tourist and NGO vessels should closely follow the IMO’s ‘Enhanced contingency planning guidelines for passenger ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities’ in accordance with ATCM resolution 6 (2005). 
Recommendation 10: That those Antarctic Treaty Parties that have not yet done so should consider approving Measure 4 (2004) on Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area as a matter of priority. 
Recommendation 11: The meeting recommended that the relevant committees and groups of the ATCM (such as the CEP and the Operations Working Group) give further consideration to how the assessment of the environmental aspects and impacts of Antarctic ship-borne tourism in WP008 (Appendix A) could be drawn on to inform their discussions regarding the management of ship-borne tourism and shipping generally. 
Recommendation 12: The meeting recommended that Parties and those involved in non-governmental activities be encouraged to provide spatial and temporal data in support of future studies and syntheses for discussion by the CEP and ATCM. 
Recommendation 13: The Treaty Parties should exchange information on contingency planning undertaken in fulfilment of Article 15, for responding to incidents with potential adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment. 
Recommendation 14: That the ATCM consider developing guidelines for responding to large-scale marine oil spills in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
Recommendation 15: The meeting agreed that enhanced coordination between the Antarctic Treaty Parties with respect to Antarctic-related matters within IMO may be valuable in some circumstances, and noted that mechanisms for coordination should be considered by ATCM XXXIII. 
Recommendation 16: Recognising the usefulness of having the IMO present and the valuable contributions the IMO representative made, the meeting encouraged IMO’s attendance at the next ATCM. The meeting recommended that ways to enhance the cooperative working relationship between the ATCM and IMO should be further considered at ATCM XXXIII. 
Recommendation 17: The IHO-HCA should continue to be invited to annual ATCMs to report the status of hydrographic survey and nautical chart production in Antarctic waters. Parties also agreed that, as appropriate, the ATCM should be represented at IHO-HCA meetings. Where an IHO-HCA meeting was to held in a country that was also a Consultative Party, then that Consultative Party should consider attending the HCA meeting. 

Annexure-C
Draft Report 2012

CEP Tourism Study 
Tourism and Non-Governmental 

Study recommendations (to be further reviewed by CEP XV)
Recommendation 1:
To ensure that the ATCM has readily available to it a complete picture of tourism activities and to facilitate regular assessments of the environmental impacts of Antarctic tourism by the ATCM, the ATCM should develop a centrally managed database of tourism activities, which might be achieved through a redesign and concerted use of the EIES.  
Consideration will need to be given as to the data required, though much of the information currently collected through the post-visit reporting process would be of relevance, supplemented with accurate reporting of all authorised tourist activities including yacht visits and land-based expeditions.
Recommendation 2:
To improve site-specific management a centrally managed ATCM database of tourist sites, including information on their environmental sensitivities, should be established, alongside the visitation database referred to in Recommendation 1.
Recommendation 3:
An appropriate method of assessing site sensitivity should be developed and a relative sensitivity analysis undertaken for at least the most heavily visited sites in Antarctica, including, for example, consideration of the vulnerability of tourist sites to non-native species establishment, for the purpose of more rigorously assessing appropriate management needs.  Site sensitivity considerations should also be included in the Environmental Impact Assessment process for tourism activities.
Recommendation 4:
Consideration should be given to the means by which site specific guidelines are reviewed and updated, including the appropriate frequency of review and the information required to support a review.  
Recommendation 5:
Consideration should be given to the regular review of trends in tourist activity at selected tourist sites, particularly those with high levels of visitation or those considered to be particularly sensitive to impact.
Recommendation 6:
Consideration should be given to establishing an ATCM-approved on-site monitoring programme for the purposes of i) assessing the effectiveness of site-specific guidelines and ii) monitoring for impacts.
Recommendation 7:
Consideration should be given to developing a series of ‘best estimate’ trigger levels to assist in guiding monitoring efforts. This could include identifying certain parameters (e.g. the number of landed tourists per season at a site) that would, if reached, trigger a need for a review of the effectiveness of current management at the site. Such an approach would be underpinned by the site sensitivity analysis referred to in Recommendation 3 above.
Recommendation 8:
Consideration should be given to identifying a range of potential management options that might be applied to managing tourism activities, including vessels and vessel operations while transporting tourists, as well as to the data and information needed to support the application of such measures.


















