





Workshop on Education and Outreach 

 APECS-Brazil E&O activities during the XXXVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) 









           Workshop on Education and Outreach
           APECS-Brazil E&O activities during the XXXVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM)
Information Paper submitted by Brazil

Summary
               This paper presents the education and outreach activities that were held by APECS-Brazil during the XXXVII ATCM (Brasilia – 2014). 
Introduction
In many countries, most people are unaware that Antarctica is a continent devoted to science and peaceful purposes which exerts great influence on the world weather and oceans.
Education and outreach activities on Antarctica are, therefore, essential, as they inform the general public and early career scientists (ECS) on the uniqueness and global role of this continent, as well as on the importance of its environmental protection. 
These activities also help fostering scientific curiosity in children and young adults and highlight the importance of scientific research in Antarctica to deal with global issues. More importantly, they inspire future generations of researchers and provide to the general society information about the results and social application of the public investment in Science.
The Role of APECS-Brazil
The Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) is an international and interdisciplinary organization for ECS, students, educators, and others with an interests in Polar Regions. The association was created in the context of the 4th International Polar Year (IPY 2007-2008), when both scientific and public interests in Polar Regions increased. APECS members promote the development of research networks, stimulate educational activities and public literacy campaigns. 
Since 2009, the Brazilian National Committee from APECS (Associação de Pesquisadores e Educadores em Início de Carreira sobre o Mar e os Polos - APECS-Brazil) creates opportunities to ECS by developing several activities to promote interdisciplinary research as well as international cooperation. It also brings polar and marine science closer to elementary and high school students and society as a whole, in order to spread information on the importance of these environments and stimulate future generations of polar and marine researchers.
APECS-Brazil activities in 2014
The I Scientific Journey: Brazil and the Antarctic Treaty
During the XXXVII ATCM, held in Brasília, APECS-Brazil organized activities all over the country aiming at promoting discussions related to the importance of Antarctica for the planet in Brazilian schools and for the general public  
The "I Scientific Journey: Brazil and the Antarctic Treaty" gathered more than 60 professors, researchers and about 3000 students from a dozen of Brazilian schools. Based on material distributed by the Governmental body responsible for the execution of the Brazilian Antarctic Program (SECIRM/PROMAR), at least 20 activities - conferences, workshops, reading, writing essays - were developed in classes. All activities focused on the Antarctic Treaty as an agreement that ensures that Antarctica is used for peaceful purposes only, international cooperation and free scientific investigation, and that scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available. 
Main Events
The "XII International Polar Week" and the "II Workshop on Career Development" took place in October in Southern Brazil together with a Photo Exhibition organized by Brazil andPortugal entitled "Glances over a Frozen Continent". More than a dozen researchers from Brazil and Portugal developed activities with more than 700 elementary and high school students, watched by 40 thousand students from more than 30 schools of Brazil and abroad.
In September, the "III APECS-Brazil Symposium: Integrating the Scientific Community from Pole to Pole" gathered 80 researchers and teachers as well as more than 200 participants from 20 institutions all over Brazil and abroad in Rio de Janeiro. Researchers from Brazil, the United States, Spain, Portugal, Chile, Argentina and England, gave twenty talks, five of which were broadcasted live on internet. Short courses and poster presentation were also included in the event.
One of the innovations of the III APECS-Brazil Symposium was to promote the participation of educators as guests of the event. Teachers from all over Brazil were able to participate in the event  and learn more about the reality of Brazilian polar science. These teachers will be responsible for helping to spread the importance of Antarctic research conducted by Brazilian researchers; integrating the PEEP Project (see below).
Photo Exhibition details
The photo Exhibition organized by Brazil andPortugal entitled "Glances over a Frozen Continent"  was made of 25 pictures taken by  Brazilian-ECS and 10 pictures taken by ECS from APECS-Portugal. The exhibition is itinerant and may occur in different environments as we provide five copies of the pictures. Since 2014, the exhibition was shown in 12 environments (events, schools, universities) and about 50 thousand people visited it. Interested institutions may request to show the exhibition  by committing to send a small report that lists the number of visitors and photos of the exhibition, and also to send the material of exhibition (pictures) to other local that will host the event. As final product the APECS-Brazil prints a Catalogue of the Exhibition Glances over a Frozen Continent, which is distributed to public schools throughout Brazil .
Antarctic Day Celebration
Antarctic Day is an annual event created in 2009 by "Our Spaces - The Foundation for the Good Governance of International Spaces". The event is an opportunity to integrate nations that can work together peacefully, using science as a global language of cooperation, and inspire future generations (http://www.apecs.is/outreach/antarctica-day.html). 
On the 1st December 2014, APECS-Brazil announced numerous activities to celebrate Antarctic Day in schools around Brazil (http://www.apecsbrasil.com/eventos/dia-da-antartica/a2014/). Students attended lectures and participated of discussions on the importance of Antarctica and the Antarctic Treaty. The activities were recorded in social media as well as in Our Spaces website, where a world map was depicted with the location of all participants. The activity "a Book for Antarctica", developed initially by APECS-Brazil in 2013, was adopted by other countries. The activity encourages advanced students to create their own book that demonstrate a small research project on a particular Antarctic topic. 
The great innovation in celebrating Antarctic Day 2014 was the Antarctic Day Challenge on Facebook, developed by APECS-Brazil and to which APECS members around the world took part. More than a thousand pictures and drawings were posted on Facebook timelines on December 1st inviting all to think about the importance of Antarctica to the planet. 

Official project
In 2013 APECS-Brazil launched a long term project called "Researcher-Educator and Educator-Researcher Training Program" (PEEP Project). The main objective is to encourage the formation of the fuure leader generation in science and education in Brazil by integrate researchers and educators by promoting training workshops in scientific research and outreach activitiesInitially the PEEP project investigated the knowledge about  the poles of educators, researchers and students involved in the proposal through an initial evaluation questionnaire. Analysis of the responses was the basis for the definition of the working groups that are developing activities to be implemented in the classroom in order to promote the discovery of the poles. 
In September 2014, the 1st  PEEP Workshop took place during the "III APECS-Brazil Symposium". It included the participation of elementary and high school educators from all over Brazil. About 30 collaborators discussed the importance of scientific knowledge and ways to adapt the information generated by researchers to schools and general society. After initial discussions, 17 mixed working groups (educators and scientists) were established  to design activities to be developed in schools during the next Polar Weeks, which will be held in May and September 2015. The evaluation and discussion on the produced materials will occur during the 2nd PEEP Training Workshop in July 2015. The intention is to hold two additional meetings, in a total offour Training Workhsops until 2016. 






