





Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)









Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)
An update on the status of the reformatting
Background
As noted in COMNAP Information Paper ATCM XXXVII (2014) IP031 Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM): An update on the status of the reformatting, as a result of Resolution 1 (2013) Air Safety in Antarctica, COMNAP has begun the process of reformatting AFIM from a loose-leaf paper product to an electronic format product. This is an update as to progress on that reformatting project.
Update on Status
In June 2014, selected national Antarctic programs participated in a beta program using the new, online data entry platform, the “AFIM Data Dashboard.” Six operators from Australia, Chile, Italy, the United Kingdom, the United States and Antarctic Logistics and Expeditions (ALE) participated in the trial. The trial provided a test of the beta system and also was an opportunity for these six operators to review and update their AFIM data and information. 

The beta program proved successful for ensuring the data entry system was a viable solution for content updates, actively engaging participants to enter the most current data, and ensuring the proper AFIM content was being collected. The system has been refined based on feedback and the data dashboard interface is complete. The system was demonstrated to COMNAP members at the COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXVI in August 2014.

The online platform allows those with a username and password to add or edit information, on demand, for their Antarctic facilities, airfields, and helipads. We have entered all required basic data and information into the system.  The next stage of the project is to provide access to the data dashboard to each COMNAP member national Antarctic program AFIM point of contact. They will be asked to review and edit all data to bring AFIM up to date as at June 2015. 
Issues to resolve
As the text entries are all being updated, there is still the need to produce all the graphics for inclusion, to update the AFIM subscribers list to allow for electronic downloading rather than postal distribution and to finalise quality control processes to ensure the national Antarctic program provided data and information is accurate and current. These issues are currently being worked on and it is hoped that they can be resolved before the 2015/2016 Antarctic summer season begins.  COMNAP will continue to produce the paper version of AFIM until the electronic version is complete and ready.

