





Portugal’s Antarctic Science and Policy Activities: a Review








Portugal’s Antarctic Science and Policy Activities: a Review 
Information Paper submitted by Portugal
Summary
Portugal initiated the development of its Antarctic research program in 2005. Portugal joined various international organizations and established the Portuguese Polar Program (PROPOLAR) in 2007. In relation to ACTM matters, Portugal ratified the Antarctic Treaty in 2010 and the Madrid Protocol in 2014. Portugal´s Antarctic research focuses on marine, terrestrial, atmospheric and social sciences, gathering approx. 100 scientists from 15 institutions today, collaborating with numerous Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Korea, New Zealand, Poland, Spain, United Kingdom, Russia and the United States of America. 
Introduction
Portugal joined the ATS in 2010 and has attended the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) since 2012. Portugal ratified the Madrid Protocol in 2014. Although there were some records of research in the Antarctic by Portuguese scientists in the 1980´s and 1990´s, Antarctic research in Portugal has increased significantly since 2005, due to the preparations for the International Polar Year 2007-08 (IPY), supported by the national committee for the event.  The committee aggregated a mixed and well-coordinated group of established scientists and early/mid career scientists, some of which were already involved in Antarctic research.   The committee coordinated scientific activities with various countries, namely Bulgaria, France, Italy, Spain, United Kingdom, and the United States of America.  Prior to this, Portuguese Antarctic research was conducted by individual teams in a bilateral collaboration level with a particular country. This information paper aims to provide an overview of the Antarctic activities carried out by Portugal since 2005, demonstrating the commitment of conducting well-balanced Antarctic research, based on international and multi-disciplinary research with various countries, under the Antarctic Treaty System.
Portugal’s Antarctic activities since 2005
    1. Portugal joined the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR) in 2006, the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) and the European Polar Board (EPB) in 2007, ratified the Antarctic Treaty in 2010 and joined the Polar Educators International in 2013. PROPOLAR was created in 2007, originally gathering around 10 teams consisting of c. 20 polar scientists.  In the last 5 years, the number of scientists has increased by c. 300%, mostly due to an increase in participation by early career scientists. Today, Portugal has around 100 scientists from 15 national institutions.
    2. Portugal’s main research focusses are on marine, permafrost and cryosphere, terrestrial, atmospheric and social sciences, predominantly in collaboration with Brazil, Spain and the United Kingdom, but also with other countries such as Argentina, Bulgaria, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Korea, New Zealand, Poland, Russia and the United States of America.
    3. To strengthen research and logistics co-operation, Portugal has signed Memoranda of Understanding (MoU´s) with Spain (inter-governmental level) , UK and, more recently, Chile (inter-institutional level).

    4. Due to the quality of the Antarctic research, Portuguese scientists have received major national and international awards (e.g. the international Marta T. Muse prize for excellence in science and policy and twice the National ‘Seeds of Science’ award for ‘Earth, Marine and Atmospheric Sciences’). Portugal was also represented at the SCAR Horizon Scan in New Zealand, an initiative aimed to highlight Antarctic science that should be conducted in the coming two decades and beyond (see Kennicutt et al. 2014. Nature 512: 23-25). Portuguese research has been recognized recently within the ATCM, in SCAR highlights to the ATCM (ATCM XXXVII/BP 9) and the SCAR ACCE 2014 update (ATCM XXXVII/IP60).
    5. Portugal is highly committed to excellence in Antarctic science, which is reflected through the participation of various Portuguese scientists in SCAR program Steering Committees (e.g. SCAR AnT-ERA), Expert Groups (e.g. SCAR Expert group of Birds and Antarctic Marine Mammals, SCAR Expert Group on Permafrost, Soils and Periglacial Environments), Action Groups (e.g. SCAR Capacity Building, Education and Training, SCAR Development Council), and the SCAR Standing Scientific Group on Life Sciences and SCAR Standing Scientific Group on Geosciences.
    6. Portugal contributes to Antarctic logistics, with a flight freighted from Punta Arenas to King George Island, under PROPOLAR, which also supports the logistics of partner programs.
    7. Under the PROPOLAR, ci. 80 research papers in international peer reviewed journals have been published (time period: 2007-2015). 

Portugal acknowledges the ATS as an excellent forum for international collaborations and inter-disciplinary research, science diplomacy, education and outreach.

