





Tourist Activity in Brown Scientific Station. Study, analysis and management measures

English version provided by the author




Tourist activity in Brown Scientific Station. Study, analysis and management measures
Information paper presented by Argentina
Introduction
Brown Station, with its particular location of natural beauty, has become one of the most chosen sites by tourist operators for their tourist circuits. According to information on the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 seasons and the records reported by the IAATO, Brown has the highest amount of tourist visits to an Argentine station, while it is ranked among the ten most visited in Antarctica, evidencing the permanent tourist activity in the area. 
Visits to the station take place in line with the General Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica (Resolution 3/2011), so as to avoid negative effects on the Antarctic environment or regarding its scientific and esthetical assets. 
This activity consists of walks around the station and includes Zodiac tours along the bay in front of the station. There are other activities developed in the area such as kayaking, climbing, diving or anchoring of vessels by the station’s coast.  Therefore, Brown Station has a permanent presence of tourist activities in the area, although in not all cases there is disembarkation. 
At present the station is undergoing reconditioning and cleaning tasks in its facilities and the surrounding area, simultaneously with the usual scientific activities carried out during the season. 
Within this context, two issues emerged for Argentina. On the one hand, the need to regulate visits and arrange for the reception of visitors, avoiding overlapping and conflicts among different scientific, logistic and recreational activities carried out. On the other hand, and as a requisite for sound decision making and management measures, the need to have our own national information related to the tourist activity at the station. 
Analysis and management measures related to tourism in Brown Scientific Station
The participation of the Environment Officer in the last two seasons in relation to recreational activities at the Station was a fundamental contribution for the articulation of all the tasks that are being undertaken, coordinating with every vessel for proper development of visits, their supervision and providing general guideline talks to visitors about the station and visits.
Likewise, in the last two seasons, tasks related to tourism management were carried out, which implied both the collection of information and the application of measures on site.
Collection of information to establish a tourism monitoring program at Brown Station:   
Although the station already collected general data on the number of visitors arriving at the station, since the 2013/2014 season, Argentina decided to broaden the type of information collected in order to complete its own database on this activity. Therefore a trial period of two seasons began allowing for adjusting and completing a tourism monitoring system for the site. The ultimate goal of this information is to provide the means to implement managing measures based on quantitative and qualitative information. Comparative and supplementary studies regarding the type of information collected in Ushuaia Harbour are also being analysed. 
Although data from the second season (2014/2015) is being processed, according to the information collected so far, statistical data referred to tourist activity in Brown station was obtained, as type and capacity of the prominent vessels, activities that are carried out by each operator, percentage of guidelines compliance, among others. The more relevant information obtained is that 93% of the vessels visiting the area are IAATO members; 75% of vessels in the area visit the station while the remaining 25% perform other activities around it; 54% of the visits last for 3 hours, and 41% of total vessels have an average capacity between 100 to 200 passengers.  Another finding was that 10% of operators disembark with no previous communication with the station, while the station is open. 
Based on preliminary data, Argentina will adjust and further develop a monitoring program for Brown Station which will be formalized within its official campaign activities.

Survey design and use
Likewise, during 2014/2015 season, some visitors were surveyed randomly in English and in Spanish, in order to learn about their expectations and opinion, so as to be able to work on the communication of activities that the station and the national programme are carrying out. The questions were of a general and a technical nature and will allow for analysis of the quantitative and qualitative evolution of the different aspects related to tourism at Brown Station. At the moment of writing this document, and due to the proximity of the XXXVIII ATCM and the recent arrival of personnel, the survey is currently being processed.
Elaboration of guidelines for visitors
During the 2013/2014 period, a survey and study of information for the elaboration of guidelines for visitors to Brown Station was carried out. During 2014/2015 a functional trial was carried out with favourable results.  This prompted its presentation through IP 131 at the current ATCM, in order to start enforcement in the coming seasons. 
Application of measures on site
During the 2013-2014 season the marking of a trail was implemented, facilitating visitor circulation and thus avoiding interference in the surroundings of penguin colonies and the station’s facilities. It was extended some meters towards the panoramic viewpoint located at the station, when the personnel who would stay in the 2014-2015 summer arrived, which minimized the diversion of visitors to non-authorized sites. The trail was favourably received by the expedition guides as it facilitated their activity.
Towards a tourism monitoring framework. Final Consideration 
From the data obtained and its analysis during both seasons, the relevance of working in cooperation among tourist operators and the station is highlighted, thus ensuring a correct development of scientific projects all the time. Likewise, the relevance of having a useful source of statistical information is evident, as it allows making studies and/or the discussion and eventual elaboration of future actions. 
Moreover, the implementation of the trail and the previous communication by radio and information sessions for visitors were relevant, among other actions. All of them contributed to avoid interference with scientific tasks and the development of logistic actions or manoeuvres, preserving natural assets.  
Lastly, the final design and formalization of the monitoring project at Brown Station, will enable a permanent supervision framework of the environment and tourism management development, ensuring that all the activities comply with current regulations, both at National and the Antarctic Treaty System levels; implementing management measures on site when they apply and collecting relevant information for the development and updating of activities and management procedures related to environment and tourism.

