





Workshop on Education and Outreach - Antarctic Education & Outreach in Italy before and after the 4th International Polar Year









Antarctic Education & Outreach in Italy before and after the 4th International Polar Year 
Information Paper submitted by Italy
1.	Introduction
Since the very begin of the Italian Programma Nazionale di Ricerche in Antartide (PNRA), a group of enthusiastic scientific and logistic staff dedicated part of their time in volunteer Education & Outreach (E&O) activities, aiming at sharing their fascinating experience in Antarctica and at getting students and general citizens involved in the extraordinary project Italy had just undertaken. The enthusiasm and good will of this group of people made up for the initial lack of specific experience and dedicated professional communicators and represented the essential, first working nucleus from which lots of subsequent activities developed. In this first information paper we report on the continuous increase of interest in Italy for E&O activities on Antarctic (and subsequent Polar) subjects and on the positive outcome of international collaborations developed in this field following the participation in the  4th IPY. 
2.	Overview of Italian presence and main activity in Antarctica 
Italy signed the Antarctic Treaty on March 18th, 1981. The PNRA was established in 1985, and the responsibility for its realization was assigned to the Ministry of Education, University and Scientific Research.(MIUR - Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca Scientifica). Italy does not have a Polar Institute. All research staff is thus temporary and has to belong to public research Institutions and Universities. The coordination of the scientific activities of the PNRA is assigned to the Italian National Council for Research (CNR - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche). The Technical Unit for Antarctica of the Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development (ENEA-UTA) is responsible for all the logistics. Since the first expedition ENEA-UTA has being collecting iconographic and multimedia material produced by PNRA staff in Antarctica. The National Museum for Antarctica (MNA), established in 1996 takes care of the Antarctic samples, collections and data and also promotes the public knowledge on Antarctica with exhibitions and conferences. 
Italy has one seasonal research station, Mario Zucchelli, located along the coast at Terra Nova Bay, and shares with France the permanent Concordia Research Station (2005) built on the Antarctic Plateau.
The scientific priorities of the PNRA are multidisciplinary and mainly regards: Global and Climate Changes, Dynamics of ice cap, Dynamics of the atmosphere, Dynamic of the planet Earth, Geodynamic evolution, Meteorites studies, Earth-Sun interaction, Space weather, Astronomy and Cosmology, Terrestrial and Marine Bio-diversity and Ecology, Environmental contamination and hazards, Technologic innovation and challenges, Human adaptation, and Oceanographic research and Studies on the dynamics of Polar ocean which has been carried out with the Italica ship and the OGS Explora research vessel.
International cooperation is, and has always been, very active in all fields of research. Italy is participating in many international projects and shared infrastructures, among which ANDRILL, ITASE, QUBIC, IPICS, IODP, CORIBAR, WISSARD, EU/FP7, Eurofleet. 
3.	E&O activities in the early years of PNRA
Soon after the beginning of the Italian PNRA, several Education and Outreach projects were realized to promote the public awareness on this new major national program. A travelling exhibition, conceived by PNRA coordinators, and guided by PNRA staff that had been in Antarctica, reached dozens of cities all around Italy and was visited by thousand of students, besides thousands of other citizens. A first informative brochure “Italia in Antartide” (Italy in Antarctica) was printed in 1989 and updated in subsequent editions. Public conferences and talks were organized in many occasions, though mostly on a volunteer base and without a real coordination. Antarctica Science was always present at Science Festivals. The booklet “Conoscere l’Antartide”(To know Antarctica) was first published in 2004. Specific projects such as “Adopt a school”, “Laboratory Antarctica”, “Ask a participant to an Antarctic expedition” were successfully included as regular annual activities of the PNRA. Visits to schools and distribution of teaching material on Antarctic science and life were organized every year. The National Museum for Antarctica (1996) in its three sites of Genova, Siena and Trieste became a further, consolidated, centre for the diffusion of Antarctic knowledge. Furthermore, a cooperation was undertaken with journalists from the press and the television, film makers and photographers which provided a professional support for high quality material to be used in the PNRA E&O activities.
It is important to notice that although in the early times there were not a group or office specifically devoted only to E&O, the activities carried out by Italian PNRA staff were remarkable, considering that Italian scientists had very few tradition in E&O. Generally speaking, the involvement of scientists in E&O activities in Italy, was not encouraged by the respective Organisations and the interaction with media was mostly seen with a negative perception, when not as a waste of scientists’ time, or a sort of exhibitionism. On the other hand, scientist were not keen to devote their time to public communication , possibly for the same reason. 
In time, both the developing in Italy (as in several other countries) of E&O reputation as an important social tool for sharing knowledge and gaining informed consensus and participation of citizens and tax payers, and the interactions with colleagues from countries with well established E&O programs, promoted and enhanced the engagements of PNRA and its staff in internationally coordinated E&O projects. In the meanwhile the various organizations involved in the PNRA, e.g. ENEA, CNR, Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV), Osservatorio Geofisico Sperimentale (OGS) implemented their own web sites with link to their Antarctic projects and strengthen their contribution to relevant Educational projects and didactic proposals. 
It is also worth noting that, in recent years, Antarctic research projects are becoming more and more coupled with Arctic projects, and the educational proposals consequently are drifting from “Antarctic” to “Polar”. 
4.	Development of Polar Edu activities during IPY and the example of ANDRILL
The 4th International Polar Year (IPY) “a large scientific programme focused on the Arctic and the Antarctic” took place during 2007-2009. This biennium was a period of focused activity aimed at making progress in all polar sciences (Fig. 1). 


Fig. 1. Honeycomb chart representation of IPY projects according to their subject and geographical location.
The Italian contribution is represented by the white, empty hexagons. 

Most Italian projects regarded Antarctic or bipolar subjects. Only three projects were fully dedicated to Education and Outreach.

Following the success in E&O experienced during the 3rd IPY, when media first provided wide coverage of scientific activities in Arctic and Antarctica and dedicated materials were used in school to engage students in science, the 4th IPY adopted the same model. A devoted E&O program was devised in order to promote the integration among the scientific researches and educators. This program not only encouraged those within the scientific community to actively plan for science E&O, it also engaged education and communication experts to develop polar projects and become involved in the larger IPY momentum.It was the first time Italy was participating in an IPY. The lack of experience in previous IPY was possibly one of the reasons why Italian polar researchers underestimated the relevance of Education and Communication aspects while drafting of their own proposals for IPY.
As a result (Fig. 2), only three projects were specifically devoted to E&O, representing 5.6% of all projects. The comparison with the mean 25% percentage of E&O projects carried out from other countries is remarkable. Lacking of significant numbers of Italian E&O projects during the IPY, can be partially explained with the severe cut of funds the PNRA experienced in those years. In a situation were resources for science were scarce, investment  in E&O was not seen as a priority.


Subjects of IPY projects. 

    1. Earth 
    2. Land 
    3. People
    4. Ocean
    5. Ice
    6. Atmosphere
    7. Space
    8. Education and Outreach




Education and Outreach (bar n. 8) was one of the main objective of the IPY. 

The mean percentage of  E&O projects of the sum of all nations taking pat to the 4th  IPY reached 25% (left, upper box).

The Italian contribution to E&O was relatively low. Most projects (ca. 35%) were dedicated to the Ocean research (bar n. 4), and only 5.6% to E&O (left, lower box).

Fig. 2. Percentage of E&O projects in Italy vs other Countries during the 4th IPY (from Fioretti, 2007).

Despite the apparent low interest in E&O activities during the 4th IPY, the 2007 was actually the year in which Italian scientists significantly increased their participation in E&O activities, albeit not within dedicated national projects, but by contributing with their participation in international projects with well consolidated experience in fruitful and positive relationship with school educators. In the meanwhile, the development of social media allowed, and strongly enhanced, new opportunities for online training and remote collaborations. Among the outcomes of IPY in Italy we would like to mention the birth of the Italian national Committee of the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS, 2008) and the participation to the ANDRILL E&O program named ARISE (ANDRILL Research Immersion for Science Educators). ANDRILL ARISE program was a multi- national scientific initiative, involving collaboration among the Antarctic programs of Germany, Italy, New Zealand, and the United States. ANDRILL-ARISE triggered a series of initiative that directly involved the school and, for the first time, allowed an Italian teacher to join researchers in Antarctica, sharing this experience with schools before, during and after the on-ice activity. In Italy the program ARISE operated from 2006 to 2008 and directly involved over 2000 students, from 66 schools in 18 different provinces of the country (Cattadori et al. 2011).
Based on this very positive experience, on 2011 the MNA, with the endorsement of MIUR and the support of PNRA, organized the first Polar Summer School for Science Teachers (SPEs). The school’s aim is to help teachers to develop active learning experiences on Polar issues. At the end of the school, one of the attending teachers is selected to take part in a scientific expedition in Antarctica during the following austral summer, where he/she will carry out the specific education and public outreach project he/she has developed for the schools and the general public.
Summing up, the long term effects of the IPY- experience gave birth to a strong and dynamic network of Italian polar educators sharing the key idea of create partnerships with scientists in order to promote new forms of scientific popularization. This new network is now very well integrated in the wide international community of polar educators and scientists. It has been represented at the main E&O events of IPY such as  the Oslo Science Conference in 2009, and the Montreal IPY Conference in 2012, when the new association named Polar Educators International (PEI) emerged.
5.	Present day situation and prospects
The relevance of Education and Outreach in Polar research is at present fully acknowledged within the Italian polar community of scientists logistics, and financing body. A working group on E&O has been established within the PNRA, with the aim of coordinating and sharing national and international initiatives, and of optimizing human and economic resources. The PNRA allocates every year a budget for E&O activities and promotes collaboration with teachers and educator and encourage scientists to include in their scientific proposals a specific project or action on education.
The Summer School for Polar Educators (SPEs) is now at its 5th edition and is expected to continue in the next years. The program has shaped a strong community of national polar-scientists and polar-educators with strong international connections. SPEs has so far trained nearly 100 science teachers and provides constant support to polar teachers activities. Three Italian teachers already took part to an Antarctic expedition, in connection with specific research projects. Each of them implemented a year long E&O program consisting of quality outreach initiatives and preparation of new teaching materials. Social media of SPEs, are widely used to keep Polar Educators in touch and to develop and share common projects on specific Polar themes. 
The Italian polar teachers community is very dynamic at both national and international level. National actions include: 3 PhD degree on Polar Science Communication at University of Camerino; production of polar educational material (books, and app); involvement of main research institutions (CNR, INGV, OGS, MUSE, MNA, ENEA and several Universities) in polar educational projects; organization of training workshops for science teachers. These activities are being carried out in close connection with E&O projects realized by the PNRA and are strictly integrated with APECS and PEI projects. 

The Italian PNRA is highly committed to education and outreach and is working out a long term plan to implement and optimize the contribution of Polar Sciences in school education. 
PNRA supports the participation of national delegates to PEI Executive Committee and Council authorities.


References: 
Cattadori M, Florindo F, Rack F (2011) Short- and long-term effects on the school system of a research immersion experience for science educators: An example from ANDRILL (Antarctic Geological Drilling), Geosphere, doi: 10.1130/GES00678.1. Published online on November, 22nd 2011. 
Fioretti (2007) “Anno polare internazionale 2007-2009: un’opportunità per la Comunicazione Scientifica” Unpublished Master thesis in Science Comunication, University of Padova (Italy).


