





Australia’s Antarctic Hydrographic Surveys








Australia’s Antarctic Hydrographic Surveys
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In Resolution 5 (2014) Strengthening Cooperation in Hydrographic Surveying and Charting of Antarctic Waters the Parties acknowledged the importance of hydrographic surveying and charting of Antarctic waters. The Resolution encouraged liaison and cooperation between national Antarctic programs and national hydrographic offices, and mutual cooperation in hydrographic survey and charting. In line with this Resolution, and to assist with meeting safety, operational, environmental and scientific objectives, Australia has undertaken a series of hydrographic survey activities in the Casey region during the summers of 2013/14 and 2014/15, using multi-beam echo sounding technology.  This project has been a collaboration between the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), Geoscience Australia (GA) and the Australian Hydrographic Service (Royal Australian Navy).
Background
In the summers of 2013/14 and 2014/15, Australia undertook hydrographic surveys around Casey station and amongst the Windmill Islands in support of a range of Australia’s Antarctic scientific, environmental management, and navigational safety objectives. Work of this nature is acknowledged as a priority within the Antarctic Treaty system and the International Hydrographic Organization.  The purpose of the survey was to acquire geophysical, geological and biological data from the seabed environment in the shallow (<200 m) coastal waters adjacent to Casey station and amongst the Windmill Islands for both scientific and navigational purposes.

The marine environment around Casey station, East Antarctica, is frequently visited by ships and smaller vessels conducting operational support activities and scientific research in the area. The area is significant for near-shore benthic ecosystem research, and research into the impact of past waste disposal practices on the marine environment near stations. Seabed geomorphological characteristics are also important, providing insight into physical processes such as the effect of glacial expansion and retreat of the East Antarctic ice sheet during, and since, the last glacial maximum some 20 000 years ago. 

To date bathymetric data in the area has been limited.  Most previous surveys were conducted using single beam echo sounders, which were unable to provide detailed representations of the seabed, and preventing the discovery of all navigational hazards. In contrast, modern bathymetry surveys using multibeam acoustic technology provide high resolution 3-dimensional images of the sea-bed. This information is analogous to and equally useful as aerial photographs and satellite data that underpin our understanding of the terrestrial environment. 

This work follows similar hydrographic survey work undertaken near Davis station in 2009/10, and is part of ongoing efforts by Australia to collect bathymetric information for safety, operational, environmental and scientific objectives.
Survey techniques and results
The Australian Navy vessel Wyatt Earp was used for the 2013/14 survey work, and operated during the resupply of Casey station from the RSV Aurora Australis.  This was Wyatt Earp’s first deployment after its recent refurbishment and installation with a new multibeam echo sounder. The survey team consisted of four hydrographic surveyors and one marine technician.  This survey covered an area of approximately 6km².  The second season (2014/15) utilised the AAD’s Howard Burton, an 8.5m long workboat equipped with twin outboard motors and a moonpool through which the multibeam transducers were raised and lowered.  This season involved a joint Navy/GA team staying on station and operating throughout the summer period and surveyed a much greater area – 28 km².  Overall the survey covered a total area of 34 km².
The resulting high resolution sonar data, and the imagery derived from it, of the shallow waters around the Windmill Islands region has revealed in unprecedented detail seabed topography of peaks, moraines and U-shaped valleys (Figure 1). The collection of hydrographic data was supplemented by biological and substrate sampling and camera verification of both the physical environment and biological communities in the shallow waters adjacent to Casey station.  Biological data was collected by a small underwater video camera. Real time images displayed on the deck unit and monitored during deployment minimised disturbance of the seafloor. Deployment involved lowering the camera to approximately 1 m above the seafloor and recording for approximately one minute to record biological and substrate information before retrieval. The location of the camera deployments was determined during the survey using the acquired multibeam data to determine suitable locations.
Seabed structure
The images generated by the multibeam sonar showed a dynamic sea floor. Particularly striking features were large crescent shaped ‘moraines’ (piles of glacial detritus), created during pauses in past ice sheet retreat (Figure 2). The moraines mark where the ice sheet grounding-zone (the point where the ice-sheet meets the sea floor) remained long enough to melt and drop gravel and rock debris that had previously been frozen in to the base of the ice sheet.  Although hundreds of metres long, these features were previously unknown from Casey, being too large for divers to recognise them for what they are.
In O’Brien Bay and the north side of Newcomb Bay, curved seabed features resemble end moraines of channelized outlet glaciers, deposited as the glaciers episodically retreated. The channels in Newcomb and O’Brien bays are some 200–400 m wide and preserve U-shaped profiles (see figure 2), characteristic of glacially eroded valleys seen on land.  One large moraine, labelled ‘a’ in figure 2, measures up to 25 m high, with many smaller moraines, about 5–10 m high, also being easily discernible. In O’Brien Bay there is evidence that moraine formation occurred at different geological times, indicating local glacial advances overprinting earlier moraines. Other features include parallel linear features (‘b’ in figure 2), discontinuous shallow channels around 3–5 m wide (‘c’) and crescent-shaped hollows or scours (‘d’). 
The two recent hydrographic surveys undertaken in the vicinity have provided significant improvements to navigational safety for mariners. The data has revealed a significant number of previously uncharted shoals. As more surveys are undertaken this will directly support other activities such as environmental monitoring, mariner safety and habitat mapping. 
The Australian Hydrographic Service will process the data and incorporate it into forthcoming navigational products, consistent with the International Chart Scheme maintained under the Hydrographical Commission on Antarctica of the International Hydrographic Organization. The data will be progressively made publicly available through the Australian Antarctic Data Centre (http://data.aad.gov.au/ ) following final quality checking and initial publication. 

Further information
Australia intends to continue a program of hydrographic survey activities in Antarctica, and will report to future meetings on the results of that work. Any Parties seeking further information on these activities are kindly invited to contact the Australian Antarctic Division.




Figure 1: Bathymetry coverage derived from data collected from 2014/15 and 2013/14 multibeam sonar surveys. Selected coastal features are labelled. Inset: location of Casey with respect to Australia (black rectangle showing the location of Figure 2) (Figure: Geoscience Australia)

Figure 2: Unprocessed data from the multibeam echo sounder used over Newcomb Bay. Crescent-shaped moraines can be seen throughout the bay. The inset at the upper left represents the seafloor profile x-x’ showing a U-shaped valley characteristic of glacially eroded valleys (Photo: Royal Australian Navy and Geoscience Australia) 
