





Recent Developments in Indian Ice-core Drilling Program in Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica









Recent Developments in Indian Ice-core Drilling Program in Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica
Abstract
India has initiated its shallow ice core drilling activities in Antarctica with a focus on the high resolution climatic history of the last few hundreds of years. Recently with a major financial support from the Ministry of Earth Sciences (India), the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) has initiated a long-term project “Cryosphere and climate”. One of the major objectives of this project is the reconstruction of Antarctic climate for the past two millennia using an array of shallow to medium depth ice cores from coastal Dronning Maud Land.
Background
Antarctic ice sheet provides a record of the history environment and climate for the last several hundreds to thousands of years. India has initiated its shallow ice core drilling activities in Antarctica with a focus on the high resolution climatic history of the last few hundreds of years. Study of ice cores coastal Dronning Maud Land have revealed the utility of coastal ice cores in high resolution reconstruction of oceanic and atmospheric dynamics, with links to the regional and global climatic modes like Southern Annular Mode (SAM) and El Nino-Southern Oscillation (Thamban et al., 2006, 2011, 2012; Laluraj et al., 2011, 2014; Naik et al., 2010 a & b; Marshall et al., 2011; Antony et al., 2012; PAGES 2k Consortium, 2013). Recently with a major financial support from the Ministry of Earth Sciences (India), the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) has initiated a long-term project “Cryosphere and climate”. One of the major objectives of this project is the reconstruction of Antarctic climate for the past two millennia using an array of shallow to medium depth ice cores from coastal Dronning Maud Land.
During the 2013-14 austral summer, a 101 m -ice core was retrieved from the central Dronning Maud Land (location – 71o 30’32.7’’ N:10o 11’ 52.3’’ E; Elevation – 1506 m). The drilling site was finalized based on the available radar data in this region as well as various satellite data that provided information on the accumulation, ice flow velocity and flow direction. The site is 130 km away from the Indian Maitri station. The drilling was undertaken using the GeoTech D-2 electromechanical drilling system. Subsequent to the successful recovery of ice cores, the drill hole was used for continuous thermal profiling of the ice sheet at the drill site. Towards this, multi-depth thermistors were placed at different depths in the ice core borehole to a depth of 30 m (36 thermistors in total) and the borehole was filled with snow to ensure thermal continuity. The sensors were connected to a multichannel datalogger system (RST DT 2040), that systematically measured (2 measurements per day) ice sheet temperature. The borehole temperature data was retrieved and redeployed during the 2014-15 season and the data were found to be excellent quality. 
Future studies planned 
The International Partnership of Ice Core Science (IPICS) highlighted the importance of ice core records that focus on high-resolution variability during the past 2000 years. Antarctic coastal climate is much more regional than the inland climate and therefore needs a detailed study. Most of the coastal ice sheets are also limited in thickness. To ensure that our study contribute to the high-resolution 2000 year network of the IPICS, it is crucial that deeper (200 m and above) ice cores are recovered from most suitable coastal sites. The Dronning Maud Land (DML) coast in East Antarctica has a chain of small ice shelves that are characterized by several ice rises that have distinct environmental settings, suggesting that individual regions have different responses to the ongoing climate change. Relatively high surface mass balance and close proximity to storms that circulate Antarctica make ice core records from ice rises well suited to examine highly-variable Antarctic climate and sea ice, including their regional tele-connections. Accurate chronology for ice core based palaeoclimate study also requires glaciological knowledge of the core site (e.g. elevation change in the past) and regional boundary conditions that regulate the ice flow at the core site. Starting from 2015-16 season, Indian scientists would be undertaking glaciological survey and ice core drilling in selected ice rises of Nivlisen ice shelf in the central Dronning Maud Land, with logistic support from Maitri station. This study would also be used to determine the most suitable future drilling site for a deeper ice core from coastal Dronning maud Land that could possibly cover the entire Holocene. 

References
Antony, R., K.P. Krishnan, Laluraj, C. M., Thamban M., Dhakephalkar, P.K., Engineer, A. S. and Shivaji, S. (2012), Diversity and physiology of culturable bacteria associated with a coastal Antarctic ice core, MICROBIOLOGICAL RESEARCH doi:10.1016/j.micres.2012.03.003. 
Laluraj, C.M., Thamban, M. and Satheesan K. (2014). Dust and associated geochemical fluxes in an ice core from the coastal East Antarctica and its linkages with Southern hemisphere climate variability. ATMOSPHERIC ENVIRONMENT, 90: 23-32. 
Laluraj, C.M., Thamban, M., S.S. Naik, B.L. Redkar, A. Chaturvedi and R. Ravindra. (2011). Nitrate records of a shallow ice core from East Antarctica: atmospheric processes, preservation and climatic implications. THE HOLOCENE, 21: 351-356. 
Marshall, G.J., Battista, S., Naik, S.S., and Thamban, M. (2011). Analysis of a regional change in the sign of the SAM-temperature relationship in Antarctica. CLIMATE DYNAMICS, 36 (1-2). 277-287. 
Naik, S. S. Thamban, M., Laluraj, C.M., Redkar, B.L. and Chaturvedi, A. (2010a). A century of climate variability in the central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica and its relation to Southern Annular Mode and El Niño Southern Oscillation. JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH (Atmospheres), 115, D16102, doi:10.1029/2009JD013268. 
Naik, S.S., Thamban, M., Rajakumar, A., Laluraj, C.M., and Chaturvedi, A. (2010b). Influence of climatic teleconnections on the temporal isotopic variability as recorded in a firn core from the central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. JOURNAL OF EARTH SYSTEM SCIENCE, Vol. 119, Pages: 41-49. 
PAGES 2k Consortium (2013). Continental-scale temperature variability during the last two millennia, NATURE GEOSCIENCE, DOI: 10.1038/NGEO1797. 
Thamban M., Laluraj, C. M., Naik, S. S., Chaturvedi, A. (2011). Reconstruction of Antarctic climate change using ice core proxy records from the coastal Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. JOURNAL OF GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF INDIA, 78: 19-29. 
Thamban M., Naik, S. S., Laluraj, C. M., Chaturvedi, A., Ravindra, R., (2012). Antarctic climate variability during the past few centuries based on ice core records from coastal Dronning Maud Land and its implications on the recent warming. In: R. Sinha and R. Ravindra, “Earth System Processes and Disaster Management”, Society of Earth Scientists Series, Springer, 2013, XII, 239 p. 
Thamban, M., Chaturvedi, A., Rajakumar, A., Naik, .S. S., D'Souza, W., Singh, A., Rajan, S., and Ravindra. R. (2006). Aerosol perturbations related to volcanic eruptions during the past few centuries as recorded in an ice core from the Central Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica. CURRENT SCIENCE, Vol. 91, No. 9, 1-8.



