





Improving Sea Ice Information in Antarctica 










Improving Sea Ice Information in Antarctica 
Information Paper submitted by Germany
1. Introduction
This paper is submitted with reference to Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) regarding the sharing of information that may be helpful to other Parties in planning and conducting their activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. This paper highlights the cooperation among operational sea ice services as well as sea ice researchers concerning improved sea ice information in Antarctica. 
2. IICWG meeting to improve Sea Ice Information in Antarctica
The 15th meeting of the International Ice Charting Working Group (IICWG) was held in Punta Arenas, Chile, October 20-25, 2014. The theme of this meeting was “Ice Information in the Southern Ocean: Status, Challenges, and the Future”. A full day was devoted to this theme including plenary sessions and breakout groups that discussed user needs for ice information in Antarctic waters, the current availability of information and how best to fill any gaps identified. Additional plenary sessions on Earth Observations, Emergency Response, and WMO Information also included specific presentations relevant to the Antarctic.
A significant outcome regarding the Antarctic was the Engagement of Southern Hemisphere organizations that provide ice information for Antarctic waters. All of the five countries having Antarctic METAREA responsibilities (Australia, Argentina, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa) were represented and participated actively in the meeting. To enhance marine safety in ice-frequented southern waters, it was agreed that a first priority should be to produce a regularly updated circumpolar ice edge bulletin for broadcast on the Global Maritime Disaster and Safety Service (GMDSS). 
Advances were also made in the joint Antarctic Ice Chart Production, where Russia’s Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, the U.S. National Ice Center and the Norwegian Ice Service reported on work underway to integrate their production of ice charts for Antarctic waters to ensure the continued availability of weekly charts on a year-round basis augmented with more frequent updates during the summer navigation season. 
Improving Antarctic sea ice information and the marine safety in the region for a continuous protection of the Antarctic environment will be also a theme on the next IICWG meeting, which will be held October 19th to 23rd in Germany. There is also the intention (but depending on travel funds) to organize a workshop focusing on ice information for the Southern Ocean METAREAs just before this meeting. 
3. Invitation
Germany and the IICWG invites those experts who can provide valuable input to improve Antarctic sea ice information, but are not members of national ice services, to attend this meeting. Further information can be found at the IICWG web site at https://nsidc.org/noaa/iicwg/ or directly contacting the IICWG secretariat (email to John.Falkingham@rogers.com).

