





Eradication of a non-native grass Poa annua L. from ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands









Eradication of a non-native grass Poa annua L. from ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

Information Paper submitted by Poland


Background
The non-native grass Poa annua L. was initially recorded at the Polish Antarctic Station H. Arctowski in the austral summer of 1985/86. At first it colonized sites disturbed by human activities, with destroyed soil structure and sheltered from the wind. Genetic studies showed high variability of the P. annua population from around the Station, which suggests several separate introduction events from different sources, including Europe and South America. It has also been shown that P. annua maintains a stable population in the vicinity of Arctowski Station, and forms soil seed banks comparable to species typical for the polar tundra.
In the summer of 2008/2009 the presence of P. annua was recorded about 1.5 km from the Station on the deglaciated moraines of the Ecology Glacier, inside ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay. The demographic study showed that this population had been stable for at least two years. 
P. annua is one of the five most widely distributed plant species in the world. It is a synanthropic and pioneer species.
In accordance with Annex II Article 4 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, as well as the CEP non-native species manual, and the Management Plan of ASPA No 128, plans to eradicate P. annua from the Area were considered.
Field work done in 2014/2015
In 2014/2015 a new research program “The causes, course and consequences of the expansion of Poa annua L. in Western Antarctica, a multi-aspect population study” (Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS, Warsaw University and Jagiellonian University, head of project - dr Katarzyna Chwedorzewska) was initiated at Arctowski Station. The aim of the project is the analysis of survival and dispersal of P. annua in in Admiralty Bay (King George Island). The planned research will allow to estimate the extent to which the local flora is threatened by this species and the risk of an invasion of other non-native plants in the region. 
As an integral part of the program, several actions relating to the management responses to the presence of non-native grass P. annua inside ASPA No 128 were taken during Antarctic summer 2014/2015:
    • ice-free parts of the Area were surveyed for the presence of non-native species. Tussocks of P. annua were found on the moraines near the Ecology Glacier in the same place where they were previously observed, as well as in a new location ca 100 m to the east. Detailed maps and photographic documentation were prepared. 
    • All grass tussocks found in the Area were removed by hand tools (in total 57 individuals from two locations). Soil samples for the future analysis of soil seed bank were collected from under each tussock.
    • Morphometric analysis, as well as examination of the reproductive status of each individual plant were done. All collected material was taken to Poland for further research (genetics, morphology etc.). 
    • Sites from which P. annua was eradicated were marked for future long-term monitoring.

Additional detailed surveys for the presence of P. annua were made outside ASPA No 128, in the so-called “Point Thomas Oasis”, where Arctowski Station is located. Detailed maps and photographs were made. Population structure, as well as reproductive status of non-native grass were assessed. All tussocks of P. annua growing in the moss-covered zone between Arctowski Station and the boundary of ASPA No 128, as well as in the adjoining area were eradicated. Sites with the remaining tussocks were marked.

Supporting references:
Chwedorzewska K.J. 2008. Poa annua L. in Antarctic – searching for the source of introduction. Polar Biology 31: 263-268.
Olech M., Chwedorzewska K.J. 2011. The first appearance and establishment of an alien vascular plant in natural habitats on the forefield of a retreating glacier in Antarctica. Antarctic Science 23: 153–154.
Chwedorzewska K.J., Bednarek P.T. 2012. Genetic and epigenetic variation in a cosmopolitan grass (Poa annua L.) from Antarctic and Polish populations. Polish Polar Research 33: 63 - 80.
Lityńska-Zając M., Chwedorzewska K.J., Olech M., Korczak-Abshire M., Augustyniuk-Kram A. 2012. Diaspores and phyto-remains accidentally transported to the Antarctic Station during three expeditions. Biodiversity and Conservation 21: 3411-3421.
Wódkiewicz M., Galera H., Giełwanowska I., Chwedorzewska K.J., Olech M. 2013. Diaspores of the introduced species Poa annua L. in soil samples from King George Island (South Shetlands, Antarctic). Arctic, Antarctic and Alpine Research 45: 415-419
Wódkiewicz M., Ziemiański M., Kwiecień K., Chwedorzewska K.J., Galera H. 2014. Spatial structure of the soil seed bank of Poa annua L. - alien species in the Antarctica. Biodiversity and Conservation 23: 1339–1346. 
Molina-Montenegro M.A., Carrasco-Urra F., Acuña-Rodríguez I., Oses R. Chwedorzewska K.J. 2014. Assessing the importance of human activities for the establishment of the invasive Poa annua in the Antarctica. Polar Research 33: 21425, http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/polar.v33.21425. 
Chwedorzewska K.J., Giełwanowska I., Olech M., Wódkiewicz M., Molina-Montenegro M., Galera H. 2015. Poa annua L. in the maritime Antarctic - an overview. Polar Record doi:10.1017/S0032247414000916
Galera H., Chwedorzewska K.J., Wódkiewicz M. (in press). Response of Poa annua to extreme conditions: comparison of morphological traits between populations from cold and temperate climate conditions. Polar Biology

