





EIA Field Reviews of Science, Operations, and Camps









EIA Field Reviews of United States Science Projects, Operations, and Camps
Information Papier submitted by United States
Introduction
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) identifies that “regular and effective monitoring shall take place to allow assessment of the impacts of ongoing activities, including the verification of predicted impacts … [and] to facilitate early detection of the possible unforeseen effects ….’ (Article 3.2(d, e).  In addition, Annex I of the Protocol states that “Procedures shall be put in place, including appropriate monitoring of key environmental indicators …” (Article 5).  
The United States complies with the Protocol through U.S. law, primarily the Antarctic Conservation Act (ACA), and implementing regulations. The size, breadth, and complexity of United States Antarctic Program (USAP) activities require a variety of processes and tools to monitor potential impacts. During project implementation, the USAP monitors projects through Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Field Reviews. 
EIA Field Reviews Purpose
The purpose of EIA Field Reviews is to compare a project’s planned and actual project activities and impacts.  The reviews facilitate communication between Environmental staff and project proponents, and results in documentation of field activities and potential impacts. EIA Field Reviews identify issues that were not adequately addressed during project planning, and project proponents frequently improve existing mitigations and suggest additional ideas. As needed, additional mitigations can be immediately implemented for the remainder of the project.  Future projects benefit from EIA Field Reviews by improvement of impact assessment protocol and identification of successful, translatable mitigation actions.     
EIA Field Reviews Process
EIA Field Reviews are conducted on projects of all scales with the potential to cause a disturbance in the Antarctic environment, including science projects, operational activities, and camp operations.  
Prior to the field season, projects are identified as candidates for an EIA Field Review.  New projects or field teams that have no or limited experience working in the Antarctic are candidates for EIA Field Reviews, as are projects with the potential to result in substantive impacts (e.g., major drilling actions, planned releases to environment, large construction actions).  More broadly, projects, activities, and camps with one or more of the following attributes are considered as candidates:
    • Use of large quantities of hazardous materials or generation of large quantities of waste
    • Use of undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas (operational activities)
    • Establishment and use of large field camps or new tent camps
    • Located in or near sensitive areas (e.g., protected areas, freshwater systems, subglacial lakes, sea bird or marine animal concentrations)
    • Located where other projects are on-going or may be initiated (e.g., South Pole Station)
    • Use of emerging technology (e.g., new drills and drill fluid, new sensor systems)
Projects are then selected for the upcoming season to reflect the various types of projects, environmental issues, and geographic locations.  The list is finalized based on funding and resource availability. 
Prior to conducting an EIA Field review, existing project information is reviewed.  Project information sources may include the initial project proposal, cost and material lists, project meeting notes, and conduct of operation plans. These project support documents assist in understanding anticipated attributes including number of people, camp size, equipment deployed, waste volumes, fuel use, flight operations, and material use.  Project-specific and applicable programmatic EIA documents that address project activities (e.g., camp establishment and operations, drilling, explosives use) are reviewed both to identify activities, potential impacts, mitigations, and best management practices.  In addition, past Field Reviews and prior End-of-Season reports, if available, are assessed.  Key quantitative and qualitative attributes are listed and summarized to compare with the EIA Field Review information that will be collected.
An EIA Field Review site visit is scheduled with the project participants to minimize disruption to the science or operations and to schedule activities to be observed.  Site visits typically take 30 minutes to one hour; on rare occasion they may be longer due to the complexity of the activities being reviewed (e.g., unique drilling operations).  Site visits are guided by the summarized information collected during the existing information review.  During the site visit, participants provide information and assessments on best management practices and on any mitigation used or needed.  Photographs and notes are taken of the structures and activities observed.  Project modifications are reviewed to determine if they are within the bounds of the existing EIA review.  If the modifications are well outside the bounds of the EIA documentation and have a potential for at least minor and transitory impacts, further project activities are delayed.  If impacts are viewed to likely be less than minor or transitory, then the project may continue (with National Science Foundation (NSF) approval); however, an amendment to the EIA project documentation is then prepared after the site visit.  Similarly, any issues requiring immediate action are identified and tracked until the issue is closed if it cannot be corrected during the field visit.  Other issues are noted for future action and inclusion in the annual EIA Field Review report.
An EIA Field Review report is prepared after the site visit is completed.  The report includes general findings, comparison of environmental impacts with anticipated impacts, and efficacy of mitigation actions.  The report also includes corrective or improvement actions identified by the project team or the environmental reviewer during the site visit.  The report is provided to the project team lead for review and then submitted to the NSF. The reports are also collated to identify any over-arching issues and are part of the annual Environmental Work Plan Summary provided to the NSF. 
Field Camp Reviews and Monitoring
Field camp reviews are an important subcomponent of the EIA Field Review process. Due to the high density of science projects based out of McMurdo Station, USAP Field Camp Reviews have been focused on nearby sea ice camps, deep field camps, and camps located within the McMurdo Dry Valleys.  These camps vary in size and infrastructure from large science camps and fixed facilities to small mobile tent camps.  
The Field Camp Review process begins with planning and education programs.  Environmental education is provided prior to departure from the Station.  All field members attend training that highlights appropriate environmental behaviours and mitigations (e.g., waste management, spill prevention and response).  Additional training is provided to the camp managers and participants of larger camps.  
Aspects examined during a Field Camp Review site visit include secondary containment, spill response capabilities, and waste handling and storage (especially hazardous waste). A form and checklist of key environmental aspects is used during site visits to obtain an objective and consistent review of all camps.  Interviews with field camp managers and PIs aid in identifying environmental risks and improve environmental best management practices.  Reviews works to ensure that NSF funded science projects have the proper tools to protect the environment and that the USAP is providing the necessary materials and education.    
As with science and operational project reviews, findings are shared with field staff; corrective actions can be taken immediately to remove risks; and additional education can be provided to the field team immediately on site.  A report is generated to aid future planning, implementing, and education and a follow up meeting or discussion can be held with a group if a significant corrective action is needed.  
Benefits of EIA Field Reviews
EIA Field Reviews monitor the environmental impacts of projects and provide real-time information on the success of mitigation and the quality and accuracy of EIA documentation. EIA Field Reviews have resulted in improving secondary containment use; identifying future activities requiring additional review; identifying excess equipment and installations to be retrograded; as well as identifying necessary safety improvements (e.g., fire extinguishers and carbon monoxide monitors). The USAP is continuing to improve EIA Field Reviews implementation and results integration into the overall USAP monitoring and improvement process.

