





Update on the Canadian Polar Commission and Canadian High Arctic Research Station (CHARS) Project








Update on the Canadian Polar Commission and Canadian High Arctic Research Station (CHARS) Project

Overview

This information paper provides an update on Canada’s work to establish a National Antarctic Research Program, which is being led by the Canadian Polar Commission.  It also provides an update on the merger of the Canadian Polar Commission with the Canadian High Arctic Research Station (CHARS) project to create a new federal agency, which will provide opportunities for collaboration in the Arctic and Antarctic.


Canada and the Antarctic

Canadian researchers have been active in Antarctic research, in areas that include, but are not limited to earth observation; marine and freshwater biology; geology; ice dynamics; and human psychology.  This research has primarily been undertaken in partnership with the national Antarctic programs of other countries.  Canadians have also been involved in technology development to facilitate polar science and operations.  Canadian companies are also active in Antarctic, including tour and air operators.  For example, in 2014/15, Canada permitted 15% of Antarctic tourism passengers.

Canada has been a non-consultative party to the Antarctic Treaty since 1988.  It ratified the Protocol for Environmental Protection (Madrid Protocol) in 2003, and is a full Party with voting rights.  Canada has also been a full member of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) since 1998.  The Canadian Polar Commission (CPC) is Canada’s adhering body to SCAR, and the Canadian Committee on Antarctic Research (CCAR), which reports to the CPC, is a national advisory body on Antarctic matters and serves as the link between the international Antarctic science community and Canadian scientists.  With advice and guidance from CCAR, the CPC has been working to establish a Canadian national Antarctic research program. 


Announcement of the Canadian High Arctic Research Station (CHARS) in Cambridge Bay, Nunavut

The Canadian High Arctic Research Station (CHARS) project was first announced in 2007 when the Government of Canada committed to "build a world-class Arctic research station that will be on the cutting edge of Arctic issues, including environmental science and resource development.  Beginning in 2012, $142.5 million over six years has been committed for the construction, equipment, and fit-up of the CHARS facility in Cambridge Bay, Nunavut.  Construction began in 2014 and is expected to be completed in the summer of 2017.  In addition to this research infrastructure, a national Science and Technology (S&T) Program has been developed and is currently underway.  Beginning in 2012, $46.2 million over six years has been committed to the CHARS S&T Program, with an additional $26.5 million per year as of 2018/19 for the on-going Program and operation of the research station.  The first cycle of the S&T program (2014/15 to 2018/19) focuses on the following five overarching priority areas of focus:
    • Alternative and renewable energy;
    • Baseline information preparedness for development;
    • Underwater situational awareness;
    • Infrastructure for development; and,
    • Predicting the impacts of changing ice, permafrost and snow on shipping, infrastructure and communities.

Although the new CHARS facility will not be operational until 2017-18, the first field season for the CHARS S&T Program has already taken place, and the second field season will begin shortly.  This facility will enhance the already existing network of northern infrastructure and research projects that have contributed to leading-edge science in the Canadian Arctic for decades.  More information about the CHARS facility and the S&T Program can be found at: www.science.gc.ca/chars.


Update on the merger of the Canadian Polar Commission with the CHARS project

In Fall 2014, the Government of Canada announced its decision regarding the governance of the CHARS project.  The Canadian High Arctic Research Station Act, which establishes a merger of the mandate and functions of the CPC with those of the CHARS project, received Royal Assent on December 16, 2014.  The new organization is expected to come into force on June 1st, 2015, and a decision on the name of the new organization will be announced soon. 

As set out in the Canadian High Arctic Research Station Act, the purpose of the new organization is to:
    a) Advance knowledge of the Canadian Arctic in order to improve economic opportunities, environmental stewardship and the quality of life of its residents and all other Canadians;
    b) Promote the development and dissemination of knowledge of the other circumpolar regions, including the Antarctic;
    c) Strengthen Canada’s leadership on Arctic issues; and
    d) Establish a hub for scientific research in the Canadian Arctic.

The new organization will be a federal S&T-focused agency with a geographical scope covering all of the Canadian Arctic.  The new organization will: 
    1) Continue to implement a pan-northern S&T program; 
    2) Operate a major world class research facility in Cambridge Bay, Nunavut that will be part of the large network of Canadian northern research infrastructure; and, 
    3) Provide coordination, analytical, and communications functions associated with the creation, management, synthesis and dissemination of Canadian polar knowledge within Canada and internationally.  


Implications of the new organization for Canada and Antarctic research

The enabling legislation confirms the new organization’s role and responsibility in promoting the development and dissemination of polar knowledge associated with the Antarctic.  The CPC’s traditional functions as Canada’s adhering body to SCAR and the International Arctic Science Committee will continue under this new organization, and it will continue to manage Canada’s participation in the SCAR standing committees and groups.  The work to establish a National Antarctic Research Program for Canada will also continue.  This will include the identification of priority areas of research, based on the results of SCAR’s 1st Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan, consultations with Canadian polar research experts, and the priorities of the CHARS S&T Program.  

No plans are in place to establish an Antarctic research base for Canadian research.  Instead, Canada’s National Antarctic Research Program will explore opportunities to operate through partnerships with national programs of other countries to facilitate access to existing Antarctic research infrastructure and logistics, and in turn provide access to Canadian research infrastructure and logistics in the Arctic.

Canada has an extensive network of infrastructure and research projects distributed across the Canadian North, which has assisted in supporting national and international science.  The world-class CHARS facility and associated S&T Program, along with the mandate to strengthen Canada’s leadership in Arctic research and attract international scientists, there is an opportunity to develop and deliver Canada’s National Antarctic Research Program in conjunction with CHARS.  New collaborations and partnerships are currently being developed with the international polar research community on common research priorities and activities, which will open the door to further Canadian research activities in the Antarctic.  In turn, once the new CHARS facility is operational in 2017-18, there will be further opportunities for international Antarctic-focused scientists and researchers to access the Canadian Arctic, to strengthen our understanding of the Polar Regions and global systems and linkages.

