





Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Thirty-eighth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting









Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Thirty-eighth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Report of the Thirty-third 
Meeting of the Commission
(Hobart, Australia, 20 to 31 October 2014)
1. 	Opening of the meeting
1.	The Thirty-third Annual Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR-XXXIII) was held in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, from 20 to 31 October 2014. It was chaired by Mr L. Dybiec (Poland).
2.	Twenty four Members, two additional Contracting Parties and nine Observers from non-government or industry organisations participated. 
2. 	Organisation of the meeting
Status of the Convention
3.	Australia, as Depository, reported that the status of the Convention had not changed during the last intersessional period. 
3. 	Implementation and compliance
4. 	The Commission approved the CCAMLR Compliance Report for 2014 noting that the Compliance Report includes an assessment of Members’ compliance status, recommendations on remedial action and amendments to conservation measures, obligations and any responsive action required.
5. 	It also considered:
    • work during 2015 to further review CCAMLR Conservation Measures concerning licensing and inspection obligations, transhipment and the Vessel Monitoring System
    • fishery notifications submitted by Members for exploratory and krill fisheries for 2014/15
    • A review of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing activities in the Convention Area, including that no new vessels were proposed for either the CP- or the NCP-IUU Vessel List, and issues associated with anomalous data submitted to CCAMLR. The Commission also agreed that it will work on developing a strategy for increased non-Contracting Party cooperation more broadly.
    • The Independent Review of CCAMLR’s Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) including further work to promote cooperation in the CDS with non-Contracting Parties
    • The acquisition of a new Vessel Monitoring System (VMS)
    • The adoption of an Arrangement for the release CCAMLR VMS data to support search and rescue (SAR) efforts in the CAMLR Convention Area (refer to previous discussions regarding SAR at ATCMXXXVI and ATCMXXXVII)
    • Consideration of the Cape Town Agreement of 2012, which updates and amends a number of provisions of the 1993 Torremolinos Protocol, and which offers potential to enhance safety standards for fishermen and fishing vessels, and
    • The use of satellite derived imagery to enhance efforts to detect IUU fishing in the Convention Area.
4. 	Administration and Finance
6. 	Among other matters, the Commission endorsed:
    • the Secretariat’s Strategic Plan (2015–2018) and its associated Staffing and Salary Strategy
    • a Budget for 2015
    • on-going work to secure sustainable funding for the organisation.
5. 	Report of the Scientific Committee
Krill resources
7.	In 2013/14 five Members fished for krill with a total reported catch (to 3 October 2014) is approximately 291 370 tonnes1 - the highest reported catch since 1991. Most of this catch was taken off the West Antarctic Peninsula (Subarea 48.1), which reached 94% of its allocated trigger level (155 000 tonnes) and was closed on 17 May 2014. 
8.	Notifications for krill fishing in 2014/15 were received from six Members and 21 vessels. There were no notifications for exploratory krill fisheries. 
9.	The Commission noted the discussion of the Scientific Committee with respect to ecosystem monitoring and estimates of penguin populations and the development of a feedback management strategy for the krill fishery. 
10.	The Commission agreed that based on current knowledge, a continuation of the distribution of the trigger level in the krill fishery (Conservation Measure CM 51-07) in its current form is consistent with the objectives of Article II and that the current interim distribution in Subareas 48.1 to 48.4 be carried forward while the science needed to move to stage 2 of feedback management is progressed.
11.	The Commission welcomed the use the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) Fund to support a proposal to use remote cameras for penguin population monitoring in Subarea 48.1.
Fish resources
12.	In 2013/14, 13 Members fished (including research fishing) for toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and/or D. mawsoni) in the Convention Area. The reported total catch of Dissostichus spp. to 20 September 2014 was 11 590 tonnes2.  In comparison, the total reported catch of toothfish in 2012/13 was 15 330 tonnes.  In addition, four Members targeted icefish during the season. 
13.	The Commission endorsed the advice of the Scientific Committee on catch limits for CCAMLR regulated fisheries during 2014/15.
14. 	The Commission endorsed the recommendations of the Scientific Committee regarding fish and invertebrate by-catch, including fish by-catch in the krill fishery and skate by-catch.
New and exploratory finfish fisheries 
15. 	Notifications for exploratory fisheries for Dissostichus spp. in 2014/15 were submitted by ten Members for a total of 27 vessels.  These, and associated research and survey plans were considered by the Commission on the basis of advice provided by the Scientific Committee. 
Incidental mortality of seabirds and marine mammals 
associated with fisheries
16.	The Commission revised Conservation Measures regarding protection afforded to seabirds during fishing operations. 
Bottom fishing and vulnerable marine ecosystems
17.	The Commission revised its Conservation Measures to avoid and mitigate significant adverse impacts on vulnerable marine ecosystems (VMEs) during bottom fishing and agreed to review current management arrangements to ensure they are sufficient for all fisheries to avoid causing significant adverse impacts on VMEs.
Marine protected areas 
18.	The Commission welcomed the update on the preparatory work for the spatial planning of marine protected areas (MPAs) in (i) Domain 1 (Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc), (ii) Domains 3 and 4 (Weddell Sea), (iii) Domain 7 (East Antarctic Representative System of MPAs) and Domain 8 for the Ross Sea Region. The Commission encouraged all Members to undertake research and monitoring, including associated with the CCAMLR MPAs, noting that the responsibility for research and monitoring is not restricted to the proponents of MPAs. 
19.	The Commission welcomed the proposed MPA checklist presented by Japan. 
20.	The Commission noted the deliberation of the Scientific Committee in respect of the South Orkney Islands Southern Shelf (SOISS) MPA, including the agreement of the Scientific Committee that the MPA Report for the SOISS MPA and the research and monitoring plan provided a good format for describing research and monitoring activities.
Climate change 
21.	The Commission noted the Scientific Committee’s discussions on climate change and endorsed advice from the Scientific Committee that development of a feedback management strategy for the krill fishery offers the opportunity to adapt to the impacts of climate change.
22.	The Commission noted the importance of the impact of climate change to the work of CCAMLR and noted the previous important advice on climate change prepared by SCAR. The Scientific Committee was encouraged to liaise with SCAR to receive regular updates and advice on climate change impacts in the Southern Ocean.
Capacity building 
23.  	The Commission endorsed the advice of the Scientific Committee in relation to capacity building including through the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship. A krill researcher from VNIRO, Russia, was selected to receive a CCAMLR scholarship in 2014/15. 
Conservation measures
24.	Conservation measures and resolutions adopted at CCAMLR-XXXIII has been published on the CCAMLR website (Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force 2014/15). 
Marine protected areas
25.	New Zealand and the USA introduced a revised proposal for the establishment of a Ross Sea Region MPA and Australia, France and the EU introduced a revised proposal to establish an East Antarctic Representative System of MPAs.  After considerable discussion the Commission encouraged further consideration of both proposals at future meetings of the Commission.  
Implementation of Convention objectives
CCAMLR Symposium
26.	The Commission endorsed a CCAMLR Symposium to mark the 35th anniversary of the adoption of the Convention to be held in Puerto Varas, Chile, 5 to 8 May 2015.
Performance Review
27. 	The Commission agreed to consider draft terms of reference for the second Performance Review inter sessionally. 
Cooperation with the Antarctic Treaty System and international organisations
Cooperation with Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties
28.	The Commission received reports relating to the outcomes of the 37th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  Opportunities to increase information exchange with the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), especially with respect to the work of CCAMLR on spatial planning and MPAs and sightings and reporting of IUU vessels in the CAMLR Convention Area, were discussed.
29.	The Commission welcomed the proposal for a Second Joint CEP–SC-CAMLR Workshop on the topics of ecosystem and environmental monitoring to detect the effects of climate change.
Next meeting
Election of officers
30.	The Commission elected Russia to Chair the Commission meetings in 2015 and 2016. 
Next meeting
31.	The Commission agreed that its Thirty-fourth Meeting will be held at the CCAMLR Headquarters building (181 Macquarie Street) in Hobart from 19 to 30 October 2015. The Thirty-fourth Meeting of the Scientific Committee will be held in Hobart from 19 to 23 October 2015. 



