





The Antarctic Treaty System, Climate Change and Strengthened Scientific Interface with Relevant Bodies of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)








The Antarctic Treaty System, Climate Change and Strengthened Scientific Interface with Relevant Bodies of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
Submitted by ASOC1

Summary: 
The Antarctic – in its scientific research of climate changes occurring in the region, including documentation of the first significant impacts of climate change, and increasing evidence that those changes will impact the entire globe, for example through sea-level rise and changes in ocean circulation patterns – figures broadly in our global understanding of anthropogenic climate change. As such, the Antarctic Treaty System has an important role to play in promoting the relevance of climate-related Antarctic research to the climate change community, including the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in accordance with the intent of Art. III of the Antarctic Treaty, particularly Art III (1)(c) and Art. III (2), as well as Art. II(3)(c) of CCAMLR. ASOC urges better realization of this role for the ATCM and its scientific bodies, most notably the CEP and SCAR. This could be similar to the regular input by the relevant Arctic Council working groups in updating climate-relevant research to the broader climate community. ASOC also urges the ATCM to take all possible actions to address climate change in the Antarctic region, including through focused dialogue with CCAMLR.

Fully Realizing the ATS Role
1. 	Timely and Appropriate Communication of Antarctica’s Importance to Climate and Relevant New Research

At the request of the XXXII ATCM, the ATCM Chair (the United States) wrote a letter to the President of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) transmitting the Review Report on Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE) prepared by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), along with two ministerial declarations from that XXXII ATCM. This letter was delivered in advance of the key 15th Conference of Parties (COP) in Copenhagen later that year.  Similarly, an update of the SCAR ACCE was transmitted in 2010 to the President of the COP, as well as the Executive Secretary of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Secretariat (IPCC); the Secretary General of the World Meteorological Office (WMO); and the Secretary General of the International Maritime Organization (IMO);

ASOC recommends that such communications from the ATCM to the UNFCCC and other relevant UN bodies become a regular occurrence, consistent with developments in Antarctic research and with a mind to key junctures in UNFCCC negotiations. We note that the Arctic Council has also conducted such communications, for example prior to the Montreal COP (COP-11, 2005) as well as COP-15 in Copenhagen (2009). In particular, climate change-related decisions made at the ATCM should be communicated.  

Given the importance of the upcoming Conference of Parties in Paris (COP-21), ASOC suggests that the XXXVIII ATCM consider such a communication including statements from relevant ATCM declarations, for example highlighting the pace of climate change impacts indicated by Antarctic research since the IPCC Fifth Assessment, such as that regarding the future stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS).

ASOC also strongly supports the Resolution offered by the United Kingdom and Norway in WP16.

2.	Strengthened Science/ Policy Interface.

SCAR has held side events and produced an Information Paper to report on their attendance at UNFCCC meetings (for example, ATCM XXXVII IP39), and has also hosted or participated in side events at various UNFCCC meetings, thus bringing awareness of relevant Antarctic science to climate negotiators and the general public. ASOC applauds such efforts to highlight important research to the ATCM, as well as efforts to keep the ATCM apprised of Antarctic-relevant scientific developments under the UNFCCC and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), and recommend that this reporting be strengthened. Possible improvements could include requesting annual reporting from the ATCM on Antarctic-related matters at international climate meetings, making UNFCCC and IPCC reports available at the ATCM, or inviting IPCC authors (such as Antarctic scientists of Working Group I – the Physical Science Basis, or those of the Polar Regions chapter in Working Group II – Vulnerability of Socio-economic and Natural Systems) to present at the ATCM.

3.	Focused Attention on Climate Change in the Antarctic.

The ATCM has worked for several years on a Multi-Year Strategic Workplan on climate change. To complement these efforts, ASOC recommends focused attention on ways to address and respond to climate change impacts in the Antarctic, including:

    a. Climate impacts and mitigation as part of the EIA process and the establishment of a representative network of protected areas;
    b. Strategic planning linking protected areas and climate change, including resilience planning and scientific reference areas;
    c. Continued strong support for climate science research in the Antarctic; and,
    d. Continued dialogue with CCAMLR that focuses on addressing climate change in the Antarctic region, including protected areas in the Southern Ocean, strategic planning, and climate science research.
    e. Ensuring that relevant climate research of global significance is incorporated into decisionmaking by ATCM parties.


