





Cooperation of Romania with Bulgaria in the Antarctic field









Cooperation of Romania with Bulgaria in the Antarctic field
Background
Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in Antarctica, and of the Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol, Romania makes efforts to participate in such collaborations with other states operating in the same research areas and fields. 
The Romanian Polar Research Program was initiated in 1987 by Dr. Teodor Gheorghe Negoita (1946-2011) and developed after 1990 especially by the two institutions established by him, i.e. Romanian Polar Research Institute (RPRI) and Romanian Antarctic Foundation (RAF) in cooperation with a series of Romanian state research institutes during 1994-2011. Romanian polar research activities were reorganized after 2011.
The representative scientific organism of Romania in the Antarctic Treaty System is, since September 12th 2012, the National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) established within the Romanian Academy. NCAR recognizes the opportunity of continuing Antarctic research connected with SCAR. A new Department of Antarctic and Arctic Research has been established on May 13th 2014 within the National Institute of Research & Development for Biological Sciences under the Romanian Ministry of Education and Scientific Research. 
Romania cooperated with Bulgaria in joint scientific projects and international programs in the polar research field, European and within the Antarctic Treaty System.

1. Cooperation within CEP 
Romania cooperated in 2005 with Bulgaria in the ICG responsible to update the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (1999).
ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII, 2005: WP 30, Agenda Item CEP 4(c): Report of the ICG Established to Update the „Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (1999)”, ICG led by Australia: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Romania, Africa South, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, UK, USA, CCAMLR, ASOC, IAATO.  


2. Scientific cooperation in research projects
Romania and Bulgaria collaborated during 2006-2008 within three Romanian Excellence Research projects  (Module III - Networking) coordinated by or involving the Romanian Institute of Polar Research led by Dr. 
Teodor Gheorghe Negoita. The Bulgarian Partners were Bulgarian Antarctic Institute (Prof. Dr. Christo Pimpirev) and Institute of Microbiology (Dr. Victoria Jordanova Gesheva), both under the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. Possible scientific research fields were discussed and established for future Antarctic research projects in collaboration. These projects involved Romanian research institutions and other 7 foreign partners (Austria, USA, Belgium, Sweden, Israel, Australia and China, some of which also being previous partners). The titles of the respective projects are:
    1. Structuring of an integrated international cooperation research on biodiversity in polar ecosystems, the response to environmental changes, and applications (Project Director T. Gh. Negoita)
    2. Promotion of international cooperation research for the study of psychrophilic microorganism potential in bioremediation (Project Director T. Gh. Negoita)
    3. Promotion within an European and international partnership of biomedical research under extreme life conditions (Project Director Dr. F. Toparceanu)

A fourth Romanian Excellence Research project (Module I, 2005-2008) involving Antarctic research at the Law-Racovita Base (operators: Australia and Romania) was “Autonomous Module for Astronomical Observations in Polar Areas – Polar Robotic Telescope” coordinated by the Astronomical Institute of the Romanian Academy (Project Director Dr. Petre Popescu,). 
Tests of this autonomous module (multiple stages at three months interval during 2004-2010) have been performed at Belogradchik Astronomical Observatory of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences in the North-East area of Bulgaria. 
     Popescu P., Negoiţă T.Gh., Bot A., Wei W., Yang H. 2006. Equipment for Astroclimate Studies in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, XXIX SCAR Symposium "The SCAR Scientific Programme on: Antarctica and the Global Climate System (AGCS)", July, Hobart, Tasmania, poster P0684.
P. Popescu, T.Gh. Negoita, P. Paraschiv, A. Nedelcu, O. Bădescu, M. Cotta. 2008. Robotic telescope for polar astronomical observations, SCAR/IASC/IPY OSC on Polar Research – Arctic and Antarctic Perspective in IPY, St. Petersburg, Russia, July 8-11, Session 4.2. Astronomy and Astrophysics, Abstract volume, p.405, published by Elektrostandard Print Joint-Stock Co., 2008, ISBN 978-5-98364-013-09, poster P04. 
Romania organized, within these four Excellence Research projects, three International Symposia of Polar Scientific Research, in 2006, 2007, and 2008, managed by the main partners in this project, i.e. Romanian Polar Research Institute, Virology Institute of Romanian Academy and the Astronomical Institute of Romanian Academy. The Bulgarian partners, by Dr. Victoria Jordanova Gesheva, participated in these three symposia with three communications on Antarctic microbiology studies performed by the Bulgarian Microbiology Institute, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, namely: Biodiversity of microorganisms in Antarctic soils,  Distribution of microorganisms in soils of Victoria Land,  Biodiversity of terrestrial Antarctic ecosystems Another bipolar Joint Research Project entitled INTERHEMISPHERE, coordinated by Romania - also involving Bulgaria and other 11 states, started in 2010.

3. EPB International Workshop on a Southeastern–Central European Action Plan for Polar Programs and Infrastructures, 1-4 July 2007, Bulgaria 
This workshop within EUROPOLAR Program WP 5, in which specialists from 7 countries participated, was organized by the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute (Prof. Christo Pimpirev, Director), Bulgarian Academy of Sciences and European Polar Board (EPB, Paul Egerton, Executive Director), in Bulgaria, at Sofia and Rila Mountains. Besides EUROPOLAR, the represented states were Bulgaria, Romania (Romanian Ministry of Education and Scientific Research, Romanian Polar Research Institute), Greece, Netherland, Finland, and Portugal. Six priority areas of cooperation were identified: Climate change; Ice core science; Life in extreme conditions; Biodiversity;  Astronomy and Astrophysics; Frontier sciences. 
Romania represented by Dr. T.Gh. Negoita, Director of RPRI, presented the document „Developing a Southeastern–Central European Action Plan for Polar Programs and Infrastructures”, elaborated in collaboration with Bulgaria, EPB and other countries which intended to participate in this regional agreement. The goals of this Action Plan were: 
a) Avoiding parallel efforts to improve the interdisciplinary studies that could be carried out between Arctic and Antarctic scientific communities in South East and Central Europe.
b)  Establishing the most adequate mechanisms for cooperation and information exchange, necessary between polar institutions in these countries, for a future cooperation in the polar scientific and logistic activities. 
Among this plan priorities were: A stronger collaboration between national polar programs; encouraging the innovative young researchers; research stages for Ph. D students in polar areas; mutual logistic support and access to polar infrastructures, also including cooperation based on mutual agreements with countries performing activities in the same polar research areas: East Antarctica, Larsemann Hills  - Australia, China, India, Russian Federation, and respectively West Antarctica, Livingstone Island, South Shetlands - Argentina, Germany, Spain, etc. 

4. Cooperation with APECS
The national APECS organizations of Romania and Bulgaria cooperated within the 2nd Criosphere Scientific Symposium, Bucharest University, Faculty of Geography, Bucharest, May 2014. Romanian polar early career scientists presented a great number of communications on cold environments (permafrost, caves and polar zones). The special guest of this conference was Dr. Iglika Trifonova, Head (in 2014) of APECS Bulgaria, International APECS Vice-president (2014), a specialist with a significant experience in Antarctic matter and expeditions within the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute, who also participated in the organization of APECS Bulgaria. She presented in Bucharest the various activities of APECS Bulgaria, educational and outreach included, by means of a conference entitled Bulgaria in Antarctica and Antarctica in Bulgaria, and a poster: Why polar bears do not eat penguins. A further cooperation between the two APECS structures was decided. 

Conclusion 
Based on this previous collaboration, Romania expresses its interest for a closer cooperation with Bulgaria in Antarctic scientific research and logistics within the Antarctic Treaty System and a possible experience exchange in the various Antarctic bases. Romania also intends to develop a close cooperation with Bulgaria within APECS, also in a perspective of South-East European research cooperation. 

Acknowledgements
Romania, by NCAR of Romanian Academy, thanks the three research institutes of Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, namely Bulgarian Antarctic Institute - Prof. Christo Pimpirev and the other specialists; Bulgarian Microbiology Institute - Dr. Victoria Jordanova Gesheva, and the Belogradchik Astronomical Observatory; and Dr. Iglika Trifonova of APECS Bulgaria for their cooperation and support.

