





The concept of "outstanding values" in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol

(Summary of the contributions received during the intersessional contact group)










The concept of "outstanding values" in the Antarctic marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol
(Summary of the contributions received during the intersessional contact group)

Information Paper submitted by Belgium
Summary
Belgium and France submitted to the seventieth session (2014) of the CEP Working Paper N°39:                      “The concept of "outstanding values" in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol”; the Committee decided the formation of an intersessional contact group to discuss the implementation of Annex V Art. 3 to facilitate the further examination of this issue by the CEP. This working paper summarises the exchange of view held during it and draw some conclusions to suggest an eventual prolongation of the intersessionnal contact group’s mandate.
Framework
Belgium and France submitted to the seventieth session (2014) of the CEP Working Paper N°39, in order to assess if there was a need for Parties to develop a more coherent approach to the implementation of Annex V, article 3, in order to account for the impact of land-based activities and associated logistic support on the marine environment. 
As a first step, it discussed the concept of "outstanding values" as they applied to the marine environment where activities regulated by the ATCM and CEP are taking place, and then suggested the formation of an intersessional contact group to discuss the implementation of Annex V Art. 3 to facilitate the further examination of this issue by the CEP.
The Committee agreed1 that the ICG would operate with the following terms of reference (ToR):
    ToR #1 Identifying key "outstanding values" within different contexts/scopes of the marine environment and analysing how they may be affected by activities under the competence of the CEP linking both terrestrial and marine environments;
    ToR #2 Identifying criteria by which marine areas with "outstanding values" would require protection through the ASPA instrument and, if appropriate, identifying activities that may have impacts on marine environment and associated risks to be managed/mitigated through the range of tools available to the CEP, including the outstanding values;
    ToR #3 Understanding the work of CCAMLR on systematic conservation planning, in order to avoid duplication of efforts, complement it and maintain separate roles, while using the appropriate tools available to the CEP's work to implement Article 3 (2) of Annex 5 to the Protocol;
    ToR #4 Discussing options for the CEP within the existing framework and tools of the Treaty and the Protocol to include “outstanding values" of the marine environment, when establishing and/or reviewing ASPAs, in accordance with Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol; and
    ToR #5 Providing an initial report to CEP XVIII.
The intersessional contact group was convened by Belgium and received contributions, during its various stages, by the following Parties and Observers: Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, United States of America and ASOC. 
The evaluation and recommendations closing this stage of the ICG are documented by WP 20, submitted by Belgium.



    1. Priority and policy issues and working definition
        1.1. Due to the broad scope of the ToR, acting as Convenor we proposed firstly to prioritise issues for discussion and, as appropriate, any broader policy (or other issues) that may warrant further discussion by the CEP. To help initiate this round of discussion, a short discussion paper with initial ideas was circulated, at this stage; two issues were requiring further discussions as they were both a preliminary step for further progress. 
        1.2. The first issue was the eventual need for a shared or agreed working definition of Outstanding Value for marine Antarctic environment. We submitted a working definition based notably on the annex V of the Protocol2 and its 2000 guidelines3 and by reference to the concept of “Outstanding Universal Value” such as developed and used by the UNESCO World Heritage Convention (WHC). 
Most of the contributors thought that no further work on a definition was necessary to continue to apply the ASPA mechanism for marine areas; annex V and its 2000 guidelines are providing relevant and practical guidance for designation of marine ASPAs. One contributor thought that, as the overall purpose of the exercise is to facilitate the designation of marine ASPAs based on the recognition of outstanding values, we need to keep it both simple and flexible. Furthermore, as such, there is currently no technical or legal impediment to the designation of marine ASPAs or ASMAs, and several marine ASPAs and ASMAs have already been designated. The 2000 Guidelines provide relevant practical guidance for application of the ASPA mechanism, which is applicable to marine areas. One contributor stated that those guidelines are a non-binding “living” document that might be reviewed in the future.  In addition, some contributors thought that if a working definition of outstanding value is worked upon, it should be applicable also to terrestrial area and covering all types of ASPAs. One contributor considered that a definition of “value” but not of an “area with a certain value” should be first elaborated; there may be an outstanding value for which area specific protection is not necessarily required, and thus it is necessary to distinguish “value” from “area”.  Another contributor didn’t share that view, since any consideration of protecting a value under Annex V would imply, in principle, the spatial protection of particular areas, there would be no difference between the concept of "value" and "area with value". 
        1.3. Regarding the criteria that could be used to assess if an area deserve special protection or not, we looked upon the 4 criteria and one condition used by the WHC and then on those of annex V and its 2000 guidelines. Once again, contributors considered that WHC is not providing any good points of comparison, they expressed the view that annex V and its 2000 guidelines with its single criteria (quality) and 6 “elements” were sufficient. The quality criteria of a potential protected area can be thought as an overall degree of excellence in terms of the value it contains. The quality of the area is being assessed by examining its representativeness, its diversity, its distinctiveness, its ecological importance, its degree of interference and its scientific and monitoring use, as identified by the 2000 guidelines, which provides a checklist of questions for each of these.  Most of the contributors considered that CEP should use or better implement the already existing quality criteria under the Madrid Protocol, its Annex V and the 2000 Guidelines, adding new ones won’t necessarily help in achieving the main objective which is to designate ASPAs taking into account their outstanding marine values. A contributor thought CCAMLR’s Conservation Measure 91-04 include in §2 (i) – (vi) the achievement of different objectives. Those objectives could be used to complement or substantiate the value in Article 3 (I) Annex V. Another contributor mentioned also CCAMLR work on marine bio-regionalisation or smaller-scale classifications as providing relevant and practical guidance for designation of marine ASPAs (see also here-under point 4.) 
        1.4. Finally, some contributors envisaged as other potential priority issues to be discussed within the ICG the following: 
    • The need to clarify, as a preliminary step for the inter-sessional work, the purpose, condition and restricted activities of Marine Protected Area (MPA) in accordance with CCAMLR decisions and ASPA in accordance with Madrid Protocol. 
    • What types of marine values (based on the existing Annex V and 2000 Guidelines) may require protection from the potential impacts of activities that are under the competence of the CEP?
    • Already existing ASPAs and ASMAs have marine values that could be included in their scope and boundaries. 29% of the ASMAs and 26% of the ASPAs already designated have marine values (e.g. native fauna, near-shore environment…) some of which could have been included within the boundaries of the specially managed or protected area, but in practice were excluded. Rather, these sites have no marine component.
    2. The quality criteria and the identification of marine areas of outstanding value to be protected
2.1. Once, according to the criteria used, a marine area or a combination of terrestrial and marine area is considered as being of outstanding value, are there any further or other criteria to be                    applied by the CEP to decide if that area should be protected according to Annex V of the protocol? One contributor reminded us that the 2000 Guidelines provide guidance on considering possible new ASPAs, including not only the quality criteria, but also on the basis of environmental risk assessment. Following discussion of WP33 presented by Norway, the seventieth meeting of the CEP (2014) agreed that Norway would lead informal intersessional discussions on the need for and development of procedures concerning ASPA and ASMA designation4. Accordingly, this ICG on marine values perhaps needs not consider this matter in further detail for now. Anyway, most of the contributors thought there was no need for any further additional (stricter) criteria to be applied by the CEP to decide if that area should be protected according to Annex V of the Protocol. 
The criteria to use should be exactly the same as for any other area i.e. a terrestrial area, or a coastal area that does not include any marine component.
The quality criteria cover all aspects for identifying possible values for being protected. Nevertheless, for some contributors, it is important to already think how that criteria could be better implemented and to make progress on that issue. The types of marine value(s) which may be require protection from the potential impacts of activities could be: 
- areas with high biodiversity,  
- breeding or feeding area(s) of species (as fish, cetaceans, birds, penguins, seals),
- areas with rare, threatened or vulnerable species,
- rare, threatened or vulnerable habitats,
- undisturbed habitats or 
- vulnerable areas with unique, rare or highly bio-diverse habitats and features.
2.2. We focussed then on what types of marine value(s) may require protection from the potential impacts of activities that are under the competences of CEP.
In this regard, most of the contributors wished to proceed case by case and step by step, the greatest need for spatial protection being given by the combination, in a given area, of a value (in this case, an outstanding marine value) and a situation or activity that threatens that value. This threat may be an actual threat or a potential one that could affect the value in the future. According to this, we do not necessarily have to discuss about types of marine values generally and isolated, but to analyse particular cases where certain values are threatened or at risk in certain areas, and any and all values of the marine/coastal environment that meet the criteria may merit additional protection through the ASPA mechanism. Note that these values (as listed in Table 1 of the 2000 Guideline's: Checklist of the values listed in Article 3(1)) may merit protection regarding whether or not there are current activities such as science or tourism taking place there that may result on particular threats.                         The Table 1 of WP 39 : “Checklist of values listed in Art. 3(2) based on Resolution 1 (2000)”  could represent a good basis for further work. Further needs are to identify outstanding values and assign them to an area. This implies that data/information are sighted, summarized or grouped to create an information basis from which could spring possible areas which might need protection.
One contributor would welcome further discussion on the types of marine values that may require protection from the potential impacts of activities under the competences of the CEP, and suggested that Table 5 of the 2000 Guidelines “Checklist for assessing environmental risk to a possible protected area” could be particularly useful in this regard.
One contributor wished to discuss an aspect he considers valuable and not often reflected in the designation of ASPAs or ASMAs. It is the concept of biogeographic corridors, which in the case of Antarctic ecosystems, are eminently marine. Related to this, the protection of terrestrial areas with wildlife values is often successful protecting breeding sites, but not always feeding or foraging areas, which are essential for reproductive fitness. Given these issues, he estimates that perhaps more ASPAs with both terrestrial and marine components would be designated. Since the conservation of these values is represented by the additional protection of a given geographical area, he believes that at least the outstanding values (and possible associated values) should be geo-referenced over time and space (if they moved). He understands that these data are essential to assist in the design of both marine and terrestrial protected areas, and in the analysis that would allow us to select the most representative areas, according to the conservation objectives defined.
2.3. We examined the fact that some existing ASMA’s & ASPAs have already a marine value component but it was not included within their respective limits, should the CEP use, if pertinent, the agreed quality criteria to include it, for instance, when the management plans for these areas will be next reviewed ? Most of the contributors thought that, regarding ASMAs & ASPAs in coastal areas that do not include marine values within their boundaries, it would be relevant to re-examine those areas when they come up for review and see if these areas should be expanded in any way. The ASPA review process allows for the boundaries and management plans of individual sites to be updated and changed if required. Marine values that are located outside the boundaries of an existing ASPA could therefore be proposed for inclusion at the time of an ASPA review. This could be especially relevant where there is a clear link between marine and terrestrial values, in coastal and near-shore areas. The review of existing ASPAs requiring the inclusion of additional marine values in this way would be a decision for the respective proponent(s) of such areas, and should be done on a case-by-case basis. When undertaking the five-yearly review of management plans, proponents could be encouraged to consider whether or not it would be appropriate to revise the Area boundary to incorporate additional values, including values in the marine environment; not only might human impact have changed since designation, but also other factors, like climate change, might have also changed.
However for some contributors, in principle any extension of the boundaries of these ASPAs/ASMAs to incorporate new area should also be considered in accordance with the 2000 Guidelines, and noting that consultation with CCAMLR may be required under Decision 9 (2005)5 for proposed to designation new or additional marine areas as ASPAs/ASMAs. Overall, for one contributor, it would make sense for those preparing the management plan of a particular marine/coastal ASPA to understand the work of CCAMLR in that area, although whether this information is relevant or not to a proposed ASPA would depend on site-specific considerations and on what particular values an ASPA aims to protect.
One contributor noted that the consideration of the inclusion of the marine values in already existing ASMA’s & ASPAs (that have a marine value component but it was not included within their respective limits) could very well fit into the implementation of the agreement of the CEP in 2009 to « develop a strategy and work towards the establishment of  effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity within the Antarctic Treaty Area within the next three years through the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs under Annex V of the Protocol » . There could be a general request made by the CEP which will then be considered, on a case by case basis, for each ASPA when the management plan is to be revised. Finally, one contributor asked, if sufficient level of protection has not been provided to marine area by the CEP, would it be more important to identify main drivers which currently limit the designation of marine ASPAs ? This contributor suggested therefore that we could have some discussion in this regard.
    3. Activities having impacts on marine environment of outstanding value
In line with ToR#2, if the CEP decides that an Antarctic marine area with "outstanding values" would require protection through the ASPA instrument, we asked which activities under the competences of the CEP may have impacts on marine environment and associated risks to be managed/mitigated through the range of tools available.
A contributor reminded us that the activities that may have an impact on the marine values in an ASPA will vary from site to site, and accordingly should be considered on a case-by-case basis. In general terms, the CEP Tourism Study identified environmental aspects of tourism activities that may result in environmental impacts (see Table Aspects and potential impacts of Antarctic tourism). The ICG on the Review of EIA Guidelines is currently considering expanding this ‘aspects and impacts’ assessment to cover other activities undertaken in Antarctica and covered by provisions of the Environmental Protocol, including national program science and support activities6.
A contributor thought there are no other activities than shipping and logistic support which are to be authorised in accordance with the Protocol and might affect marine environment.  However, at this moment, we should note that ATCM is asking SCAR to investigate the impact of cruise and shipping on Antarctic marine environment and that the Antarctic Environments Portal7, which would summarise the information including on human activity impacts on environment, are under development. This contributor considered that currently we do not have enough science-based information to identify these activities.
On the other hand, some contributors considered that table 1 of WP 39 : “Checklist of values listed in Art. 3(2) based on Resolution 1 (2000)” gives a good overview of the activities and the EIES (or other tools) could help to list more activities which may have impacts on marine environment. Many activities regulated by the Protocol effectively take place in the coastal and marine environments and there is a great diversity of activities within the broad categories of "science" or "tourism", and each of these activities may have specific impacts in particular areas resulting from how the activities are carried out e.g. kayaking and diving tourism; use of sonar for scientific research.
One contributor considered as activities which may have impacts on marine environment and associated risks to be managed/mitigated included: 
- Research activities and its associated logistic support, e.g. bottom trawling, benthic sampling, dredging; seismic operations; 
- disposal of wastes, e.g. scientific instruments remain as waste in the ocean;
- shipping, e. g. impacts because of oil spills or anchoring;
- permanent buildings/stations in coastal areas, e. g. impacts because of the discharge of sewages, disposals of wastes, spills; 
- loading and unloading near permanent stations or in areas of touristic activities,
- touristic activities, e.g. kayaking, stand-up paddling, sailing.

 
    4. Potential appropriate tools from CCAMLR to be used
4.1. In line with ToR#3, understanding CCAMLR’s work on systematic conservation planning and in order to avoid duplication of efforts, complement it and maintain separate roles, which appropriate tools are available to the CEP to implement Article 3 (2) of Annex V to the Protocol - aside Annex V itself?
One contributor considered that the ICG should discuss outstanding value which requires protection through the ASPA instrument and that marine ASPA needs prior approval by CCAMLR before designation, CEP’s work must be built on existing framework of CCAMLR, including reference to its CM91-048, if the ASPA proposal meets the criteria of ATCM’s Decision 9 (2005).
In general terms, and consistent with discussions at the 2009 CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop, one contributor stated that the CEP would naturally lead in developing measures to manage the possible impacts to the marine environment of past and present national program activities, and tourism and non-governmental activities, which would suggest a focus on the protection of marine values in the near shore environment. This is not a hard distinction, but more a practical approach to minimising duplication of effort between the two bodies, with an expectation of an open and transparent consultative process for proposals (such as provided for in ATCM’s Decision 9 (2005)).
Most of the contributors considered that it is important that the CEP’s efforts to advance the objectives and provisions of Annex V complement, rather than duplicate, the on-going work by CCAMLR to consider the designation of MPAs. Furthermore, the roles and responsibilities of the ATCM and CCAMLR are distinct and quite clear and the relation between these bodies, in what respects ASPAs and ASMAs, has been settled by ATCM’s Decision 9 (2005). Further communication between these two bodies would allow for better understanding of approaches to marine protection, avoid duplication of effort, and help to maintain separate but complementary roles. In addition, one contributor stated that this ICG addresses land-based and associated support activities and their potential impacts on the marine environment that are not the remit of CCAMLR.   
4.2. Regarding CCAMLR’s work on bio-regionalisation, one contributor did not see the need for a direct reference to it. A second one saw some specific approaches (e.g. bio-regionalisation) as of interest to the CEP, but noted that these would need to be considered and applied in a manner that is specific to the development of ASPAs – for example a finer-scale bioregional classification might be helpful in determining the contribution of existing (and potential new) sites to the development of a representative system of marine ASPAs in a particular region, such as the Antarctic Peninsula. For another contributor, there should be an exchange between the two bodies on marine areas regarding outstanding values and CEP should benefit from CCAMLRs work e.g. regarding the bio-regionalisation. Where appropriate, the work done by the latter and by many scientists should be used and further developed. Moreover, it will be necessary to complement this knowledge with other data and on a finer scale with regard to the requirements to implement marine ASPAs or ASMAs under Annex V of the Protocol.

