





Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition








Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
    1. Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be in Sofia for the XXXVIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work over the past year, and outlines some key issues for this ATCM. 
ASOC’s Secretariat is in Washington DC, USA and its website is http://www.asoc.org. ASOC has 24 full member groups in 10 countries and supporting groups in those and several other countries. ASOC campaigns are carried out by teams of experts in Argentina, Australia, China, France, Germany, Japan, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Russia, Ukraine, UK and USA.
    2. Intersessional activities 
Since XXXVII ATCM ASOC and its member groups’ representatives participated actively in intersessional discussions in the ATCM and CEP fora, including ICGs on ‘outstanding values’ in the Antarctic marine environment, a review of the guidelines for environmental impact assessment in Antarctica, climate change, and the preparation of a Special Working Group session on competent authority issues. 

In addition, ASOC and member group representatives attended a range of meetings relevant to Antarctic environmental protection including the XXXIII CCAMLR Meeting, the CCAMLR Symposium, the Weddell Sea MPA workshop, and a number of International Maritime Organization meetings relating to the Polar Code. ASOC representatives also submitted papers to several scientific conferences as a way of reaching out to the Antarctic and marine science communities, including in particular the SCAR Open Science conference.
    3. Papers for XXXVIII ATCM
ASOC has submitted six Information Papers to the XXXVIII ATCM. These papers address key environmental issues, and contain recommendations for the ATCM and CEP that will help achieve more effective environmental protection and conservation of Antarctica. 
Antarctic Tourism and Protected Areas (IP 109) The paper discusses the interface between protected areas, in a broad sense, and the regulation and management of tourism. It also discusses how area protection may be used with respect to potential vectors of tourism expansion, particularly the use of airstrips and dedicated land based tourism facilities. Overall, tourism dynamics and current tourism developments suggest that tourism regulation should be examined from a regional focus. This would require "zooming out" spatial management instruments, rather than solely "zooming in" in to specific sites managed by guidelines. Recognising the dynamic of Antarctic tourism, ASOC recommends that Parties consider strategically using ASPAs and ASMAs to regulate current and potential future tourism.  Specific recommendations are detailed in the document.
Climate Change 2015: A Report Card (IP 110) ASOC annually composes a climate change report card to present a summary of up-to-date scientific findings about current and future climate change in the Antarctic. In it, we reviewed environmental changes including temperature, ice sheets and glaciers, sea ice, ocean acidification, and species impacts. This year, we introduce a new category of “blue carbon” reflecting the uptake of carbon by krill. Climate change in Antarctica is happening now—it is not a future event. This makes scientific research in Antarctic worthy of the highest support possible. However, climate change in Antarctica is not simply a matter of scientific understanding. If we want to protect the Antarctic and its ecosystems, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties should seek solutions enabling, to the greatest possible extent, the adaptation of the Antarctic environment to climate changes on the continent, while also working to limit the growth in climate change through international agreements. 
Cumulative Impact Assessment (IP 111) This paper briefly reviews some of the discussions on cumulative impact assessment based on relevant documents submitted to the ATCM/CEP, and takes an environmentally-focused approach to cumulative impact assessment to suggest further action by ATCPs and CEP. ASOC recommends that Parties: review earlier recommendations on cumulative impact assessment documents listed here; complete the review of EIA guidelines so that it adequately considers cumulative impacts, take into account early considerations as required; carry out case studies of cumulative impacts at particular sites; and augment and improve the consideration of cumulative impacts in the implementation of Annex I.
Expanding Antarctica’s Protected Areas System (IP 112) Article 3, Annex V of the Environment Protocol states that Parties shall create protected areas within a systematic framework. To date over 70 Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) have been designated by the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), but a recent analysis in a peer-reviewed journal finds that these areas are not fulfilling the terms of the Protocol. This paper discusses that analysis and recommends that ATCPs can remedy this situation by increasing the size and number of ASPAs, with a focus on achieving representation of all known Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs) and designating inviolate areas, wilderness areas, and areas of interest to science, as well as protecting outstanding values of the marine environment. This will increase and enhance the protection of Antarctica in line with the Protocol, the separate work of CCAMLR on Marine Protected Areas, and with other international recommendations. 

Next Steps for Vessel Management in the Southern Ocean (IP 113) This paper summarises several requirements of the new Polar Code, highlighting some areas which ASOC believes would benefit by further consideration during Step 2 of work on the Polar Code. Step 2 of the work focuses on vessels such as fishing vessels, private yachts, and cargo vessels under 500GT, and is due to commence in 2016. In light of the number of incidents involving so-called “non-SOLAS” vessels (particularly fishing vessels and yachts) in Antarctic waters in recent years, ASOC urges the Antarctic Treaty Parties to formally assist Step 2 of the development of a mandatory Polar Code by contributing to an information gathering exercise through the provision of copies of relevant ATCM papers and reports to the IMO. ASOC welcomes the adoption of the first mandatory Polar Code to improve the management of vessels operating in the polar waters, and urges concerted participation by ATPs in Step 2 of work to complete consideration of the requirements of non-SOLAS vessels.

The Antarctic Treaty System, Climate Change and Strengthened Scientific Interface with Relevant Bodies of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (IP 114) 
The Antarctic is critical to our global understanding of anthropogenic climate change. As such, the Antarctic Treaty System has an important role to play in promoting the relevance of climate-related Antarctic research to the climate change community, including the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in accordance with the intent of the Antarctic Treaty and the CAMLR Convention. ASOC urges better realization and action based on this role by the ATCM and related bodies, most notably the CEP and SCAR. This could be similar to the regular input by the relevant Arctic Council working groups in updating climate-relevant research to the broader climate community. ASOC also urges the ATCM to take all possible actions to address climate change in the Antarctic region, including through focused dialogue with CCAMLR.
    4. Other Important Issues for XXXVIII ATCM
Tourism – ASOC is pleased to see WP 24 on a strategic approach to tourism management. Parties have discussed this issue for years, and now is the time for the ATCM to take action and ensure that it is proactive and not reactive in the years to come. 
Anniversary of the Environmental Protocol – ASOC hopes that the anniversary of the Protocol is an occasion for the ATCM not only to recall past successes but to also work on future visioning, including identifying current gaps in implementation and planning action steps to remedy them. 

Liability – Bringing Annex VI into force should be a high priority for the ATCM. ASOC urges Parties to continue their efforts, whether by assisting those who have not approved Measure 1 (2005) or by working to obtain the necessary domestic legislation.  

UAVs - While not in the same category as other issues discussed here, the growing use of UAVs in Antarctica is an example of how technological change impacts on Antarctic operations and potentially the Antarctic environment, and requires early action by the ATCM.  
    5. Concluding Remarks
Over the past year, ASOC has engaged with many and varied partners, including IAATO, SCAR, CCAMLR, the Coalition of Legal Toothfish Operators (COLTO), and the Antarctic Wildlife Research Fund (AWR), to work broadly to identify strengths and weaknesses existing in the Antarctic Treaty System procedures and practices, while suggesting solutions to these gaps. We value our engagement with these groups, as well as with Antarctic Treaty Parties.

ASOC notes that many promising discussions and initiatives on important aspects of environmental protection are either underway or proposed, as do our partners. In particular, ASOC welcomes the contributions of various Parties to this ATCM proposing to make progress on the various issues listed above, including but not limited to climate change, liability, safety and management of fishing vessels and yachts, strategic tourism management, and UAVs. It is important that the results of such discussions translate into tangible action. Prudent stewardship of Antarctica requires Parties to be leaders, to anticipate emerging issues, and to take decisive action. 


