





First Colombian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica 2014/2015





First Colombian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica 2014/2015 
Information Paper Submitted by Colombia
Background
Aware of Antarctica's relevance, Colombia has been an acceding Party to the Antarctic Treaty since 1989 and submitted Information Paper 104 to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXXVI, informing about the country's intention to perform its first scientific expedition to the white continent during the southern summer of 2014/2015.
In 1990, the Colombian Government passed an executive decree to establish a National Committee for Antarctic Affairs as an advising entity to the national government, reporting to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and delegating the planning and coordination of Colombian Antarctic programmes and projects to the Colombian Commission for the Ocean (CCO).
In December 2013, a Colombian delegation represented by the Maritime Directorate-General (DIMAR) at the 13th Meeting of the Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica presented its intention to increase Antarctic maritime safety by contributing with other nations in acquiring bathymetric data and developing nautical charts, and received the meeting attendees' support.
Several national organisations have been working for the last few years in the logistic, technical and scientific planning of the Antarctic expedition, as well as in the development of a Colombian Antarctic Programme and an Antarctic Scientific Agenda led by the CCO.
Colombian Navy's ship ARC 20 DE JULIO was adapted to serve as a research platform by building and installing an on-board oceanographic laboratory, installing a bathymetric echo sounder and building and installing a platform for scientific equipment setting operations.
The planning stage for the Colombian scientific expedition was supported by other countries' Antarctic programmes, such as Ecuador, Peru, Argentina, Brazil and particularly Chile, whose Navy provided operational support by facilitating Navy officials, providing training in Antarctic navigation, meteorology and diving in polar waters, and supplying nautical charts. Furthermore, the Governments of Colombia and Chile signed a Memorandum of Understanding for the Cooperation in Antarctic Affairs in 2011, and since Colombia's First Expedition, a Bi-National Dialogue has been suggested. The United Kingdom also offered its support by providing bathymetric data on the Gerlache Strait, along with nautical charts.
In compliance with the Antarctic Treaty System's requirements to perform scientific activities in Antarctica, an initial Environmental Impact Assessment was carried out and concluded the following: “The scientific activities to be performed as part of this expedition are determined as having less than a minor or transitory impact. Pursuant to Annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Article 1, 'the activities may proceed forthwith'”.
    1. Expedition Global Purpose
To carry out a research trip during the summer of 2014/2015 in the area surrounding the Gerlache Strait, studying physical, chemical, biological and geological oceanographic components, along with its marine biology, human physiological functions and nautical engineering aspects, for the collection of data and information required for research projects included in Colombia's Antarctic Scientific Agenda 2014/35.
Specific Purposes
    • To obtain physicochemical profiles in 20 oceanographic stations.
    • To follow up icebergs (course and speed) and take its dimensions.
    • To collect water samples at depths of 0, 5, 50, 100 and 200 m to determine environmental status in the Gerlache Strait.
    • To collect sediment samples for its subsequent analysis.
    • To install two tide gauges and a current meter at northern and southern ends of the Gerlache Strait.
    • To conduct a bathymetric survey of 1,000 nautical miles.
    • To carry out oceanographic measurements in 5 bays in the Gerlache Strait as an international cooperation action supporting a research project led by Andrés Bello University of Chile.
    • To record sightings of whales and collect skin samples.
    • To collect plankton samples in 26 oceanographic stations.
    • To monitor vibrations by the propulsion system of Offshore Patrol Vessel (OPV) units, study case - Ship ARC 20 DE JULIO.
    • To measure meteorological parameters.
    • To monitor heart rate, heart rate variability, blood pressure, respiratory rate, oxygen uptake, and oximetry in various human subjects under study.
    2. Research Projects
Research projects selected for the expedition are embraced by the lines of research included in Colombia's Antarctic Scientific Agenda. These projects involved 15 national bodies and 6 international ones:
Table 1. Research projects involved in the First Colombian Expedition to Antarctica.
Body
Project Name
DIMAR
Marine scientific research for maritime safety in Antarctica / ICEMAN 2014 - 2018
Del Norte University / Institute for Hydrology, Meteorology and Environmental Studies / University of Puerto Rico
Study on the link between superficial temperatures in the tropical Pacific Ocean and changes in temperatures in the Antarctic Peninsula
Institute for Marine 
and Coastal Research / Mexican Interdisciplinary Centre for Marine Sciences / Mexican Autonomous University of Baja California
Link between El Niño, Southern Oscillation and climate change in Antarctica
Naval Academy
Hydrodynamics and water masses in the South American Pacific and its link with Antarctic waters during the southern summer 
Colombian Commission for the Ocean / Universities of Del Valle and Antioquia / Barcelona's Institute of Marine Sciences

Describing zooplankton, particularly ichthyoplankton, to provide insight into the biodiversity of South American waters and the Gerlache Strait/Antarctic Peninsula

Malpelo, Omacha and Yubarta Foundations / Conservation International / De Los Andes University / Colombian Commission for the Ocean

Antarctic marine mammals, particularly cetaceans migrating to Colombian waters

Aerospace Medicine Centre for the Air Force
Determining cardiopulmonary physiological changes, and changes in body composition and their correlation to environmental factors 
Science and Technology Corporation for the Development of Naval, Maritime and Riverine Industries
Applying composite materials in axes and propellers, study case OPV 80- ARC 20 DE JULIO
    3. International Cooperation
Colombia's expedition provided scientific support to two Chilean projects. As part of its research project “ICEMAN”, DIMAR conducted a bathymetric survey covering 1,000 nautical miles. This information will be used jointly by Chile's Hydrographic Service (SHOA) to update nautical chart INT 9103 in the International Chart Scheme, Markmann Bay to Andvord Bay, thus making a significant contribution to maritime safety in Antarctica and helping all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty enlarge their scientific surveying areas. 
During the expedition, a researcher from Andrés Bello University of Chile working in research project "Variability in facies and sedimentation in small bays and fjords around Danco Islands, Antarctic Peninsula," collected information and data in five bays in the Gerlache Strait.
Table 2. Description of activities performed during current scientific trip
Date
Activity
Description
16/12/2014
Departure of vessel OPV 80 - ARC 20 DE JULIO (Colombia)
21/12/2014
Arrival at Guayaquil (Ecuador)
Academic and scientific exchange with Ecuador's Navy Oceanographic Institute, National Antarctic Institute and Navy.
30/12/2014
Arrival in Valparaiso (Chile)
Technical, academic and scientific exchange with Chile's SHOA and Navy.
08/01/2015
Arrival in Punta Arenas (Chile)
Academic and scientific exchange with Chilean Antarctic Institute. A Chilean researcher joins crew.
11/01/2015
Anchoring at Puerto Williams (Chile)
The President of Chile greets the Colombian crew.
16/01/2015
Gerlache Strait
Start sampling and data collection at 20 oceanographic stations, along with other scientific activities.
23/01/2015

Start bathymetric survey for 9103 chart – Markmann Bay – Andvord Bay
17/02/2015
Fildes Bay
The Colombian Chancellor, Minister of Defence and Navy Commander visit the Antarctica, along with the Ambassador of Colombia to Chile and the Ambassador of Chile to Colombia, providing their full support to the Colombian Antarctic Programme.
10/03/2015
Arrival at Callao (Peru)
Academic and scientific exchange with the Peruvian Institute for the Sea, Antarctic Programme and Hydrographic Service.
24/03/2014
Arrival at Cartagena de Indias (Colombia) ending the expedition
    4. Findings
Colombia has conducted its first scientific expedition to Antarctica with a view to position itself as a country committed to the protection and conservation of Antarctica, as well as to the exchange of scientific information and knowledge transfer.
As an international cooperation effort, the Colombian expedition has supported research projects involved in the Chilean Antarctic Programme.
Obtained information will be shared with relevant organisations within the research projects currently under way, and preliminary findings will be shared with the national and international scientific community at relevant scientific fora. 
Based on the positive operating experience obtained by Colombia's Navy and Air Force and on the good scientific teamwork carried out in Antarctica, Colombia will engage in ongoing and sustained efforts to conduct scientific expeditions by either using scientific platforms on board vessels, deploying researchers by aircraft or entering into cooperation agreements with other countries.

