





The unauthorised voyage of the SV Infinity (2014): Next Steps









The unauthorised voyage of the 
SV Infinity (2014): Next Steps

Information Paper submitted by New Zealand and Germany


Background

At ATCM XXXVII (2014) New Zealand presented IP48, describing the unauthorised voyage of the SV Infinity in the Ross Sea in early 2014.  

This paper provides an update on the steps taken by New Zealand and Germany in response to the voyage.  It has been prepared in light of Article 13 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection.

The Infinity Expedition

The 36-metre German-flagged SV Infinity departed Auckland, New Zealand on 30 January 2014, skippered by a German national and with 16 people from Canada (3), France (4), United States (2), Italy (1), United Kingdom (2), Germany (2), Australia (1) and Sweden (1) on board.

Two aspects of this voyage are of concern.  The first is that it proceeded without any authorisation from any Antarctic Treaty Party.  No environmental impact assessment was submitted prior to departure.

The second aspect of concern is that on 6 March 2014 the German skipper and several other crew members made an unpermitted visit to ASPA 159, at Cape Adare. 

Steps taken by New Zealand and Germany

Over recent months New Zealand and Germany have been considering what legal or other action may be taken in response to the lack of authorisation for the voyage and the unpermitted entry into ASPA 159.

New Zealand

As noted above, the voyage of the Infinity proceeded from New Zealand.  On considering the matter in consultation with the relevant law enforcement agencies, New Zealand officials determined that both the failure to undertake the necessary environmental impact assessment and the unpermitted entry into ASPA 159 were prima facie in breach of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994, which implements the Protocol on Environmental Protection in New Zealand law.

However, officials concluded that it was not currently feasible to pursue a prosecution, due to the fact that the individuals in question are not in New Zealand.  Extradition was not considered to be a viable or appropriate option in this case.

In early 2015 New Zealand obtained evidence that Borchgrevink’s Hut (part of HSM 22) had been broken into, with damage to the door and disturbance of the historical items inside, including the placement among those items of an empty bottle of sparkling wine purchased in New Zealand.  In addition, a page had been torn from the visitors’ book in the Hut.  

While there is circumstantial reason to suspect that the damage and disturbance may have been caused by the crew members of the Infinity, given the lack of other known visits to Cape Adare at the relevant time, at this point there is insufficient evidence to pursue this aspect any further.  New Zealand will however keep the matter under review, and will pursue all available action in the event of any further unauthorised voyages involving the Infinity or its crew.

Germany

German national law does not provide applicable penalty regulations, if the voyage was not organised in Germany and did not proceed from German territory. Therefore, the German competent authority (Umweltbundesamt – UBA) could not pursue a proceeding concerning the unauthorised voyage of the Infinity to Antarctica itself.

UBA has initiated legal proceedings against the German skipper in respect of his unpermitted entry into ASPA 159. Under the German Act implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection (Umweltschutzprotokoll-Ausführungsgesetz) it is an administrative offence to enter an ASPA without a permit.  The proceedings were still ongoing when this paper was drafted.

As with New Zealand, German could not take further action in respect of the damage to Borchgrevink’s Hut and disturbance of historical items, due to the lack of evidence linking it to the crew of the Infinity. 

Further Steps

New Zealand and Germany recommend that Parties be alert to unpermitted voyages such as the one described in this paper, share information and cooperate with one another to support legal proceedings where possible under their domestic law.

