





East Antarctic / Ross Sea Workshop on Collaborative Science








East Antarctic / Ross Sea Workshop on Collaborative Science
Information Paper submitted by Australia


Australia and China propose to host the first of two East Antarctic/Ross Sea Workshops on Collaborative Science in Hobart, Australia in 2016. The second workshop will be held in China in 2017.

The purpose of the workshop is to provide an opportunity for nations with an active research programme in East Antarctica and the Ross Sea region to contribute to a focused, regional effort to plan major, multi-national collaborative research science projects for 2017/18 onwards.

The workshop format proposed includes an opening half-day symposium during which invited speakers will summarise the major scientific challenges in a range of research themes including those identified within the recent SCAR Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan. This will be followed by 2 days of workshops during which participants will work together in thematic groups to explore collaborative opportunities and design project options. The focus will be on projects that benefit most directly from coordinated and collaborative international research efforts. Each group will report back on their progress to the whole workshop on the final half-day. Projects that merit multi-national collaboration in this region, particularly those where resources and collaborations could achieve science outputs that are more difficult to achieve within a single national programme, would be subsequently advanced to the second workshop in 2017 for future planning and discussion.

All nations conducting science in East Antarctica and the Ross Sea are invited to participate. Representatives from participating nations will be invited to be on a high level planning and science advisory committee, whereby delegates will help plan and run the workshops.

The 2015 ATCM meeting will be a key opportunity to discuss these proposed meetings and express an interest in participation. Further details will be provided through the Australian Antarctic Division website at: www.antarctica.gov.au.

