





Russia-U.S. Removal of Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators from the Antarctic

English translation provided by the authors









Russia-U.S. Removal of Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators from the Antarctic
Background
The Soviet Antarctic Expedition (SAE) introduced the wide application of automatic meteorological and geophysical stations during the 1970s and 1980s. Radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) were used as power sources for operation of these stations. RTGs generate electric energy utilizing the thermal energy produced via the natural decay of radioactive isotopes, typically strontium-90. RTGs are much more compact and simpler in design than nuclear reactors, and their output is quite small (tens to several hundreds of watts) at low efficiency. They do not have moving parts, and do not require maintenance during their entire lifetime, which can last for decades. The RTGs that were used by SAE had an electrical power of 8.5 W, and were powered by more than 1,200 Tbq of strontium-90 at the date of manufacture. 
RTGs have traditionally been used by Russia, the United States and other countries in navigation lighthouses, meteorological stations, and other applications where it is difficult to use other sources of reliable electrical power supply due to technical or economic reasons. In particular, RTGs were used in the USSR as power sources for navigation equipment deployed in the Arctic Circle along the Northern Sea Route and also in the Far East. The deployment of non-serviced RTGs at these locations is no longer practiced by the Russian Federation due to risks of radiation and radioactive material leakage.
The United States employed RTGs not only as land power sources but also for marine buoys and underwater facilities, as well as space applications.
Radioactive materials used in RTGs need to have the following characteristics:
    • Sufficiently concentrated activity to obtain significant energy release within the restricted space of the installation. The requirement for thermal and radiation resistance of materials limits the minimal volume and the nature of the decay of the isotopes determine the energy-mass ratio of the RTG.  Isotope decay needs to be sufficient to provide thermal energy adequate for power production.
    • Maintain capacity for extended periods. This usually means the period of isotope half-life should be sufficiently large for the prescribed rate of drop of energy release. Typical half-lives of isotopes used in RTGs are several decades, although isotopes with a shortershort half-life could be used for special applications.
Strontium-90 (90Sr) was used as the source material in the Soviet-made RTGs. This source of ionizing radiation is relatively inexpensive, readily obtained using existing nuclear technologies and poses minimum environmental impact. In RTGs used by the SAE, a radiation level of 50 µSv/h is observed at a distance of 1.5 m. At a larger distance, the radiation level is equal to the natural background.
The USSR produced 1007 RTGs for surface operations. The isotopes were hermetically sealed in solid welded capsules, known as Radioactive Heat Sources (RHS). Several variants of RTGs having different amounts of RHSs were produced. The RHS(s) are contained within a shielded Radioactive Heat Block (RHB). Depleted uranium is most often used to provide the shielding. Other components of the RTG include a cooling radiator, hermetically sealed hull, and power transmission cables.
The aforementioned Soviet automatic stations were deployed in the coastal and inland regions of Antarctica. In the 1990s, most of these stations were removed from Antarctica to the Russian Federation, and the RTGs were disassembled and disposed of at facilities operated by the State Atomic Energy Corporation (Rosatom). Four RTGs still remained at Russia’s Antarctic stations: one at the Novolazarevskaya station; two others at the Molodezhnaya field base; and one at Dome B in the inland area of East Antarctica. In addition, there were four sources of ionizing radiation at Vostok station to support the operation of scientific geophysical and glaciological instruments. In 2004, these sources of ionizing radiation were transported by a sledge-tractor traverse from Vostok station to the coastal Mirny station.
As is known, Article V of the Antarctic Treaty 1959 determined that:
1. Any nuclear explosions in Antarctica and the disposal there of radioactive waste material shall be prohibited.
2. In the event of the conclusion of international agreements concerning the use of nuclear energy, including nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste material, to which all of the Contracting Parties whose representatives are entitled to participate in the meetings, provided for under Article IX are parties, the rules established under such agreements shall apply in Antarctica.
Recommendation I-13 “Exchange of information on nuclear equipment and techniques”, adopted at the First Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Canberra (Australia) in 1961 indicated that “taking into consideration the provisions established in Article V of the Antarctic Treaty, the Representatives recommend to their Governments that they exchange by all means deemed advisable information on the application of nuclear equipment and techniques in the Treaty area”. After its approval by all Consultative Parties, it entered into force on 30 April 1962.
Article II of the Antarctic Treaty proclaimed one of the main principles of international cooperation in the region – freedom of scientific investigation. These provisions gave the right to the national Antarctic programs of the signatories to the Antarctic Treaty to use different technologies for scientific research, including nuclear technologies, with an attendant obligation to inform all Consultative Parties. Thus, the United States during the period 1960 to 1972 constructed and operated an atomic power plant at its main Antarctic station McMurdo, which was later completely disassembled and removed to the United States and the place it had been located was subjected to the required reclamation. In the early 1960s, a similar project was ordered by the SAE for installation at Molodezhnaya station; this project, however, was never implemented. The RTGs exploited in the USSR were not and could not be characterized as nuclear weapons or radiological waste, but were instead deemed engineering equipment that did not fall under the category of “radioactive materials.” Thus, application of RTGs by the SAE in the Antarctic was in full compliance with the rules existing at that time in the Antarctic Treaty System.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the United States, via its Department of Energy, expressed a serious concern over the possibility of unauthorized access to facilities and locations storing and using radioactive materials around the world, including within the territory of the Russian Federation. On 21 May 2003, representatives of Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Sweden, Great Britain, the United States and the European Council signed in Stockholm, a Framework Agreement on a Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Program in the Russian Federation (MNEPR). It determined the framework of assistance to Russia with the aim of ensuring safety in handling spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste in Russian territories. MNEPR allowed the interested Parties to address projects or any other form of cooperation in other areas of nuclear activity including nuclear security, provided the Parties come to agreement. In this regard, the Governments of the Russian Federation and the United States of America signed an Agreement on U.S.-Russian Cooperative Efforts to Decommission Russian Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators from the Arctic and Far Eastern regions of Russia.
The Russian Federation was represented in this Agreement by the State Corporation “Rosatom” and the United States Government by the U.S. Department of Energy. The term of the Framework Agreement was limited to 5 years with a possibility of automatic prolongation for the next five years.
On 14 June 2013, a Protocol to the MNEPR was signed between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Russian Federation. The Protocol included activity for removal of RTGs from the Russian Antarctic stations and their subsequent disposal at specialized plants of Rosatom. The U.S. contributed significant funds toward this joint project, and on May 23, 2014 the Material Support Agreement No. B606989 was signed on between the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AARI) of Roshydromet and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), in order to implement the Antarctic provisions of the Protocol. The choice of AARI as executor of this work from the Russian side was determined by the Order of the RF Government of 8 October 2012 No. 1872-r, in which the AARI was designated as a state operator of the Russian Federation in the Antarctic. AARI was responsible for obtaining numerous Russian licenses and permits for handling radioactive equipment. AARI also had to certify its research-expedition vessel, “Akademik Fedorov,” for transportation of radioactive equipment, as well as equip the ship with the necessary technical means for safety and radiation monitoring with assistance of the United States and LLNL. Moreover, RAE (Russian Antarctic Expedition) personnel and expedition crews of the ship and helicopters were trained in the handling radioactive equipment and materials. 
In 2014-2015, all required work was performed in strict compliance with the schedule prepared by LLNL. Supervision of the required work was performed by representatives of the LLNL and the U.S. Department of Energy. For specific types of work (e.g. technical assessments, certification preparation, and placing the RTGs into transportation containers), the AARI subcontracted the Emergency-Technical Center of Rosatom in St. Petersburg and the Research Institute of Technical Physics and Automation (NIITFA) (Moscow). Representatives of these two organizations were included in the 60th RAE team for performing practical work with RTGs in the season 2014-2015.
Operational Implementation
On 9 November 2014, the “Akademik Fedorov” departed from St. Petersburg for the Antarctic, carrying special containers onboard for the safe transportation of isotopic equipment. On 20 December 2014, when the ship called to the area of field base Molodezhnaya, two RTGs were assessed, prepared, and placed into the aforementioned containers. On 22 December, an RTG was assessed at the ice barrier of Novolazarevskaya station. Assessments were made by NIITFA specialists who met with the rest of the RAE expedition after flying to Antarctica from Capetown, South Africa. 
At Dome B within the interior of Antarctica, another RTG had been installed in the 1980s to support an automatic magnetic-variation station.  The RTG at Dome B was under a snow layer 6 m thick, and had to be excavated as part of the recovery effort. Beginning 8 January 2015, a sledge tractor traversed from Progress station to Dome В (75°41′S, 89°21′E) that included a special retrofitted sled to carry the RTG. The RTG was successfully extracted, assessed by the experts, and then inserted into a transportation container for delivery to the Progress station.  The total length of the traverse was 2415 kilometers. This removal operation at Dome B was carried out from 20 to 24 January and on 31 January, the sledge-tractor successfully returned to Progress station with the RTG.
The R/V “Akademik Fedorov” called again to Progress station on 8-9 March 2015, where the one RTG from Dome B and the four smaller sources of ionizing radiation from Mirny station were loaded onboard the ship via helicopter. On 14 March 2015, a similar operation for the two RTGs at the field base Molodezhnaya were loaded onto the ship. On 24 March 2015, the RTG from the ice barrier of the Novolazarevskaya station was also loaded onto the ship via helicopter. Thus, the operations of loading onto the ship all RTGs and ionizing radiation sources that had operated earlier under the programs of Soviet Antarctic Expedition were completed. The R/V “Akademik Fedorov” is scheduled to arrive at the St. Petersburg port (Russia) on 18 May 2015. As a result of this effort, no radioactive material sources remain at RAE stations and any threat of the unauthorized use of Antarctic RTGs for acts of terrorism have been eliminated.
In conclusion, the authors of this Information Paper express their appreciation to the authorities of the Governments of Argentina and Germany, which facilitated the R/V “Akademik Fedorov” calling to the seaports of their states with the load of RTGs enroute to decommissioning in Russia. It is noteworthy that this complicated technological and logistical effort in the Antarctic was carried out under a joint Russian-U.S. Project in full compliance with the spirit and letter of the Antarctic Treaty.

