





Secial WG on Competent Authorities session - Authorisation Procedure for 
Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica





Authorisation Procedure for Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica
Information Paper Submitted by Chile
Summary
This paper informs the authorisation procedure applicable to all non-governmental activities conducted by Chilean nationals or prepared while based in Chile.
Authorisation Procedure for Non-Governmental Activities
Chile has established an authorisation procedure for non-governmental activities to be conducted in Antarctica with a view to comply with the Protocol on Environmental Protection and supplementary regulations on Antarctic environmental protection. This procedure is administrative in nature and provides relevant instructions to national Antarctic operators (Chilean Army, Navy, Air Force and Chilean Antarctic Institute). It was authored by the Antarctic Directorate of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chile and distributed to all national Antarctica-related organisations. This procedure has been in force since 5 December 2013.
Scope
The authorisation procedure for non-governmental activities to be conducted in Antarctica applies to all Chilean nationals, foreign residents and those conducting their activities while based in Chile.
Description of the Procedure
Any individual or legal entity with an interest in conducting activities in Antarctica shall submit a project for the proposed activity to the Antarctic Directorate of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs preferably 6 months prior to the estimated date of the beginning of the activity.
The project submission shall include the following background information, along with any other relevant data:
    • a)	A letter addressed to the Antarctic Director at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs describing the proposed activity.
    • b)	A detailed list of participants, whether individuals or legal entities, and in the latter case, a detailed list of individuals in charge. Lists shall include participants' prior experience in similar activities.
    • c)	A detailed time line for the proposed activity.
    • d)	Any logistic support provided or required.
    • e)	An appropriate Contingency Plan and any arrangements for health, safety, search and rescue, medical care and evacuation.
    • f)	Any purchased insurance policies, if applicable. Though not compulsory, insurance is recommended due to the risks inherent to any activities in Antarctica.
As set forth, once the requested information is received, the Antarctic Directorate shall contact any other national organisation whose support may be requested and shall notify the project stakeholders whether their project meets the initial requirements to be temporarily authorised by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
If the project is satisfactorily evaluated by the Antarctic Directorate, stakeholders shall submit a relevant Environmental Impact Assessment to the Operations Committee for Environmental Impact Assessments in Antarctica based in Punta Arenas. 
If the Operations Committee establishes that the project ensures compliance with applicable environmental regulations upon completion of the Environmental Impact Assessment, the Antarctic Directorate shall grant its authorisation for the execution of the activity and formally inform the project stakeholders. Only this final authorisation issued by the Antarctic Directorate is valid for national Antarctic operators to provide their support whenever applicable.
Advantages of the Procedure
Centralising this procedure within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, leading all national Antarctic operations, prevents a particular non-governmental project from being submitted to more than one organisation to obtain the required support for its execution, without the Ministry's relevant authorisation and supervision.


_________________

