





Construction and Operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land. 

Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation

English translation provided by the author










Construction and Operation of Belarusian Antarctic research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land 
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
Information Paper submitted by Republic of Belarus

1. Introduction
The Republic of Belarus plans to establish a scientific station in the Tala Hills, Enderby Land, in order to promote its research in the region. It is proposed that construction of the first phase of the station facilities will take place in 2015-2018. The construction features of the station are based on the modular principle, which will minimize construction costs, and speed up and simplify construction. It is planned that the station starts as a seasonal facility and subsequently transfer to a wintering (year-round) work variant. 
Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) of construction and operation of planned Belarusian Antarctic research station has been prepared by the Institute for Nature Management, the Scientific and Practical Centre for Bioresources and the Republican Centre for Polar Research of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus within the framework of the National Program on Monitoring of the Earth’s Polar Areas and Promotion of Arctic and Antarctic Expeditions for the period 2011- 2015, as approved in 2011. The Draft CEE has been developed in conformity with Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005). The Draft CEE was endorsed by the Intergovernmental Commission of the Republic of Belarus on Antarctic Issues (Protocol № 3 of 26 December 2013) and was sent by Diplomatic Note to all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and to the CEP chair in January 2014. 
According to the Procedures for intersessional consideration of draft CEEs, an Intersessional Open-Ended contact group convened by Ewan McIvor (Australia) was established to consider the Draft CEE prepared by the Republic of Belarus. The Draft CEE was presented by the Republic of Belarus at the 37th Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty in Brasilia, Brazil, held on April 28 to May 7, 2014, (see XXXVII ATCM / WP022). Having analyzed the Draft CEE, CEP informed ATCM that it substantially met the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (CEP XVII Report). It was noted that, in general, the Draft CEE represented a clear, well-structured and duly formalised report, although it was recommended to provide additional information and explanations to ensure a comprehensive assessment of the proposed activities.
2. Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
The Republic of Belarus welcomes and highly appreciates the comments and suggestions on the draft CEE made by the Parties during the intersessional work and CEP XVII meeting. The Republic of Belarus has prepared the Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation, taking into account the comments and suggestions made by the Parties. Significant changes were made to the station design, making it safer and more environmentally friendly. Descriptions of  planned scientific activities, environment monitoring program, waste management plan, measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species and other CEE elements have been considerably expanded. Detailed responses onto the comments to the Draft CEE are given in Annex 4 to the Final CEE.
Final CEE was made  available for download at the site of Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection of the Republic of Belarus by the addresses http://minpriroda.gov.by/ru/ - Russian version  and  http://minpriroda.gov.by/en/ - English version and  was sent to Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. CEP chair and Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty were informed about preparation of the Final CEE. 
3. Conclusion
The Republic of Belarus remains committed to its intention of building a safe and environmentally friendly scientific research station at the Vechernyaya Mount, Enderby Land, which operation will contribute to important scientific results. The Republic of Belarus is grateful to all participants of the discussion on Draft CEE and those who made valuable comments and suggestions.


