





Antarctic Site Inventory: 
Results from long-term monitoring









Antarctic Site Inventory: Results from long-term monitoring
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand and the United States
Summary
The Antarctic Site Inventory (ASI), led by Mr. Ron Naveen of Oceanites, Inc., a U.S.-based, nonprofit, scientific and educational organization and Dr. Heather Lynch of Stony Brook University, has collected biological data and site-descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula region since 1994. 
The ASI continues to monitor the rapid change in the relative populations of gentoo, chinstrap, and Adélie penguins throughout the western Antarctic Peninsula, with gentoo penguin populations increasing rapidly and expanding their range southward, and the other two species declining significantly.
Introduction
The ASI is a substantive, long-term monitoring programme that includes data and information collected across the Antarctic Peninsula at all heavily visited tourism locations, sites believed to be most sensitive to potential environmental disruption, and all sites covered by site-specific visitor guidelines that Antarctic Treaty Parties have adopted. 
In the 21 seasons from November 1994, when the ASI began fieldwork, through February 2015, the ASI has made 1,561 site visits and collected data at 208 Antarctic Peninsula locations. During the recently concluded 2014-15 field season, the ASI made 124 site visits and collected data at 56 sites, roughly half of which (29 of 56) were visited more than once.1
The ASI field season generally runs from mid-November to mid-February and comprises two components: utilizing expedition tour ships to reach a regular group of ‘core sites’ whose breeding penguins and seabirds are censused annually, and utilizing yachts/smaller vessels in a directed effort to reach ‘remote, data gap sites’ that are infrequently visited and under-surveyed.
Recently, these region-wide analyses have been assisted by the availability of high-resolution commercial satellite imagery.  Lynch et al.2 and Naveen and Lynch et al.3 demonstrate the utility of such imagery for detecting penguin colonies and estimating penguin abundance. The project also has begun to examine changing relationships between species diversity and environmental factors to assist with the management of Antarctica’s floral communities.
Recent findings
A new ASI paper, A comprehensive coastal seabird survey maps out the front lines of ecological change on the Western Antarctic Peninsula4 reports on a field expedition (January 5-21, 2013) that completed the first comprehensive penguin (Pygoscelis spp.) and blue-eyed shag (Phalacrocorax [atriceps] bransfieldensis) population survey of the Graham and Loubet Coasts of the Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) since the mid-1980s. Seabirds along the western Antarctic Peninsula are known to be shifting in abundance and distribution in response to changing sea ice and prey distributions, but the spatial extent of these changes has remained an open question because survey efforts have focused on the more easily accessed northern coastline. 
The surveys document a sharp transition zone at the northern boundary of Marguerite Bay; north of this boundary zone, we confirm widespread declines in Adélie penguins and increasing populations of gentoo penguins, but south of this zone we find Adélie populations that have remained stable or increased in abundance since the previous surveys by Poncet and Poncet (1987). Marguerite Bay has long been known as a predator ‘hotspot’, but these findings suggest that Marguerite Bay has actually been improving for marine predators for at least several decades. Marguerite Bay, which has fundamentally different oceanic dynamics than in areas just outside Marguerite Bay, has maintained persistent phytoplankton blooms over the past decade even as summer sea ice extent, which can inhibit access to breeding areas, has declined. The paper provides further support for the hypothesis that oceanic productivity along with sea ice dynamics are critical factors regulating Adélie penguin population in the region, and that Marguerite Bay is now at the front lines of ecological change in this region.
Dissemination of Data and Information, Publications, Education
Data and descriptive information about the ASI are available on the Oceanites website — www.oceanites.org, and the Oceanites news/content site — “The Oceanites Feed” — http://oceanitesfeed.wordpress.com/, and the Oceanites iPhone App that is freely available via Apple’s iTunes Store. 
Biological data and site descriptions collected by the ASI have been published and routinely are made available in peer-reviewed papers, government reports, and popular publications, and are available as downloads on the Oceanites website (http://www.oceanites.org/links/) and The Lynch Lab website  (http://lynchlab.com/publications/).
The most recent government report is the Antarctic Peninsula Compendium (3rd edition),5 which covers the 142 sites that were visited and censused by ASI researchers in 17 field seasons from November 1994 through February 2011 — an increase in coverage by 60 sites from the 2nd edition.  These 142 locations include sites that are regularly visited by tourists or other visitors, sites with historic census data, national research stations, and a few Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) that are off-limits to tourists that ASI researchers have visited pursuant to appropriate permits under the U.S. Antarctic Conservation Act (see ATCM XXXIV IP23).  
The Compendium also may be downloaded from the Oceanites website (http://www.oceanites.org/visiting/2011/APC_2011_3rd.pdf) and US Environmental Protection Agency website  (http://www.epa.gov/compliance/resources/publications/government/international/antarctic-peninsula-compendium-3rd-edition.pdf).
Oceanites has also begun a series of Skype classroom sessions with students in the United States, with the intention of extending this internationally in the future.  The 20 sessions to date have involved 1st through 6th grade students and between 20-50 students per session. 
