





XXXIV SCAR Biennial Meetings including the 2016 Open Science Conference, 
19-31 August 2016, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia










XXXIV SCAR Biennial Meetings including the 2016 
Open Science Conference, 
19-31 August 2016, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Information Paper Submitted by Malaysia
Agenda Item (13)
1.Introduction

The XXXII SCAR Delegates Meeting in Portland, Oregon, USA, 2012 had selected Malaysia to be the host of the XXXIV SCAR Biennial Meetings including the 2016 Open Science Conference in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia from the 19th – 31st August 2016. The main organisers of the meeting and conference are the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation and the National Antarctic Research Centre.


2. Progress

Malaysia is pleased to inform the ATCM delegates on the progress of the preparation for this event;
    (i) The Malaysian Cabinet has agreed for Malaysia to host the event.
    (ii) The conference will be held at the Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre (KLCC), located in the middle of the city.
    (iii) The theme of the conference is “Antarctica in the Global Earth System : From the Poles to the Tropics”,
    (iv) A Steering Committee chaired by the Secretary General of Malaysian Ministry of Science, Technology, & Innovation and a Local Organising Committee (LOC) chaired by the Director of National Antarctic Research Centre have been set up. 
    (v) Website of the conference has being constructed and is available online. The address of the website is www.scar2016.com.
    (vi) The first announcement of the event has already been made.
    (vii) The following organisations have agreed to be the supporters of the  event; University of Malaya (UM), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM), Universiti Teknologi Malaysia (UTM), Universiti Malaysia Sabah (UMS), Universiti Malaysia Terengganu (UMT), State Government of Terengganu, and Malaysia Convention and Exhibition Bureau (MyCEB)
    (viii) The event has been announced at the closing session of the SCAR 2014, on 28 August 2014 in Auckland, New Zealand,



3. Conclusion
Malaysia would like to welcome the Antarctic scientific community of the ATCM to the XXXIV SCAR Meetings and Conference in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. We also hope the ATCM delegates can assist in promoting this event in their countries to make this event a success. We also would like to encourage the participants to take the opportunity to visit Malaysia prior or after the event.  31st August is Malaysia’s Independence Day, delegates and participants are invited to join this celebration. The Open Science Conference will be held from 23rd – 26th August 2016 while the SCAR Delegates Meeting will be held from 29th – 31st August 2016.



