





Chilean Antarctic Science Program: Evolution and challenges

English version provided by the author









Chilean Antarctic Science Program:
Evolution and challenges
Overview
The Chilean Antarctic Program has a strong trajectory on terrestrial and coastal ecology, with emphasis on ecophysiology. As such, effects of climate change on the terrestrial-coastal-marine gradient are a key issue. 
In this regard, the South Shetland Islands represent a natural laboratory where air and sea-surface temperature have increased the greatest in Antarctica. Chile counts with several permanent facilities on this archipelago and baseline information on vegetation and marine invertebrate diversity, physiological response to climate-induced stress and the genetic base of their adaptive capability. 
The rapid change on glacier extension during the past decade makes not only possible but necessary to re-assess key topics regarding glacier retreat, plant populations, invasive species, coastal ecology and even paleontology, due to the rapid glacier retreat and its increased influx of nutrients and liquid water to the system, phenomena that will echo sooner than later at higher latitudes. All these habitats are near INACH facilities or reachable by its transport means. 
In addition, current challenges are not only assessing status and trends, but also the evolving responses of populations, communities and ecosystems to climate change. These studies require complementary efforts from multidisciplinary and multinational teams to undertake such research.
To take advantage of these opportunities, the Chilean Antarctic Institute is evolving to be inclusive and opened to the international community, taking advantage of its wide presence in the Maritime Antarctica.
Introduction
The Chilean Antarctic Institute, INACH, has been for the last 50 years in charge of conducting, coordinating and executing the Chilean Antarctic Science Program, PROCIEN. The program has undergone a major evolution, in agreement with current political and economic realities. The INACH has promoted a greater involvement of the PROCIEN with the whole community, passing from an era of discovering and monitoring, to become a social and economic actor regionally and nationally.
The PROCIEN is currently funded by five different government agencies and decided through at least seven open, peer reviewed calls for proposals per year. This scheme, implemented progressively since 2005, has allowed not only an increase in the number of projects supported, but an increase in the investment in Antarctic Science from US$1 million in 2006 to over US$6 million this year.
This opening of Antarctica to the Chilean scientific community has in turn developed multiple research teams from more than 20 national Universities and research institutes, along with co-researchers from Brazil, Canada, China, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, Uruguay and United States.
The PROCIEN comes alive every austral summer season when the peak of the Antarctic Science Expeditions takes place. From its  headquarters in Punta Arenas, over 158 Chilean scientists, 45 students and teachers from the Antarctic School Expedition and 25 support personnel took off towards Antarctica last austral summer, joined by 167 scientists and support personnel from the Antarctic Programs of Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Ecuador, Germany, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russia, Spain, United Kingdom, United States and Venezuela.



The Research Lines of the Chilean Antarctic Program
The PROCIEN is currently organized in six lines of research, following the SCAR guidelines1:
    • State of the Antarctic Ecosystems, AntEco.
    • Antarctic Thresholds – Ecosystem Resilience and Adaptation, AnT-ERA.
    • Antarctic Climate Change, CCA (acronym in Spanish).
    • Physical and Earth Sciences, CFCT.
    • Microbiology and molecular biology, MBBA.
    • Antarctic environment, MA.
The program has a long and strong component on terrestrial and coastal ecology, with significant contribution on the adaptation of vascular plants to its environment and the challenges imposed by climate change. Below the sea surface, studies on coastal marine biodiversity as well as on adaptation to UV, to the increase of sea temperature and the phylogenetic relationships between Antarctica and South America, are also key components of our program.
A distinction of our PROCIEN is its capability for conducting research widely in the northwestern Antarctic Peninsula area, visiting over 1,000 nm of coastline per season, from King George Island to Marguerite Bay.
The 51th Chilean Antarctic Expedition
The 51th Chilean Scientific Expedition occurred from 28 October 2014 to 19 March 2015 and included 66 national projects and supported 24 activities from other National Antarctic Programs.
The projects undertook activities at the main Chilean Stations: Escudero, Prat, O’Higgins, Mann, Yelcho, Carvajal and Union Glacier (recently renamed Oscar Pinochet de la Barra), as well as in Stations belonging to other countries, such as King Sejong (Rep. of Korea), Arctowski (Poland) and Gabriel de Castilla (Spain).  Fundamental for the expedition was the support provided by the two vessels of the Chilean Navy, I/B ‘Oscar Viel’ and the AP ‘Aquiles’. Camps were established at Byers Peninsula, Lagotellerie Island and Plateau Laclavere. The expedition was joined by researchers from Australia, Brazil, China, Germany, Republic of Korea, The Netherlands, United Kingdom, United States and Venezuela.
New platforms for the Chilean Scientific Program
During the recent summer season our program also concluded two new platforms for Antarctic research: the MN ‘ISABEL’ and the renovation of our Station ‘Yelcho’.
MN ‘ISABEL’ – Coastal research boat:
It’s a 9 m long boat programmed to work with a maximum of 6 researchers on board.
To support scientific activities, she has been implemented with a Garmin GPSMAP 720S radar, which includes a chartplotter and a 700 m transductor AIRMAR, and with an L-frame and winch. 
The MN ‘Isabel’ was received forward by coastal oceanographers in Maxwell Bay area (Fildes Bay), in King George Island (25 de Mayo Island). The boat proved herself worthy to be both safe and comfortable for carrying out shallow sampling of the water column, such as casting CTD and Niskin bottles. Having a cabin and washroom increases the endurance of the scientists and allows to take longer shifts at sea.
Yelcho Station (Doumer Island, South Bay):
This INACH station was remodeled during the past two seasons to receive 15 researchers. A new multiuse and wet laboratory were constructed, using thermic panels. For the next seasons, aquarium facilities will be built.  After two decades of being dormant, Yelcho received two projects on marine biodiversity and coastal food web, as well as researchers studying terrestrial invertebrates, permafrost and microorganisms associated to glaciers. 
Next steps
Over the past decade the program has increased in number of projects and total funding, allowing for a growing community of researchers. This has brought in bigger opportunities for national and international collaboration, as well as an increasing pressure on logistic requirements.
Right now, we are transitioning from multiple, independent projects, towards a major cohesiveness among projects, by line of research, to tackle down main streams questions on Antarctic research. This transition will require collaborating with strategic partners to undertake comparative, complex studies involving several disciplines and producing high impact science results.

Figure 1- Chilean Antarctic Science Program evolution, in number of projects and funding agencies involved.




Figure 2- 2014-15 Research projects developed in Chilean and foreign platforms.





















