





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer 









Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer 
SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP
Introduction
1.	As in previous years this report focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in 2009 at the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
2.	The Thirty-third Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 
20-24 October, 2014. The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website http://www.ccamlr.org/en/sc-camlr-xxxiii. A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-XXXIII is provided in Appendix 1. 
SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
3.	The Scientific Committee continued the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship scheme, selecting one recipient this year: Aleksandr Sytov (Russia), who will work on the relationship between environmental variables and the spatial–temporal dynamics of krill catch and effort. Details of the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship Scheme can be found at www.ccamlr.org/en/document/science/ccamlr-scientific-scholarship-scheme. 
4.	The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 
Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
5. 	The Scientific Committee highlighted work which ICED (Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean) undertook with respect to fisheries management in the Southern Ocean, including plausible quantitative scenarios of how the Southern Ocean ecosystems may change, the future role that sea-ice may play in governing ecology in the Southern Ocean, and challenges in projecting future scenarios for Southern Ocean ecosystems. The Scientific Committee noted that ICED addressed seven topics with respect to krill which will be useful for the work of the Scientific Committee in the future. 

6. 	The Scientific Committee noted that development and progress of a feedback management strategy for the krill fishery offers the opportunity to adapt to the impacts of climate change.

7. 	The Scientific Committee noted an important paper on ocean acidification which was provided for the information of WG-EMM in July 2014.

8.	Other issues in relation to Climate Change will be taken up during the proposed joint SC-CAMLR/CEP Workshop scheduled for 2016.

Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
9.		The Scientific Committee noted the joint report from the FAO and CCAMLR secretariats on the implementation of a project on sustainable fisheries management and biodiversity conservation of deep-sea living marine resources and ecosystems in the Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (ABNJ). This project is an international collaboration, led by the FAO with financial support from the Global Environment Fund (GEF), which aims to achieve sustainability in the use of deep-sea living resources and biodiversity conservation in ABNJ through the systematic application of an ecosystem approach. 
10.	The Scientific Committee considered additional issues pertaining to biodiversity within the spatial marine management and protected areas agenda item.
Antarctic species requiring special protection
11.	A single seabird mortality event occurred in the South Georgia toothfish longline fishery, where 74 white-chinned petrels were caught on a single longline on 13 April, 2014. As a result of this incident, the 2014/15 season has commenced slightly later, on 16 April. The SC noted that future season extensions would require careful consideration and potentially extra mitigation measures.
Spatial marine management and protected areas 
12.		The Scientific Committee noted the progress within the various planning Domains in the Convention area, including preparatory work for the spatial planning of MPAs in Domain 1 (Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc), and Domains 3 and 4 (Weddell Sea). 
13.		The Scientific Committee welcomed continuing progress on the scientific data compilation and analyses carried out by Chile and Argentina in support of the development of a CCAMLR MPA in the Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc region. A second international expert workshop to address policy considerations and evaluate different MPA scenarios for a CCAMLR MPA in the Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc region was held in Buenos Aires, Argentina, May 25-29, 2015. The Terms of Reference for this meeting were to: (i) review the available data that support the existing specific conservation objectives, (ii) consider different candidate MPA scenarios submitted by Members, and (iii) undertake a sensitivity analysis of different scenarios.
14.		The Scientific Committee welcomed the progress report on the data processing and scientific analyses carried out by Germany in support of the development of a CCAMLR MPA in the Weddell Sea, as well as the report from an international workshop held in April 2014. A second international expert workshop on the scientific foundation of a CCAMLR marine protected area in the Weddell Sea was held in Berlin, Germany, April 28-29, 2015.
15.	The Scientific Committee noted progress on the development of a representative system of MPAs in Planning Domain 7, East Antarctica, as well as progress in supporting MPA planning in the Ross Sea region.
16.		The Scientific Committee encouraged every Member of CCAMLR  to participate in MPA research and monitoring.
17. 	 The Scientific Committee agreed that ‘MPA planning reference documents’ could include: (i) documents providing background information, (ii) descriptions of spatial data used in the planning process, (iii) methodological descriptions of approaches, and (iv) documents containing or describing the MPA proposals. Information contained in all of these reference documents would then form the basis of future MPA Reports, which were expected to be developed in support of MPAs after adoption of those MPAs.
18. 	The Scientific Committee welcomed the research and monitoring plan and the MPA Report for the South Orkney Islands Southern Shelf MPA, and agreed that these documents provided a good format for describing research and monitoring activities. 
Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs)
19.	Since 2008 the Secretariat has received a total of 156 VME-indicator notifications from longline fisheries, these have led to the declaration of 64 VME risk areas (i.e. areas now closed to fishing). In addition, there have been 46 VMEs detected and registered as a result of fishery independent research cruises. Full details of the VMEs encountered and areas closed to fishing are provided in the Report On Bottom Fisheries and Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems available from 
http://www.ccamlr.org/en/document/publications/report-bottom-fisheries-and-vulnerable-marine-ecosystems 

20. 	The Scientific Committee agreed that consideration be given on whether the current fisheries are having no significant adverse impacts as required by Article II of the CAMLR Convention. The Scientific Committee recommended a review of whether the current management arrangements are sufficient for these fisheries to avoid causing significant adverse impacts on vulnerable marine ecosystems, and that this be a priority to support the review required by the Commission (Conservation Measure 22-06, paragraph 15).  
Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
21. 	The Scientific Committee recognised that the current set of CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) parameters are providing indices at different time and space scales and that this will benefit further development of feedback management approaches for the krill fishery.
22.	The Scientific Committee awarded funds from the CEMP Special Fund Management Group for a proposal aimed at detecting changes in penguin populations in different areas using cameras. Several logistical elements of this research have since been initiated.
Second Joint CEP–SC-CAMLR Workshop
23.	The Scientific Committee welcomed the idea and proposed scope of a second Joint CEP–SC-CAMLR Workshop and agreed it should be held in 2016. It also agreed that the terms of reference for the workshop could be based on elements such as those identified during informal intersessional CEP discussions led by Dr Penhale:
(i) identifying those drivers or effects for which measurable responses are required to support the goals of the CEP and SC-CAMLR
(ii) reviewing existing monitoring programs to determine whether the data is sufficient to assess climate change impacts or whether new approaches are needed
(iii) defining mechanisms for practical cooperation, including the sharing of data and information.
24.	In addition, it was noted that several of the recommendations from the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change and Implications for Antarctic Management and Governance addressed cooperation between CEP and SC-CAMLR, and that these matters could usefully be considered during a joint workshop.
25.	The Scientific Committee agreed to establish a steering committee, co-convened by Drs Penhale and Grant and including the CEP and SC-CAMLR Chairs, to consult with representatives on both committees and further develop the workshop terms of reference and an agenda for initial consideration at the 2015 CEP meeting.  The Scientific Committee agreed that, as for the first joint workshop in 2009, the proposed workshop should be open to the official observers of both committees. In particular, it was noted that SCAR’s work in the area of climate change would provide valuable input to the workshop.
Future Meetings 
26.	The next regular meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 19 to 23 October 2015. 
27.	The Scientific Committee agreed to the following meetings in the 2015 intersessional period: 
•	SG-ASAM (Busan, Republic of Korea, 9 to 13 March 2015) (Convener: Dr Zhao (China))
•	WG-SAM (Warsaw, Poland, 29 June to 3 July) (Convener: Dr Parker (New Zealand))
•	WG-EMM (Warsaw, Poland, 6 to 17 July) (Convener: Dr Kawaguchi (Australia))
•	WG-FSA (CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, 5 to 16 October) (Convener: Dr Belchier (UK)).
Appendix 1
Representatives of Members and Observers to SC-CAMLR-XXXIII


Chair, Scientific Committee
Dr Christopher Jones
National Marine Fisheries Service
Southwest Fisheries Science Center
La Jolla, California, USA
chris.d.jones@noaa.gov


Argentina
Dr. Enrique Marschoff
Instituto Antártico Argentino
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores,
Comercio Internacional y Culto
Buenos Aires
marschoff@dna.gov.ar

Australia
Dr Andrew Constable
Australian Antarctic Division
Department of Sustainability, Environment, 
	Water, Population and Communities
Tasmania
andrew.constable@aad.gov.au

Belgium




Mr. Daan Delbare
Institute for Agricultural and Fisheries
  Research
daan.delbare@ilvo.vlaanderen.be

Chile
Dr. Javier Arata
Instituto Antártico Chileno
Punta Arenas
jarata@inach.cl

People’s Republic Of China
Dr Xianyong Zhao
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Qingdao
zhaoxy@ysfri.ac.cn

European Union 

Dr Volker Siegel
Institute of Sea Fisheries – Johann Heinrich
von Thünen Institute
Hamburg
volker.diegel@ti.bund.de

France
Mr Romain Sinegre
Muséum national d'Histoire  naturelle
romainsinegre@gmail.com

Germany
Dr Karl-Hermann Kock
Federal Research Institute for Rural Areas, Forestry and Fisheries
Institute of Sea Fisheries
Hamburg
karl-hermann.kock@ti.bund.de


Italy
Prof. Marino Vacchi
ISPRA c/o ISMAR, Institute of Marine Sciences
  Ancona
marino.vacchi@isprambiente.it

Japan
Dr Taro Ichii
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries
Yokohama, Kanagawa
ichii@affrc.go.jp

Republic Of Korea
Dr Seok-Gwan Choi
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute
sgchoi@korea.kr

Namibia
Mr Titus Iilende
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
Windhoek
tiilende@mfmr.gov.na

New Zealand
Dr Rohan Currey
Ministry for Primary Industries
rohan.currey@mpi.govt.nz

Norway
Dr Olav Rune Godø
Institute of Marine Research
Bergen
olavrune@imr.no

Poland
Dr Anna Kidawa
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
akidawa@arctowski.pl

Russian Federation
Dr Andrey Petrov
FSUE-VNIRO
petrov@vniro.ru

South Africa



Dr Toufiek Samaai
Department of Environmental Affairs
tsamaai@environment.gov.za

Spain
Mr Luis José López Abellán
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
Santa Cruz de Tenerife
luis.lopez@ca.ieo.es

Sweden
Professor Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
bo.fernholm@nrm.se

Ukraine
Dr Leonid Pshenichnov
YugNIRO
Kerch
lkpbikentnet@rambler.ru

United Kingdom
Dr Chris Darby
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas)
Lowestoft, Suffolk
chris.darby@cefas.co.uk

United States Of America



Dr George Watters
Southwest Fisheries Science Centre
National Marine Fisheries Service
La Jolla, California
george.watters@noaa.gov

Uruguay
Mr Carlos Osvaldo Bentancour Fernandez
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
carlos.bentancour@mrree.gub.uy




OBSERVERS – 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS

ACAP
	
Mr Warren Papworth
ACAP Secretariat
Tasmania, Australia
warren.papworth@acap.aq

ATS
Dr Manfred Reinke
Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
manfred.reinke@ats.aq

CCSBT

Represented by Australia
CEP
	
Dr Polly Penhale
National Science Foundation
Office of Polar Programs
Arlington, Virginia, USA
ppenhale@nsf.gov


IWC
Represented by New Zealand

SCAR		

Prof. Mark Hindell
Institute of Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania
Hobart
mark.hindell@utas.edu.au

SEAFO
Represented by Norway

OBSERVERS – 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS

ARK
Dr Sigve Nordrum
Aker BioMarine Antarctic AS
Oslo
sigve.nordrum@akerbiomarine.com


ASOC

Dr Rodolfo Werner
The Pew Charitable Trusts
Washington, DC
rodolfo.antarctica@gmail.com

COLTO
Mr Martin Exel
Austral Fisheries Pty Ltd
Western Australia
mexel@australfisheries.com.au



