





The role of the United Kingdom in charting the waters of the Antarctic








The role of the United Kingdom in charting the waters of the Antarctic

Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
This information paper summarises recent work by the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office (UKHO), British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and the Royal Navy in provision and usage of hydrographic data for navigation and scientific purposes. The UKHO plans to publish six new charts of Antarctica in the coming year, and has recently produced a chart of Lemaire Channel, one of the most transited routes in the Antarctic Peninsula.
Introduction
The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office (UKHO) has been producing navigational charts for over 200 years and prides itself on its worldwide coverage. At present the waters of the Antarctic are largely unsurveyed, with only around 5% of the region surveyed to modern standards. The lack of up-to-date data and the requirement to modernise existing navigational charts highlights the need for open communication and sharing of information and data between Hydrographic Offices and chart producers worldwide.
International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO)
The Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) is an IHO regional commission made up of 23 Member States and industry observers that meet annually to discuss and plan future surveying and charting requirements for the Antarctic region. The UKHO continues to be a highly respected and active member of this commission and is greatly involved in the paper and electronic charting of the region.  The UK has been Chair of the Hydrography Priorities Working Group (HPWG) since its formation in 2004. The Working Group has been instrumental in the generation of a prioritised survey plan for the Antarctic, highlighting main navigation routes and destinations throughout the continent, especially the Antarctic Peninsula where the main vessel traffic is. The survey plan is a working document incorporating input from all interested Parties within the Member States, taking into consideration naval requirements, and the perspectives of scientific organisations and commercial tourist industry representatives. The Chair continuously monitors vessel movements throughout the season to identify any new routes that require survey priority.  As an example, survey priority routes for the Antarctic Peninsula are shown in Figure 1.

As with all areas of the world, there is an IHO International (INT) chart scheme that covers the Antarctic. Within the Antarctic scheme there are 111 charts, the responsibility for which is divided up between 17 Member States. The UK is responsible for 26 of the Antarctic charts.  The UK, as the Chair of the HPWG, is the regional coordinator monitoring the production of charts and Electronic Navigational Charts (ENC) within the Antarctic International Chart Scheme.  As with the survey plan, vessel movements are regularly monitored to ensure the existing charts in the scheme are fit for purpose and allow safe navigation. The free exchange of data between Member States is fully supported by the UK with current and historical survey data being passed to Antarctic chart-producing nations upon request. 
Interactions between the UKHO, British Antarctic Survey and the Royal Navy
An excellent relationship exists between the UKHO, British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and the Royal Navy developed through long-term data acquisition, science support and chart production. For many years now the UKHO chart production has been dependent on data and surveys supplied by the Royal Navy and BAS. The types of data and information include full multibeam swath surveys, aerial photography for coastline and danger delineation, topographic mapping and requested shallow-water feature searches. The UKHO provides up-to-date, carriage compliant, navigational products for use in this environmentally sensitive area. For example, Figure 2 highlights the use of data collected by the Royal Navy and BAS overlaid on a UKHO chart to show the full seafloor insonification in the area around Anvers Island to Renaud Island, which is one of the most visited areas of the Antarctic Peninsula.  Recently the Royal Navy survey ship, HMS Protector, has been planning her survey programmes adhering to the IHO survey priority list, giving particular attention to the UK’s areas of responsibility. The UKHO and BAS have been working closely on a project to hasten data transfer through standardised compatible file formats; this will also lead to a better understanding of each other’s data holdings and requirements. The free flow of data between the UKHO, BAS and the Royal Navy has always been the most important factor of the successful relationship and, when required, bespoke one-off products have been generated at short notice to fulfil operational requirements.  
The UKHO and future charting in the Antarctic
The UKHO, so far, has published 11 of the 26 charts within the Antarctic INT chart scheme for which it has responsibility. Chart production is extremely labour intensive and requires experienced cartographers to reconcile many original documents that range from modern state-of-the-art surveys to old lines of passage soundings that were positioned from visual fixes on ice features that are no longer present.  Modern satellite imagery is used within the production of charts to ensure the latest coastline features are accurate and positioned correctly.  In order to build on the progress to date, the UKHO plans to publish six new charts of Antarctica in the coming year, and has recently produced a chart of Lemaire Channel (see Figure 3), which is one of the most transited routes in the Antarctic Peninsula.
Conclusion
The UK continues to play an important role in Antarctic charting and scientific research. The ongoing collaboration between the UKHO, BAS and the Royal Navy will help facilitate future understanding of Antarctica, in collaboration with other international partners.

Figures
Figure 1. Survey priority routes for the Antarctic Peninsula

Figure 2. Chart showing full seafloor insonification in the area around Anvers Island to Renaud Island, which is one of the most visited areas of the Antarctic Peninsula 




Figure 3. The Lemaire Channel


   	      
