





Remediation and Closure of Dry Valley Drilling Project Boreholes in Response to Rising Lake Levels









Remediation and Closure of Dry Valley Drilling Project Boreholes in Response to Rising Lake Levels
Summary
The US Antarctic Program (USAP) has actively monitored and remediated boreholes installed as part of the Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP) in the ASMA No. 2 (McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land).This document discusses the remediation and closure of two specific DVDP boreholes, DVDP 6 and 12, historically filled with Diesel Fuel Arctic (DFA). Remediation and closure of the DVDP boreholes became necessary to mitigate risk of introducing DFA to the Dry Valley lakes or the environment as a result of rising lake levels that threatened to overtop or inundate the DVDPs.
Introduction
The Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP) was a coordinated scientific endeavour by groups from Japan, New Zealand, and the United States between 1972 and 1975. Scientists hoped to resolve the diverse theories regarding the geologic history of the Dry Valleys by examining subsurface sediments and down-hole geophysical measurements. Fifteen boreholes were drilled from January 1973 to January 1975. Due to drilling requirements, and hopes to maintain the integrity of holes for further scientific interests, Diesel Fuel Arctic (DFA) was used as the primary drilling fluid in a number of boreholes and was commonly left in the borehole. This practice has led to ongoing environmental concerns of loss of DFA from the boreholes into the Dry Valley environment. Thirty years following the initial installation of the DVDP boreholes, monitoring and remediation activities have been conducted periodically at sites which could be located and were accessible.
All accessible DVDP sites were evaluated for stability and environmental impacts between 2002 and 2007. Additionally, any changes in the risk of release to the environment (e.g., lake encroachment) were documented and mitigated as necessary. 
Continued monitoring of the remaining DVDP locations is required to prevent environmental contamination.  Borehole locations at New Harbor and Commonwealth Glacier are monitored by the USAP yearly to ensure no changes in borehole characteristics (e.g., depth to fuel, water, and bottom of casing or blockage)) have occurred that could compromise the local environment. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) identifies that “regular and effective monitoring shall take place to allow assessment of the impacts of ongoing activities, including the verification of predicted impacts … [and] to facilitate early detection of the possible unforeseen effects …” (Article 3.2 (d) and (e)).  In addition, Annex I of the Protocol states that “Procedures shall be put in place, including appropriate monitoring of key environmental indicators …” (Article 5). 
Figure 1 shows the DVDP locations.


Figure 1 – Overview map of the DVDP borehole sites
DVDP History, Remediation, and Closure
DVDP 6 (Lake Vida)
History
DVDP 6 was drilled to a total depth of approximately 305.8 meters in December 1973 near the edge of Lake Vida. The borehole was filled with 2,211 litres of DFA to keep it open for future investigations.  Due to a combination of high seasonal melt water input from local glaciers and the shallow gradient of the valley floor, the DVDP 6 borehole has become inundated with lake water several times.  
Remediation and Closure
Remediation activities at the site, including the removal of fuel and contaminated soil, have been occurring intermittently since 1974. Between 1974 and 2004, approximately 34,020 kilograms of fuel contaminated soils and 757 litres of fuel were removed from the site. 

During a site visit to DVDP 6 in November 2005, the standpipe maintaining access to the borehole was at a 10 angle from vertical, likely due to the pressures associated with lake ice and permafrost forces acting on the standpipe during the freezing and thawing of the lake over the seasons. Had any further bending of the standpipe occurred, access to the borehole would have been entirely lost. Additionally, it was observed that the lake level was still increasing and further extensions to the standpipe would be required in the near future to sustain borehole access.   Due to the threat of release of DFA to the lake and increasing lack of accessibility, US Antarctic Program (USAP) decided the borehole should be closed.  


Figure 2 – DVDP 6 standpipe at 10 angle from vertical, October 2006

DVDP 6 was remediated and closed during the 2006-2007 summer season. In October 2006, a field camp was established near the DVDP 6 borehole. A drill rig was mobilized to the DVDP 6, and assembled, using helicopter operations. 

A total of 568 litres of liquid (fuel and brine solution) was removed from the borehole using a bailer. As the liquid was bailed out of the borehole it was containerized in 208-litre drums for transport back to McMurdo Station, for disposal.

Following removal of the drill pipe, fresh water was flown to the site, via helicopter from McMurdo Station, in 208-litre drums and pumped into the borehole using a hand pump. Approximately 662 litres of fresh water were pumped into the borehole. The water was then allowed to freeze to create a fresh water ice plug in the borehole. Once the fresh water was frozen, grout was mixed on site and poured down the borehole. The grout filled the borehole from the top of the freshwater ice plug, 9 meters below the top casing (btoc), to the ground surface, 1 meter btoc. The section of standpipe above the ground surface was removed using the drill rig, thereby leaving nothing remaining above the ground surface. 

The remediation and closure actions taken at DVDP 6 in October and November 2006 were successful in removing the accessible fuel and fuel-contaminated brine from the borehole to a depth of 120 meters. In addition, the borehole was successfully sealed to prevent further interactions between the remaining borehole fluid and the Lake Vida environment. Remediation and closure actions have eliminated any significant environmental effects associated with the borehole.
DVDP 12 (Lake Hoare) 
History
DVDP 12 was completed in January 1975 near Lake Hoare. The borehole was approximately 185 m deep, and was filled with a mix of DFA drilling fluid and lake water. Borehole logs indicate DVDP 12 was installed 9 m from Lake Hoare and 1.5 m above the level of the Lake. 

In the 2006-2007 season USAP determined that DVDP 12 posed an environmental concern due to the remaining DFA left down-hole and the dynamic lake environment currently surrounding the site. 


Figure 3 - DVDP 12 with Lake Hoare in background, December 2013
Closure and Remediation
The decision was made to remediate and close DVDP 12 by USAP during the 2013-2014 austral summer season.  The lake surface of Lake Hoare had risen to within 0.5 metres of the borehole casing and USAP was concerned that it could rise to the base of the borehole during the melt that season. In December 2013, 19 litres of DFA were bailed out from DVDP 12 and transported to McMurdo Station for disposal. 

The abandonment of the borehole was completed in January 2014. Bentonite chips were slowly dispensed into the borehole to isolate the viscous DFA material that remained.  Clean water, transported to the site from McMurdo, was added to hydrate the bentonite and allow it to expand and seal the borehole pipe. After a hydration period, the team measured the depth of the water at 7.6 metres btoc, and felt the probe encounter the top of the hydrated bentonite at 24 metres btoc. This impermeable barrier prevents any DFA remaining in the borehole from entering Lake Hoare, once the lake level rises above the top of the borehole casing. 
Conclusion
Monitoring the DVDP boreholes proved important in the dynamic, changing environment in the McMurdo Dry Valleys. The USAP continues to monitor the remaining accessible DVDP locations in the McMurdo Dry Valleys.  Competent and accessible boreholes are still possible sources of climatic temperature data for Dry Valleys Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) science program.  Future geological investigations in the McMurdo Dry Valleys may also need access to the boreholes.  The monitoring program allowed for the risk of the boreholes to be mitigated and the sites to be remediated before negative impacts were encountered.


