





Special WG on Competent Authorities Issues:

 Summary of Canada’s Antarctic Permitting System









Summary of Canada’s Antarctic Permitting System
Information Paper presented by Canada
Summary
Canada implements its environmental protection obligations under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection through the Antarctic Environmental Protection Act (2003) (AEPA) and the associated Antarctic Environmental Protection Regulations.  Canada issues a number of permits each year to Antarctic tour operators, scientific expeditions, and adventure expeditions.  While Canada does not currently have a station in Antarctica, the AEPA is designed to govern the activity of any Canadian stations should one be established.  The Department of the Environment (Environment Canada) is responsible for administration and enforcement of the AEPA and acts as Canada’s Competent Authority.
Legislative Framework
The AEPA establishes a permit system for Canadian activities carried out in the Antarctic, defined in the Act as the area south of 60° south latitude. In order to enter the Antarctic, the Act requires any member of a Canadian expedition, a Canadian vessel, or a Canadian aircraft to obtain a permit under the AEPA or to have a permit or authorization from another Protocol Party.  Anyone entering a Canadian station would require an AEPA permit.  In addition, a permit is required in order to conduct a number of prohibited activities taken from the Protocol including mineral exploration, harming wildlife, deposit of waste, activities in specially protected areas, etc…
Application for a Permit
Permit application requirements are set by the Antarctic Environmental Protection Regulations.  The information requirements are stipulated in the regulations and there is an application form appended to the regulations that must be used.  The regulations stipulate that a permit must be issued within 90 days of receipt of the application.  The guidance to applicants states that the application must be received at least 90 days prior to departure for Antarctica, but Environment Canada works with applicants to ensure that they submit their applications sooner in order to allow for permit issuance well before their actual departure date.

Permit applications must include an environmental impact assessment, a waste management plan, and an emergency plan.  The emergency plan must provide a comprehensive plan for emergency response, evacuation, and environmental mitigation.  In the case of private adventure expeditions, contracts for logistics and emergency rescue must be provided.  Insurance documentation is also required.  The Minister may require that a permit applicant provide and maintain a security to cover potential costs needed to prevent, mitigate or remedy any adverse environmental impacts caused by the permit holder while in the Antarctic.  In addition, certificates must be provided for vessels and aircraft to be used on expeditions in order to ensure that they meet minimum requirements for travel in Antarctic conditions and that they are in compliance with all relevant environmental and safety codes.

Guidance documents on the drafting of emergency and waste management plans are available and provided to prospective applicants. Each of these documents includes a template that may be used for submission of plans.  Environment Canada is in the process of creating a similar guidance document for environmental evaluations.
Application Review Process
Environment Canada has assembled a team for permit review in order to ensure sufficient expertise for thorough review.  Environment Canada’s waste management and environmental emergencies divisions review the waste management and emergency plans.  The Department of Transport reviews relevant certificates and provides advice on the suitability of vessels and aircraft and on the emergency plans specific to transportation.  Environment Canada’s Environmental Assessment and Marine Programs Division is the main point of contact with applicants, coordinates the review and permit issuance, and reviews the preliminary environmental evaluations.  Additional departments or agencies may become involved depending upon the nature of the application, for instance Parks Canada for adventure expeditions and the Canadian Polar Commission for scientific project proposals.

It is common during reviews to request additional information and details from permit applicant.  Often additional information is required to make a determination on the preliminary environmental evaluation.  Due to the nature of permitted activities we have not yet had a request that required impact assessment beyond the preliminary screening level.  Additional information is also often required for vessel certificates.  Due to annual expiry of many certificates, permits are often issued contingent upon submission of renewed certificates when they become available.
Permit Conditions
Permits are issued for a single season of activity.  They contain full details on the entity authorized to conduct activities, the vessel or aircraft involved, and the itinerary for the activities.  For vessel based tourism, multiple voyages are listed on a single permit for the Antarctic season.  A standard set of conditions is included in most permits which include obligations under the AEPA and Madrid Protocol, emergency contact procedures, and reporting requirements.  In addition, application reviewers may request inclusion of special precautions in the permit conditions.  Finally, special conditions may be added for particular activities that occur as parts of tours and for activities undertaken as part of adventure expeditions.



