





Special WG on Competent Authorities Issues: 

 Recent Canadian Permitting Issues 









Recent Canadian Permitting Issues
Information Paper presented by Canada
Background
Canada implements its environmental protection obligations under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection through the Antarctic Environmental Protection Act (2003) (AEPA) and the associated Antarctic Environmental Protection Regulations.  The Department of the Environment (Environment Canada) is responsible for administration and enforcement of the AEPA and acts as Canada’s Competent Authority.  Each year Canada issues a number of permits for activities in the Antarctic organized by Canadians or Canadian companies.  Most of these permits are for marine based tourism using vessels with a passenger capacity of between 100 and 200 persons.  Last year Canada issued four marine based tourism permits for a total of 36 voyages carrying approximately 4,000 passengers.  Also issued were one permit for flight support of a scientific research project and one permit for a solo adventure expedition.

In the course of our permitting activities we have identified a number of areas where additional guidance or coordination with other Parties would be of possible benefit.
Adventure activities
Adventure and extreme sport activities are becoming more common, both as part of organized commercial tours and as part of smaller privately organized expeditions.  These activities can be a challenge for Competent Authorities to asses, particularly when the activities have not been previously assessed and the risks are relatively unknown.  Additional guidance on the conduct and authorization of these activities would be of benefit.  Also, a mechanism for identifying and consulting with other Competent Authorities on activities for which they have experience would be beneficial.
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
Of particular note in the past few years is the increasing number of requests for permits to operate unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in Antarctica. Canada received one request in 2014 to include the use of UAVs as part of a film crew’s operations in a marine tour operator’s permit.  This request included an amendment to their preliminary environmental evaluation specific to the use of the UAV.  Upon assessment of the request and the pilot’s experience, Canada approved the use of the UAV by including specific conditions in the operator’s permit, including a condition requiring adherence to the draft IAATO UAV guidelines.  We have also received requests from Canadian passengers planning to travel with both Canadian permitted operators and operators permitted by other Parties.  Our position to date has been that it is the responsibility of the tour operator to decide which activities will be allowed as part of their tour and to seek authorization for those activities from their appropriate Competent Authority.  Canada’s is of the opinion that in order to account for cumulative impacts, tour operations must be assessed for their potential impacts as a whole and not as a number of separate activities.  As such, we will not entertain requests for permits for activities by individuals travelling under the permit of authorized operators.
Canada would be interested in discussing the need for further guidance on the authorization of UAV use and on the views of other Parties on the role of competent authorities in handling similar requests.  We note that while the most recent requests have involved UAVs, the principles discussed here could apply to requests for separate authorization of any activity that occur as part of a larger authorized tour. 
Canadians operating as part of tours organized in other Parties
Canadians often travel in Antarctica as part of small private expeditions which may be organized in and permitted by another Party.  When the Competent Authority receives reports of such activities it can take time and effort to ascertain that the individuals in question have a permit from another Party.  We would be interested in discussing with other Parties how Competent Authorities can better inform each other of activities involving their nationals.
Forum shopping
We have received suggestions that standards and practices for permitting are different between Parties and that it may be beneficial for our operators to seek authorization from other Parties.  What measures have been put in place by Competent Authorities to ensure that the appropriate Party is responsible for authorizations?  We would be interested in a discussion of practices in order to understand the current potential for forum shopping and to ensure that our practices are up to standards.
Activities involving national bases
Canada often receives requests to conduct activities as part of a larger tour that may take place on national bases.  These activities range from large scale sporting events to individual visits to a base by adventure expeditions.  Our position has been that it is the responsibility of the tour organizer to make arrangements with the national program involved and provide evidence of approval of the use of facilities.  We would be interested in any discussion of more formalized coordination procedures to ensure that activities permitted by Canada do not have a negative effect on the operation of national bases.
Reporting issues
We have noted in reviewing this season’s pre-season reporting that multiple entries are being made for the same activity.  For instance, the kite-skiing expedition we permitted this year was reported by Canada as we issued a permit for the activity.  The skier flew into Antarctica and had search and rescue arrangements made with The Antarctic Company and was thus listed in South Africa’s pre-season reporting.  The skier also had a search and rescue contract and was transported out of Antarctica by Antarctic Logistics and Expeditions and was therefore likewise listed in the United States’ pre-season report.  Is there a need for coordination in reporting to ensure that expeditions are adequately represented in the reports or is the current situation adequate?


