





COMNAP Sea Ice Challenges Workshop








COMNAP Sea Ice Challenges Workshop
Background
Sea ice conditions are one of the many challenges for vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty marine area. In recent years, in some parts of the Antarctic, sea ice conditions have been such that those conditions have affected science, science support and logistics operations in the regions. Some parts of the Antarctic are experiencing expanding sea ice extent while other areas are seeing multi-year sea ice remain in areas where, previously, that was not the norm. The nature of changing sea ice conditions creates problems with resupply of both coastal and inland Antarctic research stations and also poses threats to human safety and has the potential to create emergency situations quickly.
Sea Ice Challenges Workshop
Given the challenging nature of recent sea ice conditions in many parts of the Antarctic region, COMNAP agreed to convene the Sea Ice Challenges Workshop which was co-hosted by the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and the Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre (ACE CRC) in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, on 12–13 May 2015. The workshop convenor was Dr. Rob Wooding, AAD General Manager Support & Operations and COMNAP Vice Chair. 

The aim of the Sea Ice Challenges Workshop was to discuss the latest scientific advice on the causes and likely future trends in sea ice expansion, to scope the challenges these trends will pose for national Antarctic programs and other operators, and to identify and discuss potential solutions.

The workshop brought together scientists, Antarctic program managers, sea ice forecasters, ice navigators and shipping experts from around the world to work together in addressing a multi-faceted issue of critical importance to everyone who operates in the area.

The aims of the workshop were to:

(a)      Understand the causes of the expansion in sea ice in the waters around Antarctica;

(b)      Scope the challenges sea ice expansion pose for sustaining Antarctic stations that depend on over water refuelling and resupply;

(c)      Identify and explore potential solutions.

At the time of the writing of this information paper, there were twenty-five speakers from nine different countries presenting, a number of others setting up technology displays and one presentation being delivered virtually to the participants.

The following sessions were part of the workshop programme:

    • Session 1: Recent National Antarctic Program Experiences with Changing Sea Ice 
    • Session 2: Sea Ice Trends
    • Session 3: Sea Ice Technology (Display)
    • Session 4: Operational Implications
    • Session 5: Sea Ice Navigation: Operational Requirements and Technologies
    • Session 6: Alternative Solutions (Including Icebreakers)


A workshop publication is planned for distribution in the next couple of months. 
