





Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2014/15 intersessional period








Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2014/15 intersessional period
Summary
The 17th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XVII) was held in Brasilia, Brazil, from 28 April to 2 May 2014. This paper presents a summary of intersessional activities arising from CEP XVII, as identified in CEP Circular: 1/CEP XVIII. Where appropriate, the details of related papers submitted to CEP XVIII are provided.

Action
CEP XVII report paragraph(s)
CEP Member/Observer
Related papers to CEP XVIII / comments

CEP XVII Agenda Item 3: Strategic Discussions on the Future Work of the CEP
Project sponsors to complete the development of the Antarctic Environments Portal ahead of CEP XVIII. Members to continue to provide feedback via participation in an intersessional reference group.
17

New Zealand, Australia, Belgium, Norway, SCAR, and interested Members
WP 21 Antarctic Environments Portal: Project completion and next steps (Australia, Belgium, New Zealand, Norway, SCAR) 

IP 11 Antarctic Environmental Portal content development and editorial process (Australia, Belgium, New Zealand, Norway, SCAR)
Norway to discuss with Chile and other interested Members the planning of an event, such as a symposium, to be held in conjunction with the 25th anniversary of the Protocol to assess the effectiveness of the dynamics between the CEP as the advisory body and the ATCM. 
21
Norway, Chile, interested Members
WP 44 A symposium celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty (Norway, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, United Kingdom) – also submitted under ATCM 5
Informal discussions during the intersessional period regarding the proposal to prepare an online publication for the 25th anniversary of the adoption of the Protocol. Australia to provide preliminary list of achievements. 
23-24
5 year work plan
(priority 1)
Argentina, Chile, Australia, interested Members
WP 47 Workshop on Education and Outreach - Report of the Informal Discussions on the Development of a Publication on the Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol (Argentina) – also submitted under ATCM 15

CEP XVII Agenda Item 4: Operation of the CEP
Members to participate in ICG established by ATCM XXXVII to review information exchange requirements (regarding discussion of environmental reporting requirements), and prepare for discussion at CEP XVIII to provide advice to ATCM XXXVIII.
29
5 year work plan
(priority 3)
All Members
WP 14 Report of the intersessional contact group established to review information exchange requirements (Australia) – also submitted under ATCM 16
Members to consider opportunities for strengthening cooperation between the ATCM and CEP, with a view to a discussion of these matters at CEP XVIII.
ATCM XXXVII Final Report, para 82
ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan
All Members
Note: In CEP Circular: 1/CEP XVIII, the CEP Chairman encouraged Members to consider opportunities for strengthening cooperation between the CEP and ATCM, with a view to a discussion of these matters at CEP XVIII.

Note: WP 44 A symposium celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty may also be relevant to this action – see above under Agenda Item 3.


CEP XVII Agenda Item 5: Cooperation with other Organisations
Dr Frenot (France), Dr Penhale (United States) and Ms Vallejos (Chile) to represent the CEP at COMNAP XXVI, SC-CAMLR XXXIII and SCAR XXXIII, respectively.
35
France, United States, Chile
IP 8 The Annual Report for 2014/15 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) – also submitted under ATCM 4

IP 12 Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer (CCAMLR)

IP 19 The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Annual Report 2014/15 (SCAR) – also submitted under ATCM 4

IP 106 Report by the CEP Observer to the XXXIII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting (Chile)

Note: The CEP was represented in meetings of other organisations as follows: COMNAP XXVI – Dr Frenot (France); SC-CAMLR XXXIII – Dr Penhale (United States); SCAR XXXIII – Ms Vallejos (Chile) 

CEP XVII Agenda Item 6. Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
Secretariat to include the Checklist for Preliminary Site Assessment in the Clean-Up Manual.
38
Secretariat
Done. See http://www.ats.aq/documents/recatt/att540_e.pdf 
As appropriate, Brazil to provide further updates on the remediation of the Comandante Ferraz station area.
42
Brazil
IP 16 Bioremediation on the Brazilian Antarctic Station area (Brazil)

CEP XVII Agenda Item 7: Climate Change Implications for the Environment: Strategic Approach
Norway and the United Kingdom to continue to lead the ICG on developing a Climate Change Response Work Plan, with a view to completing the work against the ICG terms of reference. 
26
5 year work plan (priority 1)
Norway, United Kingdom, all Members
WP 37 Report from ICG on Climate Change (Norway and United Kingdom)
Secretariat to continue to update the overview of recommendations from the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance.
49
Secretariat
SP 7 Actions taken by the CEP and the ATCM on the ATME recommendations on climate change (Secretariat) – also submitted under ATCM 14
Dr Penhale (United States) to coordinate informal intersessional discussions to further develop the scope / terms of reference for a possible second joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop. Members to consult with their respective SC-CAMLR representatives to prepare for discussion of this issue at SC-CAMLR XXXIII.
53
5 year work plan (priority 1)
United States, all Members
WP 6 Proposed Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop (2016) on climate change and monitoring (United States, United Kingdom) – submitted under Agenda Item 5
Members to encourage further collaboration among interested experts to investigate the applicability of the Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) methodology in Antarctica.
61
United Kingdom, Norway, Germany, Spain, interested Members
WP 38 Application of the RACER (Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience) Conservation Planning Tool to James Ross Island (United Kingdom, Czech Republic)

IP 34 Results of RACER workshop focused on James Ross Island (United Kingdom, Czech Republic)

CEP XVII Agenda Item 8a: Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations
If it decides to proceed with its proposal to construct and operate a new Antarctic research station, China to consider the CEP’s advice and comments from Parties, and address the comments when preparing the required final CEE.
79
China
n/a
If it decides to proceed with its proposal to construct and operate a new Antarctic research station, Belarus to consider the CEP’s advice and comments from Parties, and address the comments when preparing the required final CEE.
88
Belarus
IP 39 Construction and Operation of Belarusian Antarctic Research Station at Mount Vechernyaya, Enderby Land. Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (Belarus)

CEP XVII Agenda Item 8b: Other EIA Matters
All Members to prepare for in-depth discussions on unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) at CEP XVIII. The following to be prepared for CEP XVIII: reports by SCAR and COMNAP on the utility and risks of UAV operation in Antarctica; paper by IAATO on its experience and current practices relating to UAVs; papers referring to Members’ experiences.
97
5 year work plan (priority 2)
All Members, SCAR, COMNAP, IAATO 
WP 22 UAV Use in Antarctica – Risks and Benefits (COMNAP) – also submitted under ATCM 10

WP 27 Wildlife Approach Distances in Antarctica (SCAR) – also submitted under ATCM 13

IP 77 UAV remote sensing of environmental changes on King George Island (South Shetland Islands): preliminary information on the results of the first field season 2014/2015 (Poland)

IP 80 South Africa’s use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) in Antarctica (South Africa)

IP 82 A risk-based approach to safe operations of unmanned aircraft systems in the United States Antarctic Program (USAP) (United States) – also submitted under ATCM 10

IP83 Guidance on unmanned aerial system (UAS) use in Antarctica developed for applications to scientific studies on penguins and seals (United States) – also submitted under ATCM 10

IP 88 IAATO Policies on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV)
United States to conduct informal intersessional consultations with interested Members to discuss further the issue of coastal camping activities conducted by non-governmental activities, and how best to proceed.
100
United States, interested Members
n/a
Australia and the United Kingdom to lead an ICG to review the EIA Guidelines.
110-111
5 year work plan (priority 2)
Australia, United Kingdom, all Members
WP 13 Initial report of the intersessional contact group established to review the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Australia and United Kingdom)
France, Belgium and interested Members to continue reflecting on matters relating to the level of environmental impact assessment conducted for activities.
121
France, Belgium and interested Members
Note: see WP 13 above.

CEP XVII Agenda Item 9a: Management Plans
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) to continue its intersessional review of the management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 144 Chile Bay, ASPA 145 Port Foster and ASPA 146 South Bay, and to conduct an intersessional review of ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula and ASPA 150 Ardley Island.
141, 153
5 year work plan (priority 1)
SGMP
WP 15 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on 2014/15 Intersessional Work (Norway)
SGMP to conduct work under its terms of reference 4 & 5, as outlined in the work plan agreed by CEP XVII, including initiating work to develop guidance for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans, inter alia by developing a work plan for the process.
157-158
5 year work plan (priority 1)
SGMP
WP 15 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on 2014/15 Intersessional Work (Norway)
China to lead further informal intersessional discussions on its proposal to designate a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) at Kunlun station, Dome A.
160
China, interested Members
WP 48 Report of the Informal Discussions for Another Intersessional Period on the Proposal for a New Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A (China)

CEP XVII Agenda Item 9c: Site Guidelines
United Kingdom to keep coordinating an informal process to seek and collate information on National Operators’ use of site guidelines.
5 year work plan (priority 2)
United Kingdom, all relevant Members
IP 119 National Antarctic Programme use of locations with Visitor Site Guidelines in 2014-15 (United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, United States)

CEP XVII Agenda Item 9d: Human Footprint and Wilderness Values
Members to consider guidance regarding wilderness values when participating in the ICG to review the EIA Guidelines.
178
5 year work plan (priority 2)
All Members
Note: see WP 13 above (at Agenda Item 8b)

CEP XVII Agenda Item 9e: Marine Spatial Protection and Management
Belgium to lead ICG to discuss “outstanding values” in the Antarctic marine environment.
186
5 year work plan (priority 1)
Belgium, all Members
WP 20 The concept of "outstanding values" in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol (Belgium) – submitted under Agenda Item 9d

IP 10 The concept of "outstanding values" in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol (Belgium) – submitted under Agenda Item 9d

CEP XVII Agenda Item 9f: Other Annex V Matters
Norway to lead informal intersessional discussions on the need for and development of procedures concerning ASPA and ASMA designation.
198
5 year work plan (priority 1)
Norway, interested Members
WP 29 A suggested ASPA/ASMA prior assessment process (Norway) – submitted under Agenda Item 9e
As appropriate, Members to hold further discussions on the protection of outstanding geological features.
203
All Members
Note: SCAR reports in IP 19 The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Annual Report 2014/15 that an Action Group on Geoheritage and Geoconservation was approved during the 2014 SCAR Delegates Meeting – see Agenda Item 5 
Argentina to consider comments raised at CEP XVII regarding the protection of Antarctic fossils, to consult with interested Members and, as appropriate, to develop a new Working Paper for CEP XVIII.
216
Argentina, interested Members
WP 50 Results of the informal consultations on the protection of Antarctic fossils. Possible courses of action for further discussion (Argentina) – submitted under Agenda Item 9e
Members to consider how to accommodate monitoring issues in a future review of the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
231
All Members
n/a

CEP XVII Agenda Item 10a: Quarantine and Non-Native Species
Prepare for review of Non-Native Species Manual. Consider informal discussion group/
5 year work plan (priority 1)
All Members
WP 28 Revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2011) (United Kingdom, France, New Zealand)

CEP XVII Agenda Item 11: Environmental Monitoring and Reporting
National Antarctic Programs that have existing ground control information or that can acquire new ground control in ASMAs or ASPAs are encouraged to offer those data to the Polar Geospatial Center (PGC) at the University of Minnesota for use in the production of digital elevation models (DEMs). Members are invited to provide comments to the PGC through the United States CEP representative about which ASMAs and ASPAs should be given higher priority for DEM production.
257
All relevant / interested Members
n/a
Interested Members to continue with work planned by New Zealand, Australia, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States to develop a new methodology to analyse site sensitivities.
256
New Zealand, Australia, Norway, United Kingdom, United States, interested Members
IP 103 A Methodology to Assess Site Sensitivity at Visitor Sites: Progress Report (Australia, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom, United States)

CEP XVII Agenda Item 13: General Matters
COMNAP to report to CEP XVIII on outcomes from the COMNAP Waste Water Management Workshop.
268
COMNAP
IP 74 Waste Water Management in Antarctica
COMNAP Workshop (COMNAP) – also submitted under ATCM 10


