





Report by the CEP Observer to the XXXIII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting

English translation provided by the author











Report by the CEP Observer 
to the XXXIII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting
Information Paper submitted by Chile
Summary
The XXXIII Meeting of Delegates of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, SCAR, was developed between September 1st and 3rd, 2014, in Auckland, New Zealand.
This paper presents the most important aspects of this meeting for knowledge of the CEP.
    1. Introduction
In the XVI CEP, , the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, SCAR, as occurred in 2012, invited again the Committee on Environmental Protection to participate as an observer at the meeting to be held in New Zealand.
The CEP accepted the invitation and nominated the delegate of Chile as an observer to the XXXIII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting, to be held in Auckland, New Zealand, in September 2014.
That meeting was attended by delegates from 27 countries; associate members from 5 countries; 6 observers associations, and representatives of the 8 SCAR subsidiary groups.
A total of 37 working papers, WP, and 14 Information Papers, IP, were presented and discussed in the course of the meeting.
The documents presented and discussed are available in the SCAR web site, in the link http://www.scar.org/meetings/33scar-papers, while the Report of the XXXIII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting is available in http://www.scar.org/scar_media/documents/publications/bulletins/Bulletin190.pdf.
    2. Development of the meeting
The SCAR Delegates Meeting took place from September 1st to 3rd, 2014 and was chaired by Dr. Jerónimo López-Martínez, once the SCAR Open Science Meeting concluded.
The representatives of the Standing Scientific Groups of Physical Sciences, Life Sciences and Geosciences, presented their progress and future plans.
Likewise, representatives of the Scientific Research Programmes - Astronomy and Astrophysics from Antarctica (AAA); State of the Antarctic Ecosystem (AntEco); Antarctic Thresholds- Ecosystem Resilience and Adaptation (AnT-ERA); Antarctic Climate Change in the 21st Century (AntClim21); Past Antarctic Ice Sheet Dynamics (PAIS) and Solid Earth Responses and Influences on Cryospheric Evolution (SERCE) - presented their development in the period and the challenges ahead.
Next are presented the relevant aspects of this meeting, which may be of interest to the Committee of Environmental Protection.
    3. Relevant aspects of the meeting
    • During this meeting, two new countries were added as associate members. The Czech Republic and Iran showed its commitment to the development of Antarctic research. Seven more countries have expressed interest in joining as members of SCAR, five of which are currently Non-Consultative Parties of the Antarctic Treaty.
    • Dr. Steven Chown concluded his term as Chief Officer of the Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System, SCATS, assuming the position Dr. Aleks Terauds. The observer of the CPA took the opportunity to thank the SCATS, and Dr. Chown, the support given to the Committee in the past, and wished Dr. Terauds the greatest success in the task starts, hoping to continue collaboration Antarctic environmental areas.
    • Prior to the development of the Meeting of Delegates, during Open Scientific Meeting of SCAR, the Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System, SCATS, organized a "flipped symposium" in which 10 jobs that delivered the current view of occurred Antarctic researchers on conservation, biodiversity, monitoring, protected sites, local impacts, invasive species and the role of National Antarctic Programs, and the challenges they present to the Antarctic Treaty System and the international scientific community. The presentations from this symposium are available on the link http://www.scar.org/antarctic-treaty-system/scats/flipped-symposium.
    4. Next meeting
The next SCAR Delegates Meeting will be held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in August 2016.

XXXIII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting 
Auckland, New Zealand, 1-3 September 2014

AGENDA

1. Opening Business 
2. Membership
3. SCAR Officers
4. Science 
4.1 The SCAR Horizon Scan
4.2 SCAR SSGs: Highlights, Progress and Plans
4.3 SCAR Scientific Research Programmes
4.4 Other Science Topics
5. Data and Information: Highlights, Progress and Plans
6. Partnerships: Highlights, Progress and Plans
7. SCAR and Policy Advice
9. Capacity Building, Education and Training: Progress and Plans
8. Communications: Progress and Plans
9. Major Meetings
10. SCAR Business
11. Finance
12. Actions Arising
13. Elections
14. Closure of the meeting


