





Workshop on Education and Outreach - Key Dissemination and Education Activities in the Chilean Antarctic Science Programme






Workshop on Education and Outreach - Key Dissemination and Education Activities in the Chilean Antarctic Science Programme 

Information Paper Submitted by Chile


Summary

Chile conducts numerous activities within a dissemination and education programme in Antarctic science, whose primary purpose is to engage nationals in Antarctic research, encouraging its social values in a wide range of settings. Its main feature involves facilitating multiple actions in education, culture and scientific journalism, working in partnerships and in an articulated fashion with various organisations and social actors in Chile and abroad. 

This paper briefly describes main aspects of the Chilean Antarctic strategy in education and dissemination during the last decade. 

Introduction 

Aware of the relevance of disseminating Antarctic values and the science conducted in the Antarctic territory, the Chilean Antarctic Science Programme has carried out various activities during the last few years to contribute to the building of the social capital of citizens, helping them to understand and disseminate our rich cultural heritage in the White Continent. 

Today this dissemination and education effort bears vital importance in educating newer generations of citizens who will discuss the future of the Antarctic Treaty System in a globalised world. 

Antarctic School Fair

The Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) has been organising a programme called Antarctic School Fair (FAE) for the last eleven years, targeted at secondary school students across the country with a view to stimulate their interest in Antarctic science. This programme has three stages: 1) A contest of projects; 2) A fair, i.e. an exhibition of selected projects in Punta Arenas; and 3) An Antarctic expedition with the awarded groups for each edition of the fair.

In 2014, 160 projects were submitted (107 literature reviews and 53 experimental papers), 66% of which were supported by scholars. From the submitted papers, 26 groups (16.2%) were selected, based on a ranking score determined by a jury of polar scientists. These groups later comprised the Antarctic School Fair, a five-day event open to the community. Students were then evaluated in an oral presentation and in their stands. The five best ranking projects will go on an Antarctic School Expedition to King George Island for five days during the Antarctic summer. They will carry out scientific activities and visit Chilean and other countries' stations in the area.  During the ten years of contests, 1,863 students have submitted their projects, stimulating the aspiration of students and teachers interested in science to visit Antarctica.  

One of the positive impacts of this programme has been the outstanding performance of FAE's Antarctic projects in international contests, with the granting of a Junior Water Prize in Stockholm, Sweden, in 2012 and the first place in the international category at the Science, Technology and Innovation Fair in Medellin, Colombia, in 2014.

Another relevant outcome has been the cooperation between various Antarctic programmes. Students and teachers from Finland and the United States participated in 2013 and 2014 respectively, fostering a multicultural dialogue among young people from different countries with an Antarctic scientific programme.  

Additionally, as a cooperation effort between INACH and the Division of Polar Programs of the US National Science Foundation, a Chilean Science teacher participated in a secondment for 25 days in the International Program “PolarTREC - Teachers and Researchers Exploring and Collaborating” in 2014. 

Further Educational Initiatives

Since 2007, scientists from INACH have been providing a three-day training workshop in Antarctic topics to staff from the National Board of Nursery Schools (JUNJI). This workshop is coordinated by both institutions to stimulate children's interest in Antarctic science from an early age. This training workshop is focused on a particular main topic every year, and trainers and children exhibit their work to the school community every November.

In addition, two new actions were conducted last year to encourage students from the Magallanes region to come in contact with Antarctic science, developing two programmes “Antarctic Scientists for a Day” and “Antarctic Science Reporters”. The former involves visiting Antarctic Laboratories “Ambassador Jorge Berguño Barnes” and encouraging students to experiment and come in contact with scientists. The latter is a contest calling on students of different ages from Punta Arenas to write a report on research papers submitted at the Antarctic School Fair. The selected report is published by local press.

Media

Since 2012, INACH has been supporting the development of scientific outreach divisions in the two largest print media companies in the Magallanes and Chilean Antarctic Region in order to cooperate and contribute to the dissemination of science. The working methodology consists in revising and reprinting expert papers published in the Chilean Antarctic Bulletin journal and publishing reports on Antarctic science by INACH reporters, reaching an annual production of over 100 papers and opinion columns in the last two years.  

Additionally, INACH has established a strategic partnership with Imagen de Chile Foundation to promote the dissemination of high level contents strengthening Chile's global positioning. International news agencies have also been invited to cover Chile's Scientific Expedition to Antarctica, achieving a high coverage in English-speaking and Latin American media and producing 2,400 news stories during the last Antarctic season.  

Arts and Culture


The link between the arts and culture, and Antarctic science has been fostered. Outstanding initiatives include: Project A - “Artistic Residences in Antarctica” (2012-2013) supported by a collaboration agreement between the National Council for Culture and the Arts and INACH. This was part of the Council's Programme “Sello Región” and was carried out in partnership with the above mentioned bodies and various public and private organisations.

In addition, Coloane Workshops “Arts, Science, Antarctica” (2011-2013) offer an open space for reflection to discuss topics related to Antarctica, Science and the Arts. An International Film Festival on Antarctic Environment and Sustainability, Ficams, (2011-2015) has also been in place. 

The première of the play “Piloto Pardo: el Rescate en la Antártica” (Pilot Pardo: Rescue in Antarctica) (2013) reveals and highlights the historic figure of Pilot Luis Pardo and his heroic deed in rescuing Endurance crew in 1916 from the White Continent. 

Plastic arts projects have been supported in public spaces, creating big murals that depict the Antarctic history of Punta Arenas. These projects include the following: “Restoring public space with an urban architectural mural” (2013) and “Antarctic Biodiversity portrayed in glass mosaic and ceramic murals” (2015). 

INACH has supported the production of TV shows such as “Terra Incógnita” (Mysterious Land) (2009), “El último confín del mundo” (Far Corner of the World) (2012), “La Fuerza de la Tierra” (Strength of the Earth) (2012), “Los jóvenes en el Continente Blanco” (Youth in the White Continent) (2012), “Cambio Global” (Global Change) (2013) and “Chile, laboratorio natural” (Chile, Natural Lab) (2013). Chile has also participated in restoring Chilean film heritage in Antarctica by sponsoring the documentary “El Continente de la Luz” (Continent of Light), which recounts the country's first expeditions to the southern territories. 

Publications 

INACH annually issues several publications aimed at disseminating the latest scientific developments in Antarctic science for the general public. The Chilean Antarctic Bulletin is its main publication, distributed free of charge and available for download from its website www.inach.cl 

The guide “Traces of Antarctica around Punta Arenas and the Straits of Magellan” recounting the Antarctic history of the area was published in 2013. This has served as training material for tourists and the general public.  

Lastly, INACH has also been producing material in English during the last few years, in particular a summary of the Chilean Antarctic Bulletin and the National Programme for Antarctic Science – PROCIEN, as a response to the need of communicating developments of Chile's Antarctic Programme and generating collaboration opportunities with other countries. With a view to enlarge these contents, a new journal has been created in 2014: Ilaia. Advances in Chilean Antarctic Science.

Other publications sponsored by the Chilean Antarctic Programme include the following children's books: Fantasía Antártica (Antarctic Fantasy) (2007), El Sueño de Elvis (Elvis' Dream) (2013), Odisea Antártica, Piloto Pardo y Shackleton (Antarctic Odyssey, Pilot Pardo and Schackleton) (2015) and Guido no puede dormir (Guido can't sleep) (2015).


