





Workshop on Education and Outreach - Norway’s Antarctic Education and Outreach Activities










Norway’s Antarctic Education and Outreach Activities
Summary
This paper outlines the education and outreach activities undertaken by Norway in the most recent years. It includes two publications on the Antarctic, a royal visit for the celebration of the 10-year anniversary of Troll station as an all year station, the free database “Quantartica”, updating the Norwegian Polar Institute’s website and fact sheets, the production of maps on the Antarctic, participation in the establishment of the Antarctic Environmental Portals, as well as the production of a white paper on the Antarctic that is planned to be presented later this year. These activities from the recent years of Norwegian outreach and education activities show Norway’s ongoing dedication to performing outreach and education activities related to the Antarctic.

Introduction
In connection to the Workshop on Education and Outreach to be held in Sofia in relation to the ATCMXXXVIII, Norway has put together a summary of Norway’s most recent education and outreach activities. There are at present no dedicated educational programs, but a number of the outreach and education activities are applicable to schools and educational purposes.
Norway´s education and outreach related activities in recent years:

Publications
There are currently two different publications on the Antarctic used in outreach and education. The brochures were recently updated in conjunction with the celebration of the 10-year anniversary for the Norwegian Antarctic Research Station “Troll”.  
 
The publication “Antarktis-kort fortalt” (Antarctica-brief stories) was produced by the Norwegian Polar Institute. The brochure is mainly a compilation of adapted information texts that were released on the Norwegian Polar Institute’s website during the outreach project: “The Anniversary Expedition 1911-2011”. This expedition followed in the tracks of Roald Amundsen’s expedition to the South Pole to mark the one hundred year celebration for his exploits. The brochure contains information about the Antarctic, focused on the history of the Antarctic, climate and environment, flora and fauna, and lastly a section with other interesting information such as information about claims, research and waste management. The publication is structured in such a way that it has short informational pieces written in a question and answer format. The brochure is aimed at the general public. It is available in Norwegian only, but the ambition is to also publish an English version.

The publication: «Norway in the Antarctic» (2014) was published by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and prepared by the Norwegian Polar Institute in cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, the Ministry of Climate and Environment, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries, and the Institute of Marine Research. This publication provides an overview of Norwegian activities in the Antarctic, the geography of the Antarctic, Norwegian cultural heritage in the region, expeditions, the current management regime (The Antarctic Treaty, The Environment Protocol and CCAMLR), Norwegian research activity, commercial interests and resource management, and Norwegian Antarctic policy and legislation. As such, the focus of this publication differs from the first publication as it does not use storytelling, but instead focuses on informing on the situation in the Antarctic in a succinct manner. The brochure is aimed at members of the public wishing to learn more about the Antarctic, the legal framework, and Norwegian activities in the region. It is available in Norwegian (printed and web) and English (printed and web). 

Norwegian Polar Institute website 
The Norwegian Polar Institute’s website provides information on a range of Antarctic topics. This includes fact sheets on the Antarctic with information ranging from geological and biological information to the history of the Antarctic. These are regularly updated, and the next update is set for later this year. There is also access to the multi-disciplinary scientific Open Access peer-reviewed journal Polar Research.

Maps of the Antarctic
The Norwegian Polar Institute is the main authority on mapping in the Norwegian polar regions, and publishes printed and digital maps. The Institute is the main publisher of topographical and geological maps of the Norwegian polar regions. A topographical map of Antarctica was published in 2013, and is available on the Institutes’ website. The map won the price for best map in the public vote at the national cartographic conference in 2013, and was through this qualified to the 26th International Cartographic Conference in Dresden, Germany the same year.  

Exhibitions
Norway, through the Norwegian Polar Institute, regularly contribute to exhibitions at museums and science centres. One of the most recent collaborations is with “Polaria” in Arctic Tromsø, on their current exhibition called “Priceless”. The exhibition focuses on ice in the polar regions, and features short films, pictures and music played on ice cores from the Arctic and the Antarctic.

Antarctic Environmental Portal Project 
Norway has been heavily involved in the project to establish the Antarctic Environmental Portal. This portal aims to provide a link between Antarctic science and Antarctic policy. This is done through making science-based information available to the Antarctic Treaty System’s Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and all the Antarctic Treaty nations. All scientific information available through the Portal is based on published, peer-reviewed science and has been through a rigorous editorial review process.

Quantarctica
Quantarctica is a collection of Antarctic geographical datasets, and works with QGIS, a free and open source geographic information system. It is free for non-commercial use, such as research, education, and operations in Antarctica. Quantarctica was originally developed for in-house use at the Norwegian Polar Institute. It is currently aimed mostly at in-field researcher, but aims to expand to become a source of information for the wider public. 

Royal visit to mark the 10-year anniversary of the Norwegian Antarctic research station “Troll”
On February 12th 2015, HM King Harald of Norway visited the Norwegian Antarctic research station “Troll” together with the Minister of Climate and Environment Tine Sundtoft, and Minster of Justice Anders Anundsen. The occasion for the visit was to mark the 10-year anniversary of the research station. The visit garnered much media attention in Norway, and with large amounts of information about the visit, Antarctic research, climate change, as well as information about the research station featured in national newspapers and on national news channels. Also, the Norwegian Polar Institute, the Ministries and the institutions involved, published information about the visit on their social media platforms ranging from the home pages to Twitter and Facebook. These publications focused on explaining Norwegian activities in the Antarctic, research, and the challenge of climate change. In addition to this, several of the involved Ministries and institutions have published articles after the visit. The visit was used as an opportunity to undertake education and outreach not only towards the public, but also towards politicians and policy makers on Antarctic issues. 

White paper on the Antarctic
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is currently producing a white paper on the Antarctic, which is set to be released later this year. It will be presented to the Norwegian national assembly (the Storting) on June 14. This will be the first white paper on the Antarctic produced by Norway since 1939. The paper will serve as an important source of information for the public, as well as industry and decision makers. In association with the release of this white paper, the Foreign Ministry has held, and will be holding, a series of seminars on Norwegian Antarctic history and policy to make the topics better known to the public. Information will also be made available through media events following the release of the white paper. 



