ANTARCTIC TREATY               
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE   
TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE          

              TRATADO ANTARTICO        
              PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA  
              ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./4

10 July 1961

(Original in English)

Address of Welcome on the Occasion of the Opening of the
First Antarctic Consultative Meeting by the Prime Minister
and Minister of State for External Affairs of Australia,
the Right Honourable R.G. Menzies, C.H., Q.C., M.P.

10 July 1961

Mr. Chairman, Your Excellencies and Delegates - It is a very great pleasure
for me to be able to welcome you here and to declare the Conference open.
As a matter of fact, I thought this morning, as I peered through the fog,
that we had gone to some trouble to give you a proper Antarctic welcome.
The atmosphere seems precisely right for it this morning.  But, as you know,
we are delighted, and indeed honoured, that you should have come here for the
first Conference under the Treaty.

I have one personal regret, and that is that my former colleague, now
Lord Casey, who played a most active part in the negotiation of this Treaty,
is not here - for the very simple reason that he has given up being in this
Parliament or in my Government.  However, I think I am right in saying,
Sir, that he maintains his interest, because at about this very time he is
due to be in the Soviet Union having a look at the Polar Institute at
Leningrad.

We, of course, are a country very close to the Antarctic. We have,
over a number of years, had great interests in it. We have had the pleasure
of being associated with some very notable work of exploration in that part
of the world, and I think that you would wish me to refer to the most
pleasant fact that we have here to-day Lady Mawson, the widow of a man

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
2.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC ./4

10 July 1961
(Original in English)

whose name is famous in all circles in which Antarctic research is regarded as of importance.

So, we have not only a sense of neighbourhood about the Antarctic; we also have, over many years, a deep and practical interest in it. To-day there are twelve nations represented here - four of them what we call"nuclear powers." This, I think, is tremendously significant, because the Treaty itself - and the whole spirit in which it was conceived - have concentrated round three major principles which we would do well to bear in mind. The first of these is that this region is not to be regarded as a region in which preparations for war or conflict can be engaged in. It would not, perhaps, be grammatically accurate to say that it is demilitarized, because it has never been militarized; but it is to be non-militarized, and this is of tremendous importance because if, in this great area of the world, and with the modern development of weapons of destruction, you could have a conflict, or preparation for conflict, a new horror would be added to the world.

Consequently, all the nations concerned have agreed that this is not a place of war, but that this is a place of scientific research, of study, of enlarging the boundaries of knowledge, of friendly co-operation.

The second thing about it is the emphasis that it places upon co-operation. I can remember - you all can - not so long ago when we first heard about the International Geophysical Year, and many of us - non-scientific people like me - had only the vaguest ideas of what that meant. It turned out to be a most remarkable demonstration of co-operation, with each country helping the other, with the pooling of the results, with the advantages that all felt could be secured from the activities of each. It was a notable example of international scientific co-operation. I need hardly say now that it seems a contradiction in terms that any scientific investigation should be regarded as purely national. In the whole nature of science it is an international matter. Knowledge must find its way round the world into scientific minds and non-scientific minds of all kinds, and, here in the Antarctic, we are going to have, more and more as a result of this association between us, co-operation in scientific research and the establishing of the result for the benefit of mankind all over the world.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
3.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./4

10 July 1961

(Original in English)

The third thing is that under the Treaty we have agreed to set
aside the argument about territorial claims. Nobody abandons his own.
We have made territorial claims in the Antarctic - quite expensive ones.
I dare say that there are nations represented here to-day who would not
agree with some of our claims. There is all this possibility of
arguments. There are some nations who do not think that anybody has
a territorial claim at all and, by a singular stroke of wisdom I think,
when this Treaty was being negotiated it was agreed not to abandon claims
but to put on one side the argument about them. I think that was very
sensible. We said to each other, "Look, there are more important things than
arguing about our rights. The most important thing is to get on with
the work in co-operation with each other, and if, some day, somebody
wants to argue about territorial rights, that will be time enough for it,
but we will have established in the meantime that when twelve nations
concentrate their best resources of intellectual power and of bold and
exploratory spirit in an area like the Antarctic enormous things may result
for the world as a whole."

Sir, having all these things in mind I repeat that I offer a very
warm welcome to all the delegates. I declare the Conference open, and
I am confident that the work you do will be brought to a complete success.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
