ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING       PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE    ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./15
10 July 1961
(Original in Russian)

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR. IVAN F. KURDIUKOV, LEADER
OF THE U.S.S.R. DELEGATION, AT THE OPENING SESSION OF
THE MEETING
10 July 1961

Mr. Chairman, Delegates,

The Delegation of the Soviet Union endorses the reference made
by other delegations to you personally, Mr. Chairman, and expresses
the hope that in our work mutual cooperation and good will may prevail.

I would like to take this opportunity to greet the delegates
of the countries participating in this Meeting and to express the
hope that constant cooperation in the fulfilment of the tasks before
us will be maintained among all delegations.

We are gathered here in order to discuss questions pertaining
to the Sixth Continent on the basis and in the spirit of the Antarctic
Treaty signed at Washington in December 1959.

In accordance with the Treaty, Antarctica must be used exclusively
for peaceful aims. Any undertakings of a military nature including the
establishment of military bases and fortifications, the carrying out
of military manoeuvres as well as testing of any kind of weapons,
being prohibited.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DCC./15
10 July 1961
(Original in Russian)

- 2 -

It is very important to point out that the carrying out of any
nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste material in
the Antarctic are forbidden. Thus Antarctica becomes a demilitarized
and neutral region and also an atom-free zone.

This Treaty, establishing the legal status of Antarctica con-
stitutes a sound basis for cooperation among the countries participating
in the exploration and assimilation of this continent in the interests,
and for the well-being, of all peoples.

At the same time the Antarctic Treaty constitutes a good example
of the way in which, with good will and an understanding of each other's
interests the Governments concerned may, finally, arrive at a common
viewpoint in keeping with the interests not only of the participating
countries, but of all mankind.

One of the most important provisions of the Washington Treaty
is the one incorporated in the Preamble and Article I, stating that
"it is in the interests of all mankind that Antarctica shall continue
forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not
become the scene or object of international discord".

This provision of the Treaty fully meets the fundamental problem
facing mankind today - the problem of preserving and consolidating
peace between all states, of developing and strengthening friendship
among the nations of the whole world.

Another important point of the Washington Treaty is the provision
in Article II referring to freedom of scientific investigation in
Antarctica and the cooperation of scientists towards that end. As you
know, the Treaty provides for the exchange of data and the results of
scientific observations in Antarctica and free access to them, as well
as the exchange of scientific personnel between expeditions and stations
of different countries engaged in scientific research there.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
MEETING UNCLASSSIFIED
DOC./15
10 July 1961
(Original in Russian)

- 3 -

The above provisions, already applied in practice, will further contribute to the rapid and effective scientific investigation of the Sixth Continent in the interests of all mankind.

You are no doubt aware, Gentlemen, that Russian scientists have taken an active part in the discovery and exploration of the Sixth Continent.

As far back as the beginning of last century the expeditions carried out by the Russian navigators Lazarev and Bellingshausen explored a considerable part of the Antarctic coastline and by doing so, in actual fact paved the way for the discovery and exploration of Antarctica. This work is being successfully continued by Soviet scientists. During the period which has elapsed since the signing of the Treaty in Washington, Soviet scientists have carried out a whole series of important scientific investigations in Antarctica, thereby adding a substantial contribution to the world's store of knowledge of the Sixth Continent.

By 1961 Soviet expeditions spent five winters on the Antarctic continent and had carried out six naval expeditions in Antarctic waters. The total number of personnel taking part in these expeditions exceeded 2,000, of whom 709 wintered over.

Although in virtue of its International Geophysical Year commitments, the Soviet Union was called upon to organize four scientific stations in the Antarctic, it in fact became necessary to set up from time to time and at various periods a total of twelve scientific stations in order to penetrate into the continent and to cope more fully with its scientific problems.

Substantial contributions to the study of Antarctica have been made by Soviet polar explorers in the course of their advance into the continent on vessels and their scientific aerial surveys. Soviet vessels have covered more than 10,500 miles of the surface of the Antarctic.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./15
10 July 1961
(Original in Russian)

- 4 -

Soviet scientists have discovered and mapped more than 300
new geographical features in the Antarctic, among them great mountain
ranges, plateaux, valleys, bays and islands.

Between 1959 and 1961 Soviet scientists published eighteen
volumes of scientific material from the expeditions and issued more
than 500 separate works and more than fifty new maps.

The explorations carried out in Antarctica by Soviet scientists
have proved their importance in throwing light on many natural phenomena
occurring on the earth which call for scientific study. The work of
Soviet polar explorers has proceded in close collaboration at the
scientific level with scientists from other countries in a spirit of
friendship and mutual assistance.

However, the Sixth Continent has not yet revealed to mankind
all its secrets, and scientists of different countries still face
a great, difficult, but honourable task in the exploration of Antarctica.

The Soviet Government, Gentlemen, considers that the fundamental
pledge of success in the investigation and assimilation of Antarctica
is to be found in the strict implementation by all countries of the
provisions of the Washington Treaty. As far as the Soviet Union is
concerned it has at all times carried out scrupulously and consistently
the international obligations undertaken by it. This also applies
fully to our obligations under the Antarctic Treaty.

The Soviet Delegation hopes that the First Consultative Meeting
of Governments - parties to the Antarctic Treaty will work out
recommendations for the effective realization of the provisions of the
Treaty and that the Meeting will proceed in a spirit of cooperation
and mutual understanding and arrive at a successful solution of the
tasks before it.

The Soviet Delegation, for its part, will exert every effort to
contribute to the success of this Meeting.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
