ANTARCTIC TREATY              
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE      
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              



TRATADO ANTARTICO              
PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA       
ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./12

10 July 1961

(Original in English)

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR. S.C. JOHNSTON, LEADER OF THE
NEW ZEALAND DELEGATION, AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE MEETING

10 July 1961

May I congratulate you, Sir Chairman, on your election to this
important office.  I think it most appropriate that you should have been
elected firstly for your personal qualifications and also in view of the
important part that your country has played in the field of Antarctic
exploration, and indeed in the conclusion of the Antarctic Treaty under
which we are meeting now. For these reasons I think it appropriate also
that we should be meeting in Canberra for this First Consultative Meeting,
and I should like to express to you, Sir, our sincere appreciation of
your Government's generosity in acting as host to this meeting.  I
also congratulate you on the excellence of the arrangements that have
been made.

Ten years ago it would have seemed optimistic to predict that the
twelve nations with a record of Antarctic exploration and interest would
have produced that historic document, the Antarctic Treaty, under the
provisions of which we are meeting here today for the first time.  The
entry into force of the Treaty and this First Consultative Meeting represent
the beginning of a realistic and practical attempt to ensure that an entire
continent, the size of Europe and the United States combined, should, in
the words of the preamble, be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and
shall not become the object of international discord.  It is the
belief of the New Zealand Government that under the Treaty scientific activity
will be carried out in the future, as it has been in the past, in peaceful
conditions, in a spirit of cooperation, with scientific knowledge from
Antarctica benefiting all mankind.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 2 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./12

10 July 1961

(Original in English)

The Treaty has met most of the objectives of the New Zealand 
Government. It provides a framework for international co-operation in 
scientific activities, and affirms the principle of freedom of access to 
Antarctica for peaceful scientific purposes. It stipulates that Antarctica 
is to be used for peaceful purposes only. Its demilitarization provisions 
should effectively seal off the continent from the tensions of the outside 
world. All measures of a military nature are prohibited, all nuclear 
explosions are banned, and the disposal of radio-active waste in Antarctica 
is prohibited. These provisions are of considerable importance to New 
Zealand, for Antarctica is of course at our backdoor. The inspection pro-
visions will subject all aspects of national bases to the appraisal of 
observers who may go anywhere in Antarctica at any time to establish what 
activities are being undertaken. New Zealand bases in Antarctica will of 
course be open for inspection at any time. The Treaty also provides the 
basis for avoiding rivalries and quarrels over territorial claims and con-
flicting national interests in Antarctica. Peaceful scientific co-operation 
can therefore continue unhampered by disputes. Any member of the United 
Nations can become a party to the Treaty and any other State may be invited 
to become a party to it by unanimous consent of the contracting parties. 
It has thus been effectively demonstrated that the Treaty is not an attempt 
by the twelve signatories to monopolise Antarctica and exclude the rest of 
the world.

New Zealand's interest in Antarctica is long-standing. For almost 150 
years men have been irresistibly drawn to the windiest, coldest and most in-
accessible of continents and New Zealand has been the staging point for a 
number of great expeditions of the past. In recent years our own expeditions 
have made a significant contribution to the cause of Antarctic exploration 
and the advancement of science. During and since the International Geophys-
ical Year, man's knowledge of Antarctica has increased beyond all expectations. 
It was this scientific stimulus that printed the way to the political nego-
tiations leading to the conclusion of the Antarctic Treaty. We must now 
focus our attention once more on scientific co-operation. Let us once 
again demonstrate our belief in the spirit of co-operation in Antarctic 
affairs. The New Zealand delegation is confident that the deliberations 
of this meeting will be conducted in the constructive atmosphere that was 
a characteristic of the Washington Conference, and that a firm basis will be 
provided for consolidating and extending the co-operation which has so 
happily, and so fruitfully grown up between the nations with a direct 
interest in the Antarctic Continent.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
