ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING     PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./11

10 July 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR. SABURO OHTA, LEADER OF THE
JAPANESE DELEGATION, AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE
MEETING.

10 July 1961

Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen -

May I take this opportunity to extend, on behalf of the
members of the Japanese delegation and myself, congratulations to you,
the Hon. J. G. Gorton, on your election as Chairman of this ?eting. I
am sure that, with your wisdom and impartiality and wide experience, this
meeting will be conducted in a harmonious and fruitful manner.

I would also like to express my gratitude to the Govern-
ment of Australia and all those concerned who have made all the arrangemonts
in preparation for the First Consultative Meeting, and particularly for the
hospitality extended to us. The high regard in which Australia's efforts in
Antarctica and her contribution towards the successful conclusion of the
Antarctic Treaty were held was shown by the unanimous choice of Canberra as
the site for the first ?eeting as marked in the text of the Tronty.

I cannot pass without mentioning the painstaking efforts
of all the members at the Interim Meeting of Representatives of Antarctic
Treaty Signatories in ?ashington, which did a great deal to establish the
basis on which the present ?eeting is to carry out its tasks.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 2 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC ./11

10 July 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

Sir, I would like to speak a few words about the policies and fundamental thinking of my Government on the subject of this Meeting.

As many distinguished delegates here may well be aware, Japan's interest in the Antarctic area dates back to the turn of the century, when a Japanese expedition under Lt. Shirase explored the Ross Sea and areas adjacent to it as far South as 80 degrees of latitude. Since 1934, our fleets have been actively engaged in whaling operations there, except for the war years.

More recently, we have despatched scientific expeditions to Antarctica every year since 1956, when the scientific programme was instituted under the International Geophysical Year. We have already sent five wintering parties, the fifth one being now in Antarctica, to carry out scientific research programmes in co-operation with other nations.

Our past experiences in this field have convinced the people and the Government of Japan of the importance and benefit of co-operation among nations in the field of scientific research for peaceful purposes. We participated in the framing of the Treaty, having had the above conviction in mind. We were satisfied with the result that the principles of peaceful use of Antarctica and international co-operation on the basis of freedom of scientific investigation were firmly established and embodied in the provisions of the Treaty adopted in 1959.

Under the Treaty, all twelve nations agree that Antarctica shall be used only for peaceful purposes. To ensure this solemn undertaking, it is provided that the parties to the Treaty have the right to send observers anywhere in Antarctica at any time to see that this undertaking is not being violated. We venture to hope that it will provide a useful, valuable and practical experience in other fields of international affairs.

We have gathered here to discuss a number of questions related to practical co-operation in the antarctic area in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty. The framework of practical measures to be formulated at this Meeting will determine the future of the Treaty.

I can assure you, Sir Chairman and distinguished fellow delegates, that my delegation will participate in the discussion throughout this Meeting with a very flexible and open-minded attitude for the implementation and promotion of the purposes and principles of the Treaty and to make the Antarctic Treaty a milestone on the way to agreement on other international questions.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
