ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE                    ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./8

10 July 1961

(ORIGINAL:  FRENCH)

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR. WILLY STEVENS, LEADER
OF THE BELGIAN DELEGATION, AT THE OPENING SESSION OF
THE MEETING, 10 JULY 1961

The Belgian Delegation is very happy to be taking part in this First
Consultative Meeting on Antarctica, and we should like, before going any
further, to express our gratitude to the Australian Government for its
traditional hospitality.  Australia is a country eminently suitable for
international conferences.  We still have pleasant memories of Broadbeach,
the setting for the ECAFE Conference of March 1959.  And now, for a
change of site, we are assembled in Canberra where, even in winter, nature
and climate combine for the comfort of the Delegations.  We are also well
aware of the warm-hearted friendliness and hospitality of the Australian
people, and of the praiseworthy and successful efforts made by the
Australian Government in regard to the physical organization of
international meetings.  Australia's interest in Antarctica and its
geographical position in the Southern Hemisphere justify the choice of
Canberra for this first Meeting.

Today is an important and historic date. To the extent that it
fulfils its promises, the First Antarctic Conference will mark a stage in
the history of international relations and perhaps in the history of mankind.
This Canberra Meeting, the outcome of the successful conclusion of the Washington
Treaty, is making an auspicious start.  We are gathered here, not to settle
political problems, nor to put an end to disputes, but to consult together,
to unite for disinterested ends, and to seek a basis for all-round
co-operation in regard to the only continent as yet practically unexplored.
We are here in the interests of scientific advancement and the progress of
mankind.  The entry into force of the Washington Treaty, introducing
entirely new principles in many spheres of activity, gives us cause for
deep satisfaction, as does the present Meeting which constitutes the first
landmark on the way towards the practical application of the Treaty.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 2 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

If we succeed in making goodwill prevail and in turning Antarctica into an instrument of peace and harmony, we shall have proved the possibility of reaching agreement and co-operation in other and more delicate situations also.  The significance of this Canberra Meeting is, therefore, far-reaching.  If we succeed in putting the principles embodied in the Washington Treaty into practice, we shall have made history.

Belgium is well aware that it has a part to play here.  It has no territorial ambitions. The Belgians are an industrious people, and their prosperity is proof of their courage and energy. Belgium has at all times, and in various fields of activity, lent its assistance in formulating principles for international co-operation.  We can hardly be suspected of ulterior motives in regard to Antarctica. Our activities in this region have been concerned only with scientific research. As you are perhaps aware, the first men to spend a winter within the Antarctic Circle were Belgians. The Baron de Gerlache Expedition of 1898 was the first to spend fifteen months on the Antarctic ice, and the scientific findings of this expedition, published at intervals over a number of years, constituted the first scientific contribution to Antarctic studies.  The success of the various recent Belgian expeditions at Roi Baudouin Base is evidence of the value of Belgian collaboration in the scientific exploration of Antarctica. This collaboration may be counted upon to the limit of our resources; and if my country can make its voice heard at this present Meeting, it will be the voice of reason, of mutual understanding, of reassurance and of loyal and generous co-operation.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
