ANTARCTIC TREATY           
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE      
TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE          


                                                         TRATADO ANTARTICO           
                                                         PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA      
                                                         ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBЕЩAHИE      
                                                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           

CANBERRA A.C.T.

                                                         MEETING UNCLASSIFIED      
                                                         DOC./7      
                                                         10 July 1961      
                                                         (ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

SPEECH BY MR. R.L. HARRY, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN      
DELEGATION, AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE MEETING      

10 July 1961

Mr. Chairman, distinguished representatives, ladies and gentlemen:      
There has been a striking similarity in the eleven speeches we have heard this      
morning. This, I think, bodes well for the success of this, the first      
regular consultative meeting under the Antarctic Treaty.  If the opening      
statement of the Australian delegation repeats some of the points already made,      
this will be still further evidence of the fundamental identity of view of this      
group of twelve Antarctic powers.

Our Governments have, after all, a common interest in Antarctic      
exploration and research. Our explorers have faced the same cold hazards and      
our scientists the same frigid obstacles.

We are now embarking on a new voyage of exploration, a venture into      
the uncharted territory of international co-operation. I am sure there will      
be the same camaraderie in this expedition as in the Antarctic itself.  If      
crevasses of procedure or substance open up in our path, we shall be able to      
bridge and surmount them, or, if we do slither de?ply in, to crawl out without      
structural damage.

The simple pursuit of co-operation may not always appear to have      
any intrinsic practical value, but neither could a monetary price be put on      
the attainment of the South Pole.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 2 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./7

10 July 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

The Australian delegation thanks all those who have paid compliments
to our capital city. We certainly hope that Canberra will prove a convenient
base for this venture and that our long-standing interest in and experience in
Antarctic affairs will contribute to a fruitful session.  In the absence of
precedents our current deliberations must necessarily be highly exploratory.
Nevertheless, the Australian delegation is confident that, building on the good
work of the interin consultative group in Washington, practical, if modest,
measures of real value will emerge from the recommendations which this meeting
will make to Governments.

I should like to take this opportunity of reiterating the determination
of the Australian Government to give full force and effect to the provisions of
the Treaty. When the Australian Parliament, which has kindly made available
this meeting place, enacted legislation to enable effect to be given to the
Treaty, support in both Houses was unanimous. It is one of the principal
objects of the Treaty that Antarctica shall be reserved for peaceful purposes
only. We, for our part, are ready to carry out such activities as may be
required to ensure the fulfilment of this purpose, and to facilitate the
exercise of rights of inspection under the Treaty.  We have already made
provision for the exchange of information about plans for scientific programmes,
scientific observations and results, and the exchange of scientific personnel.
We have already conducted an exchange of information relating to expeditions
and stations in Antarctica. Australia will welcome further opportunities for
collaborating with other nations in Antarctic investigation and research, and
the aim of my delegation during the deliberations of this consultative meeting
will be to obtain results of mutual benefit to all signatories of the Antarctic
Treaty.

Australian, Mr. Chairman, is proud of its record of exploration and
scientific activity in Antarctica. During the nineteenth century, Australian
sealers and whalers were active in Antarctic waters. Australians were
associated with the later expeditions of Scott and Shackleton, and with Sir
Douglas Mawson's Australasian Antarctic expeditions of 1911-14 and the British-
Australian-New Zealand Antarctic Research Expedition of 1929-31.  Mention has
already been made of the presence of Lady Mawson in the audience today and it
may be of interest to honorable representatives that on the recommendation of
the Antarctic Names Committee of Australia it has been decided that a hitherto
unnamed portion of the Robertson Land coast, from the eastern boundary of

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 3 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./7

10 July 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

Kemp Land to Murray Monolith, 80 miles east of Mawson Station, should be 
named "Dawson Coast". Pioneers in Antarctic aviation included Australians 
Sir Hubert Wilkins and Mr. John Rymill, who was unfortunately not able to 
accept our invitation to come to Canberra for this meeting. Since 1947, 
Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions have maintained five 
mainland and island bases for research and exploration and two unmanned 
stations for the automatic transmission of meteorological data.

Australian scientists have made a significant contribution, we feel, to 
the programmes of the International Geophysical Year and the subsequent 
period of co-operation organised by the Special Committee on Antarctic 
Research. We are very conscious of the proximity of the Antarctic contin-
ent to the southern coasts of Australia, and of the importance of scien-
tific research in Antarctica. We are particularly interested in facilitating 
the collection of meteorological data from Antarctica, and view with 
satisfaction the establishment in Melbourne of the International Antarctic 
Analysis Centre which is staffed by a team of international meteorologists. 
We are equally interested in, and will make proposals for, the co-ordination 
of communications so essential for meteorological and other research and 
practical work.

Mr. Chairman, my delegation believes that the Antarctic Treaty 
consultative meetings will assist us all by facilitating a full and free 
exchange of information, thus increasing our knowledge of the most remote 
and least explored of all the continents.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
