ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING     PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ПEPBOE KOHCYЛЬTAТИВHOE COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

CANBERRA A.C.T.

                                  MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
                                  DOC./6
                                  10 July 1961
                                  (ORIGINAL IN SPANISH)

SPEECH BY

DR. R. E. GUYER, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE ARGENTINE DELEGATION
_____________________________________________________
AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE MEETING, 10 JULY 1961

Mr. Chairman, Delegates,

On behalf of the Argentine Delegation I should like, first and 
foremost, to express my appreciation of the generous hospitality which the 
Australian Government has extended to us on this occasion of the First 
Consultative Meeting on the Antarctic Treaty.

The Antarctic Treaty, incidentally, brings out clearly the fact that 
we are neighbours at the South Pole. There are many affinities between 
Argentina and Australia.  Both countries are characterized by their 
agricultural and pastoral resources, by the evolution of their industrial 
development, by their population, their climate, and their geographical 
situation in the Southern Hemisphere.

For years men from all parts of the world have been travelling to 
that region of eternal ice, inspired by a variety of motives, but the hostile 
environment has always stood as an insurmountable obstacle in the way of 
utilization of those vast areas for the benefit of mankind. Only a few 
countries - and Argentina, which since 1904, at the cost of great sacrifice, 
has carried out there an uninterrupted and continuous scientific programme, 
is one of them - had given any inkling of the importance which the Ant rctic 
would in time acquire in the march of human progress. With modern 
scientific and technical advances, however, intense activity is being 
carried out by the countries gathered here and this has made it more and 
more vitally necessary to reach an understanding permitting beneficial and 
widespread co-operation at the international level in an area that is 
ceasing to be shrouded in mystery, and in an age when man is overcoming

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
- 2 -
MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
DOC./6
10 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN SPANISH)

one by one the physical obstacles which until recently have stood in the way of his conquest of the earth.

Much negotiation has gone into the formulation of this Treaty, but it has been rewarding. From our point of view four objectives : inter alia, have been attained to which we assign the greatest importance: the safeguarding of our rights, the prohibition of nuclear explosions, peaceful utilization and international scientific co-operation.

Because of its geological continuity, its geographical proximity, and the efforts exerted there over many years, the Argentine Antarctic is a part of our national territory. The specific clauses of the Treaty which safeguard our rights will enable us, in reaffirming them, to contribute in a positive manner to the common task we have all undertaken, namely, to carry out with maximum efficience the activities connected with scientific research.

As one of the countries adjacent to Antarctica we attended the Washington Conference on Antarctica in 1959 with one overriding concern. The possibility of this territory being used as a testing ground for nuclear explosions implied a serious threat to the health of our people. The removal of this threat was imperative, and with the agreement on the prohibition of nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste material the conclusion of the Treaty became feasible. The implementation of the relevant Article will give back to the inhabitants of the areas adjacent to Antarctica the peace of mind which would otherwise have been perpetually disturbed.

The peaceful use of Antarctica will enable it to be kept isolated from international tensions, present and future, should man be unable to find a suitable formula by which he can live in peace in a world created by Providence for living in peace and not at war.

One of the main aims of the Treaty and the basic aim of this First Consultative Meeting is, primarily, international scientific co-operation and its organization.

The world-wide interchange of scientific knowledge today is a necessity imposed by progress. Widespread aquaintance with the results of research will without doubt contribute to improving and speeding up the development of science. For the same reason the knowledge which this research brings to light should be interchanged in an informative, reliable and effective manner.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
- 3 -

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
DOC./6
10 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN SPANISH)

The provisions of the Treaty constitute a guarantoe in this respect and indicate to us the paths we must follow. The proposed agenda for this First Consultative Lieeting takes these aspects of international scientific co-operation into consideration, and the conclusions we reach in the course of our deliberations will be the structural base for the common task in which we are engaged.

At the same time, we shall have to consider certain subjects of vital importance which, although they do not refer to science as such, make scientific activity possible; for example, logistic support. In this field, too, close co-operation is indispensable, for any technical error could result in irreparable loss of human life.

Cordiality and harmony have been outstanding characteristics of scientific work in Antarctica. These same characteristics, despite differences in views, were again evident in the lengthy diplomatic negotiations which culminated in the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and continued in evidence during the interim group meetings held subsequently in Washington.

If this spirit continues to pervade our discussions, we believe that in addition to the specific gains we obtain we shall set an example for other negotiations, other spheres and other aims, and demonstrate that understanding is possible in international problems, however difficult, so long as they are approached with a sincere will to serve the higher interests of mankind.

MEETING CONFIDENTIAL
