ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING       PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE    ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

REPORT OF THE FIRST ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE
MEETING

1.      In accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Antarctic
Treaty, representatives of the Contracting Parties (Argentine, Australia,
Belgium, Chile, the French Republic, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South
Africa, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America)
met at Canberra on 10 July, 1961 for the purpose of discussing, and
recommending to their Governments, measures in furtherance of the
principles and objectives of the Treaty.

2.      Senator the Honourable John Grey Gorton was appointed by the
Australian Government to act as Temporary Chairman of the Meeting until
the Meeting elected its Chairman.

3.      The Meeting was formally opened by the Right Honourable Robert
Gordon Menzies, C.H. Q.C., the Australian Prime Minister and Minister for
External Affairs.

4.      The Meeting then adopted its Rules of Procedure, which are
attached at Annex "A".

5.      Senator Gorton was then elected Chairman of the Meeting and
Mr. William George Alexander Lendale of the Department of External Affairs
was appointed Secretary.

6.      Opening statements were delivered by, or on behalf of, the Leaders
of all Delegations, and the Meeting then adopted the following Agenda:

    1.      Opening of the Meeting.
    2.      Adoption of Rules of Procedure.
    3.      Election of Officers.
    4.      Opening Statements.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 2 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

5.      Adoption of Agenda.
6.      Exchange of information regarding plans for 
        scientific programmes.
7.      Exchange of scientific personnel.
8.      Exchange and making available of scientific 
        observations and results.
9.      Relations with SCAR
10.     Relations with other international organisations 
        having a scientific or technical interest in 
        Antarctica.
11.     Exchange of information concerning expeditions 
        and stations under Article VII, paragraph 5.
12.     Matters relating to logistic support.
13.     Preservation and conservation of living 
        resources.
14.     Preservation of historic sites.
15.     Reciprocal assistance among expeditions.
16.     Arrangements for radio communications.
17.     Co-operation in mail services.
18.     The exchange of information and advice 
        relating to the application of nuclear energy 
        in the Treaty area.
19.     Administrative arrangements.
20.     Date and place of next Meeting.
21.     Other business.
22.     Adoption of the final report of the Meeting.

7.      The Meeting considered all items on the Agenda in Plenary 
Session, appointing Working Groups to assist it in reaching conclusions in 
respect of Agenda Items 9, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 21 and 22. These Working 
Groups in each case comprised representatives of all Delegations wishing to 
participate in them.  No other Committees were established.

8.      The session at which Agenda Items 1-4 inclusive were dealt 
with and the session at which Delegates delivered their concluding statements 
were held in public, but other sessions were held in private.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

9.      The Meeting agreed unanimously to the adoption of the
following recommendations:

      I - I

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that they
should facilitate the continuation of the exchange of
information regarding plans for scientific programmes as now
carried on through the Special Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR) and through other member unions and committees of the
International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and by such
other means as may ensure the availability of this information.

      I - II

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that they
should promote the continuation of the exchange, on a basis of
bilateral arrangements, of scientific personnel amongst their
expeditions, and should make available such of their facilities
as may be helpful to this purpose.

      I - III

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that they
should promote the exchange and making available of observations
and results from Antarctica through the recognized international
data gathering centres and by such other means as may be
appropriate to ensure the exchange and free availability of
this information.

      I - IV

The Representatives agree, without prejudice to the rights of
Governments to make such arrangements as they may deem necessary
to further the objectives of scientific co-operation set forth
in the Treaty:

(1) that the free exchange of information and views among
scientists participating in SCAR, and the recommendations
concerning scientific programmes and co-operation
formulated by this body constitute a most valuable
contribution to international scientific co-operation
in Antarctica;

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 4 -
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

I - IV (Cont'd)

(2)    that since these activities of SCAR constitute the
kind of activity contemplated in Article III of the
Treaty, SCAR should be encouraged to continue this
advisory work which has so effectively facilitated
international co-operation in scientific investigation.

I - V

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that they
should individually encourage the work of international
organisations having a scientific or technical interest in
Antarctica, including the specialised agencies of the United
Nations, and should promote on a bilateral basis the
establishment and development of co-operative working
relations with these organisations.

In this connection, the Representatives take note of the
letter to the Minister of State for External Affairs of
Australia from the Secretary-General of the World Meteoro-
logical Organisation dated 28 June 1961, circulated at the
Meeting. They welcome the offer made by the World Meteoro-
logical Organisation of co-operation in questions of
meteorology and of the collection and relaying of meteoro-
logical data in the Antarctic, and recommend to their
Governments that they should establish co-operation in these
matters through their Representatives in that Organisation.

I - VI

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that
information furnished in accordance with Article VII
paragraph 5 should be exchanged between Governments through
diplomatic channels as early in each year as possible, and
in any case before the end of November each year, and should
include -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 5 -
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

I - VI (Cont'd)

(1)     the names, types, numbers, descriptions and armaments of ships, aircraft and other vehicles, 
        introduced, or to be introduced into Antarctica, 
        and information on military equipment, if any, 
        and its location in Antarctica;

(2)     dates of expeditions leaving for, and arriving in, 
        Antarctica, duration of stay, itinerary to and from 
        Antarctica and routes followed within Antarctica;

(3)     the names, location and date of opening of the 
        Party's bases and subsidiary stations established 
        or planned to be established in Antarctica, listed 
        according to whether they are for summer and/or 
        winter operations;

(4)     the names of the officers in charge of each of these 
        bases, subsidiary stations, ships and aircraft; the 
        number and occupations and specialisation of personnel 
        (including any designated by other governments), who 
        are or will be stationed at each of these bases and 
        subsidiary stations and on board these ships and 
        aircraft, including the number of personnel who are 
        members of the military services together with the 
        rank of any officers and the names and professional 
        affiliation of personnel engaged in scientific 
        activities;

(5)     the number and types of armements possessed by 
        personnel;

(6)     the programme of work, including scientific 
        investigation, being done and planned at each of 
        these bases and subsidiary stations and on board 
        those ships and aircraft; and also the area or 
        areas of operation to be covered by such programme;

(7)     principal scientific equipment;

(8)     transportation facilities and communication 
        equipment for use within Antarctica;

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 6 -
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

I - VI (Cont'd)

(9) facilities for rendering assistance;

(10) notice of any expeditions to Antarctica not
organised by the Party but organised, in, or
proceeding from, the Party's territory.

I - VII

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that they
should undertake to exchange information on logistic problems.
This might include information on the design and construction
of buildings and airstrips, the provision of power supplies,
the performance of aircraft, ships, tractors and other vehicles,
techniques of supply of coastal and inland stations, the
transport and handling of cargo in Antarctic conditions, food
and cold weather clothing. They further recommend that
consideration should be given to the calling of a meeting or
symposium of experts to consider the question of the exchange
of information on experience gained in matters of the
organisation of expeditions, logistic support and transport,
and that proposals for the calling of such a meeting or
symposium should be discussed at or before the next Treaty
Consultative Meeting.

I - VIII

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that:

(i) they recognize the urgent need for measures to
conserve the living resources of the Treaty area
and to protect them from uncontrolled destruction
or interference by man;

(ii) they encourage the interchange of information and
international co-operation with a view to promoting
scientific studies of Antarctic life as the essential
basis for long-term conservation measures;

(iii) they bring to the attention of all persons entering
the area the need for the protection of living
resources;

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 7 -
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

I - VIII (Cont'd)

(iv)     they consult on the form in which it would be most
         suitable to establish in due course internationally
         agreed measures for the preservation and conservation
         of the living resources of the Antarctic, taking into
         account the discussion at and documents submitted to
         the First Consultative Meetings;

(v)      as an interim measure, and to the extent possible
         under national legislation and binding international
         conventions, they issue general rules of conduct on
         the lines of the attached statement extracted from
         the recommendations of SCAR as contained in the
         report of the Meeting held at Cambridge in August 1960;

(vi)    they exchange information on any major steps taken in
         accordance with this recommendation with respect to the
         next Antarctic season;

(vii)   this question be included in the Agenda of the next
         Consultative Meeting.

GENERAL RULES OF CONDUCT FOR PRESERVATION AND
CONSERVATION OF LIVING RESOURCES IN ANTARCTICA

1. Animals and plants indigenous to Antarctica shall
not be unnecessarily disturbed and shall not be
destroyed or injured. Exceptions shall be
permitted on a strictly controlled scale which
will not deplete the local stock and only for the
following purposes:

     (a)  collections and studies for scientific
          purposes;

     (b)  food (e.g. meat, eggs) for men and dogs;

     (c)  living specimens for zoological gardens;

     (d)  taking a strictly limited number of specimens,
          especially natural casualties, for private
          purposes.

Exceptions (c) and (d) shall not apply for the time
being to fur seals.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 8 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

2. Alien forms of flora and fauna should not be deliberately introduced except when rigidly controlled having regard to their chances of survival, capacity of reproduction and utilization by man.

3. The following activities should be regulated with a view to preventing serious harm to wildlife:

      (a) allowing dogs to run free,

      (b) flying helicopters or other aircraft in a manner which would unnecessarily disturb bird and seal colonies, or landing near (e.g. within 200 yards) such colonies,

      (c) driving vehicles unnecessarily close to breeding colonies of birds and seals,

      (d) use of explosive or discharge of firearms close to breeding colonies of birds and seals,

      (e) disturbance of bird and seal colonies by persistent attention from people on foot,

      (f) the discharge of oil from ships in a manner harmful to animals and plants indigenous to Antarctica.

I - IX

With regard to Article IV of the Treaty, the Representatives recommend that -

(1) Governments interested in any tombs, buildings or objects of historic interest should consult together whenever appropriate on their restoration or preservation;

(2) periodic reports on the condition of such tombs, buildings or objects of historic interest as well as any restoration which might have been effected should be exchanged among contracting parties;

(3) Representatives adopt all adequate measures to protect such tombs, buildings or objects of historic interest, from damage and destruction.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 9 -
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

I - X

The Representatives reaffirm the traditional Antarctic principle that expeditions render all assistance feasible in the event of an emergency request for help and recommend to their Governments that consideration should be given to arranging consultations among them,and to the matter being discussed at the appropriate time at any meeting of experts qualified to discuss it.

I - XI

The Representatives recommend to their Governments:

(1)     that they convene as soon as practicable a meeting of specialists in Antarctic radio communications;

(2)     that this meeting of specialists should discuss the telecommunications facilities needed for scientific, technical and other purposes in the Treaty area, and their use;

(3)     that the meeting should take into consideration -

(a)     the requirements of governments;

(b)     the viewpoint of the United Nations Specialised Agencies and other International organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctic communications;

(c)     the relevant recommendations of the communications working group of SCAR;

(d)     the experience of the various Antarctic expeditions;

(4)     that the meeting should examine and make recommendations regarding such matters as -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 10 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./18

24 July 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

          I - XI (Cont'd)

(i)     the routing required to meet demands of users 
        most effectively;

(ii)    the modes of transmission;

(iii)   the power requirements for effective reception;

(iv)    the rationalisation of schedules and the 
        evaluation of priorities for traffic in 
        normal and post blackout conditions;

(v)     new developments in the field of communications 
        relevant to antarctic requirements;

(vi)    emergency radio procedures;

(vii)   such other matters of an engineering or 
        traffic nature as may be appropriate;

(5)     that the Governments should consult regarding the date, place 
        and definitive agenda of the meeting, and as to which 
        specialised agencies and other international organisations 
        referred to in paragraph 3(b) should be informed of the 
        meeting and be invited to send observers.

        I - XII

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that they 
should:-

1.      promote co-operation among expeditions in the Treaty 
        area in the collection and distribution of mail for 
        expedition members;

2.      advise each other of opportunities for forwarding 
        mail to and from stations in the Treaty area;

3.      consult together with a view to reaching agreement on 
        further practical measures for improving postal 
        communications in the Treaty area.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 11 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

I - XIII

Taking into consideration the provisions established in Article V of the Antarctic Treaty, the Representatives recommend to their Governments that they exchange by all means deemed advisable information on the application of nuclear equipment and techniques in the Treaty area.

I - XIV

Pending any further recommendation which may be adopted at a future Meeting concerning the procedures to be followed in connection with the Consultative Meetings provided for in Article IX of the Treaty, the Representatives recommend to their Governments that as an interim measure:

(1) the Government of the host country of the present Meeting shall send to each of the participating Governments a certified copy of the Final Report containing the authentic texts of all documents agreed and adopted by the Meeting. It shall also send to the other participating Governments any other documents relative to the Meeting and comply with any additional request, or answer any questions on the subject, and supply any information which the participating Governments may subsequently request regarding the First Consultative Meeting or recommendations of that Meeting;

(2) the Government of the country where the next Meeting is to be held shall consult the other Governments entitled to participate in the Consultative Meetings in regard to the provisional agenda and the choice of the opening date of the Meeting;

(3) the Governments shall consult through diplomatic channels as they deem necessary on matters of common interest relating to the Treaty area including matters which may be proposed for consideration at future Consultative Meetings;

(4) notifications of approval by Governments of recommendations adopted at Consultative Meetings shall be communicated through diplomatic channels to all other such Governments entitled to participate in the Consultative Meetings;

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 12 -
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

I - XIV (Cont'd)

(5) the depositary Government designated in the Antarctic Treaty 
shall inform all signatory and acceding states when any 
recommendation has been approved in accordance with 
Article IX (4) of the Treaty by all the Contracting Parties 
whose representatives were entitled to participate in the 
Meeting held to consider that recommendation.

I - XV

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that they 
accept the offer by the Delegation of Argentina of the city of 
Buenos Aires as the seat of the Second Consultative Meeting 
under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, to be held on a date 
mutually decided upon by the participating Governments.

I - XVI

The Representatives recommend to their Governments that reports, 
studies and all other documentation, including any specific 
proposal or draft recommendation, which any participating 
Government may desire to place before the next Consultative 
Meeting, shall be forwarded through diplomatic channels so as 
to reach all Governments entitled to participate in that 
Consultative Meeting, at least one month prior to the Meeting, 
except in circumstances of urgency.

10.       In respect of Recommendation I - IX, the French Delegation 
stated that the French Government would wish to give the word "object" a fairly 
broad significance.

11.       In respect of Recommendation I - XII, the United Kingdom 
Delegation stated that it considered that Governments should, in consulting 
together with a view to reaching agreement on further practical measures for 
improving postal communications in the Treaty area, give consideration to the 
following measures:

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 13 -
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

(a)    accept for transmission to the Antarctic by all
       available means of transport correspondence or
       mails, other than philatelic mail, addressed to
       Antarctic stations occupied by other participating
       countries;

(b)    invite the International Bureau of the Universal
       Postal Union to advise other postal administrations
       to send correspondence addressed to an Antarctic
       station to the postal administration of the country
       occupying the station for onward transmission;

(c)    recognize as duly prepaid correspondence originating
       in an Antarctic station occupied by another
       participating country and prepaid in postage stamps
       issued by that country;

(d)    accept such prepaid correspondence for transmission
       from the Antarctic by all available means of
       transport to the most convenient office of exchange
       in a participating country;

(e)    reforward the correspondence from the office of
       exchange to its destination in accordance with the
       provisions of the Universal Postal Convention,
       particularly those concerning transit payments;

(f)    put their mail services, subject to prepayment in
       the normal way, at the disposal of the personnel of
       any Antarctic station occupied by another participating
       country which is for any reason prevented from using
       the stamps of that country for the prepayment of its
       correspondence.

12.     In respect of Recommendation I - XIII, the Chilean Delegation
        stated that it understood that the declaration in no way implied a change in
        Article V of the Antarctic Treaty, and the French Delegation stated that it
        considered that the information exchanged should also be brought to the notice
        of the International Atomic Energy Agency when Governments considered this was
        appropriate.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 14 -
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./18
24 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

13.      In respect of Recommendation I - XIV, the New Zealand 
Delegation expressed the hope that any consultations pursuant to paragraphs 
2 and 3 would take place in a capital where New Zealand had diplomatic 
representation.

14.      On 24 July, 1961, the Final Report of the Meeting was 
adopted unanimously and concluding statements were delivered by or on behalf 
of the Leaders of all Delegations.  The Meeting was then closed.

____________________________________________________
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
