ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING       PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE    ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

CANBERRA A.C.T.

                                  MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
                                  DOC./16
                                  10 July 1961
                                  (ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

SPEECH BY MR. R.H.G. EDMONDS. ALTERNATE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
UNITED KINGDOM DELEGATION, AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE
MEETING

10 July 1961

Mr. Chairman, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen -

The leader of the United Kingdom Delegation, Sir William Oliver,
has asked me to say how very sorry he is not to be able to attend the open-
ing meeting of this Conference. He is detained by other business about
which you will all know. In his place, may I add my delegation's congratu-
lations to you, Mr. Chairman, on your election to preside over and guide
our meeting, and also our thanks to the Australian Government both for
their hospitality and for all the excellent preparations which they have
made to ensure the Conference's success. It seems to us a good augury
that the Antarctic should open a new phase in its history in a new and
rapidly expanding capital which is such an impressive example of modern
planning. Perhaps I may also add a personal note: I am especially glad
to be speaking here on behalf of my country, today, which is just a hundred
and ten years since my great grandfather arrived in Sydney.

Reading the opening speeches made by delegates at the
Antarctic Conference in Washington nearly two years ago one is struck by
the common thread running through all of them - the past. At that time
most delegations were thinking mainly in terms of the great achievements
of the past, in exploration and scientific endeavour to which my country
made a prominent contribution. It was not easy to think of the future
until agreement had been reached on all the main issues. The provisions

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 2 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./16
10 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

of the Treaty have now exorcised the several political problems which for so long bedevilled the Antarctic. Today, in the opinion of the United Kingdom Delegation, it is our task, while not forgetting the past, to concentrate our attention on the future. We should like to suggest that with the main lines of agreement drawn for us in the Treaty our task should be both agreeable and constructive.

The Treaty of which our Governments are signatories has in effect provided a future framework for the Antarctic for rather more than a generation. The aim of this Conference, as we see it, is to recommend to our governments what measures we consider necessary to fill in this framework, and at the same time to exclange ideas on the basis of our experience since we met in Washington in 1959. To help us we have the benefit of the valuable work accomplished by the Interim Consultative Group in Washington. The Group has drawn up what looks like a formidable agenda for us, but we have every hope that, given the good will and spirit of friendly co-operation which prevailed at Washington two years ago, we shall be able to complete our work in time.

Gentlemen, the Treaty enables the world to use the Antarctic peacefully, jointly and for one common aim - scientific research. By common consent, the Antarctic has been demilitarised and is wide open to inspection at any time. Here for once the scientist is to be given the chance to plan his work over a long period without looking over his shoulder at generals or statesmen. It is the view of my delegation that the chief object of this conference is to do all that we can to enable scientists of all nations to carry out this task, while leaving it to them to work out most of the details of their co-operation, so far as possible, themselves. We have little doubt that when we come to consider our agenda we shall find it advisable to recommend to our governments that they establish some form of permanent administrative machinery, however modest in scope, to facilitate inter-governmental co-operation and to ensure the free flow of scientific exchanges in the intervals between the meetings of this group. However, we are also anxious not to disturb the existing arrangements for co-operation where these are already working well. I refer particularly to the Special Committee for Antarctic Research, which I think we are all agreed has been doing really admirable work. My delegation is particularly pleased that the Committee's Secretariat is for the time being in the United Kingdom at the Scott Polar Research Institute. In passing, may I say

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 3 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./16
10 July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

how happy we are that we shall see here as a member of the French Delegation
the distinguished President of the Special Committee for Antarctic Research,
Monsieur Laclavere.

To achieve the full range of its possibilities scientific
research in the Antarctic must be untrammelled. We must make sure that in
Antarctic matters there is real freedom of research and, above all, freedom
to publish and discuss scientific results, to the ultimate benefit of man.
We have in the Antarctic Treaty an instrument which, if it is rightly
handled, could not only achieve this object but also point the way to
effective international co-operation in other fields outside the Antarctic.
The recommendations which this Conference submits to governmonts will be
the first and, we believe, a very important test of how we intend to use this
instrument. It is in this spirit that my delegation approaches the
Conference.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
