ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING     PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTRCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./9

10 July 1961

(Original in Spanish)

SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY SENOR MARCIAL FORA, LEADER OF THE
CHILEAN DELEGATION, AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE MEETING

10 JULY 1961

Mr. Chairman, Heads of Delegations, Ladies and Gentlemen:

When the Washington conference ended in December 1959 with the
signing of the Antarctic Treaty, it was my duty to present on behalf
of the Government of my country a statement welcoming the unanimous agreement
which had been reached, and stating that Chile in signing a Treaty of such
importance was fully confident that all the obligations therein undertaken
for collaboration, reciprocity, peace, mutual respect for each others' rights,
general progress and welfare, would be met so that none of the noble
aspirations, so diligently pursued, be frustrated.

Now that the twelve Antarctic nations after dispassionate study and
thoughtful deliberation by their constitutional bodies, have ratified the
Antarctic Treaty, we should acknowledge its entry into force by reaffirming
the principles which inspired it and by creating at this meeting the immutable
precedent that nothing or no one may impair or distort it in the letter
or the spirit. Chile comes to this meeting prompted by the same eagerness
which led her in her search for a happier future for mankind, to participate
in the drafting, signing and ratification of the Treaty.

The purpose of the Consultative Meetings referred to in Article IX
is to formulate and recommend to the Governments of the Contracting Parties
measures for the proper application of the Treaty, the realization of its
objectives, and the furtherance of the benefits it offers. We have,
therefore, a historic obligation to respond worthily to the responsibility
placed upon us.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
1 .
 
2.
MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./9

10 July 1961

(Original in Spanish)

It is the opinion of the Chilean Government that in this First
Consultative Meeting the best service we can render for the safeguarding
of the Treaty, its prestige on the international scene and the hopes
centred upon it, is to proceed cautiously in our eagerness to make it
operative and fruitful, and to recommend only such measures as, after
lengthy study of the various projects, convince us of their obvious usefulness
and immediacy. If we are to avoid unproductive misunderstanding and harmful
friction, we must proceed with caution in the practical application of the Treaty.

In order to adopt measures for the best and most profitable application
of the Treaty, we shall have to rely on the experience which will accumulate
gradually in the intervals between these Consultative Meetings. Let us not
forget that the Treaty came into force a mere seventeen days ago.  In
Antarctica, it may be more advisable to wait for problems to arise and then
seek the most reasonable means of solving them, than to hasten to propose
theoretical solutions for presumptive events or situations.

On the other hand, even in the face of the natural and laudable
desire to prevent difficulties, in no case must we overstep the provisions
of the Treaty.

Consequently, at this First Consultative Meeting, we should begin by
avoiding all matters on which we are divided for it is essential to the
objectives of the Treaty that close co-operation be established among us
and that an atmosphere of the utmost harmony should prevail; in other words,
we should renounce any attempt to achieve perfection if the measure proposed
does not muster unanimous consent. It is better to be content with a
modest achievement than to seek spectacular solutions which might later be
rejected by our Governments.

The Antarctic Treaty is an event of too recent birth to be stamped with
the hallmark of perfection from the outset. Its application may have far-
reaching and beneficial repercussions so long as we proceed with prudence,
in order to do it safely.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
3.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./9

10 July 1961

(Original in Spanish)

For example, we must avoid the formation of bodies which could create 
the impression that we are establishing a supra-national administration for 
Antarctica. This would not be in keeping either with the letter or with the 
spirit of the Treaty.

     Chile, the country situated geographically closest to the Antarctica, 
joins in the common effort to make the White Continent a place of peace 
which may serve as an example to the rest of the world and as the laboratory 
in which scientists may work for the benefit of mankind and contribute to a 
happier and more prosperous future.

     In following this line of conduct, my Government is inspired by sincere 
goodwill and faith in the future of the Antarctic Treaty and is convinced that 
its contribution to these efforts in no wise diminishes its legitimate and 
historic rights in respect of the Antarctic territory over which it exercises 
jurisdiction.

     In Washington, our Delegation agreed with pleasure to the choice of this 
beautiful capital city of Canberra as the site for the present meeting, and in 
doing so it publicly acknowledged Australia's labours in Antarctica and her 
spirit of international collaboration. On behalf of my Delegation I wish 
to express my appreciation of the kindness which has been shown to us since our 
arrival in Australia, and to voice my earnest hope that the present meeting 
will be entirely successful.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
