ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
FIRST CONSULTATIVE MEETING      PRIMERA REUNION CONSULTIVA
PREMIERE REUNION CONSULTATIVE   ПЕРВОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

CANBERRA A.C.T.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./2 (Adopted)
10th July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

Agenda Item 2

RULES OF PROCEDURE

The following Rules of Procedure were adopted on 10 July 1961:

1.  The meetings held pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty 
    shall be known as Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.

    Representation

2.  Each participating government shall be represented by a delegation
    composed of a Representative and such Alternate Representatives,
    Advisers and other persons as each state may deem necessary.  Their
    names shall be communicated to the host government prior to the
    opening of the Meeting.

3.  The order of precedence of the delegations shall be in accordance with
    the alphabet in the language of the host government.

    Officers

4.  A representative of the host government shall be the Temporary
    Chairman of the Meeting and shall preside until the Meeting elects
    a Chairman.

5.  At its inaugural session, a Chairman shall be elected.  The other
    representatives shall serve as Vice-Chairmen of the Meeting in order
    of precedence.  The Chairman normally shall preside at all plenary
    sessions.  If he is absent from any session or part thereof, the
    Vice-Chairman, rotating on the basis of the order of precedence
    as established by Rule 3, shall preside during each such session.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 2 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
DOC./2. (Adopted)
10th July 1961
(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

Secretariat

6.       The Secretary shall be appointed by the Meeting on the proposal 
of the Chairman. The Secretary shall be responsible for providing 
secretarial services, and shall carry out such other tasks as 
the Meeting may require or direct.

Sessions

7.       The opening plenary session shall be held in public;  other 
sessions shall be held in private, unless the Meeting shall determine 
otherwise.

Committees and Working Groups

8.       The Meeting, to facilitate its work, may establish such committees as 
it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions, defining 
their terms of reference.

9.       The committees shall operate under the Rules of Procedure of the 
Meeting, except where they are inapplicable.

10.     Working groups may be established by the Meeting or its committees.

Conduct of Business

11.     A quorum shall be constituted by two-thirds of the representatives 
participating in the Meeting.

12.     The Chairman shall exercise the powers of his office in accordance 
with customary practice.  He shall see to the observance of the 
rules of procedure and the maintenance of proper order.  The 
Chairman, in the exercise of his functions, remains under the authority 
of the Meeting.

13.     No representative may address the Meeting without having previously 
obtained the permission of the Chairman.  The Chairman shall call 
upon speakers in the order in which they signify their desire to 
speak. The Chairman may call a speaker to order if his remarks 
are not relevant to the subject under discussion.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 3 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./2 (Adopted)

10th July 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

14. During the discussion of any matter, a representative may rise to a 
point of order and the point of order shall be decided immediately 
by the Chairman in accordance with the rules of procedure.  A 
representative may appeal against the ruling of the Chairman.  The 
ap eal shall be put to a vote immediately, and the Chairman's ruling 
shall stand unless over-ruled by a majority of the representatives 
present and voting.  A representative rising to a point of order 
shall not speak on the substance of the matter under discussion.

15. The Meeting may limit the time to be allotted to :ach speaker, and 
the number of times he may speak on any subject. When debate is 
thus limited and a representative has spoken his allotted time, the 
Chairman shall call him to order without delay.

16. During the discussion of any matter, a representative may move the 
adjournment of the debate on the item under disrussion.  In 
addition to the proposer of the motion, two representatives may speak 
in favour of, and two against, the motion, after which the motion 
shall be put to the vote immediately.  The Chairman may limit the 
time to be allowed to speakers under this rule.

17. A representative may at any time move the closure of the debate on 
the item under discussion, whether or not any other representative 
has signified his wish to speak. Permission to speak on the 
closure of the debate shall be accorded only  two speakers 
opposing the closure, after which the motion shall be put to the 
vote immediately. If the Meeting is in favour of the closure, 
the Chairman shall declare the closure of the debate. The Chairman 
may limit the time to be allowed to sp?akers under this rule. 
(This rule shall not apply to debate in committees.)

18. During the discussion of any matter, a representative may move 
the suspension or the adjournment of the Meeting.  Such motions 
shall not be debated, but shall be put to the vote immediately. 
The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to the speaker 
moving the suspension or adjournment of the Meeting.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 4 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./2 (Adopted)

10th July 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

19. Subject to rule 14, the following motions shall have precedence in the following order over all other proposals or motions before the Meeting :-

        (a) to suspend the eeting;

        (b) to adjourn the Meeting;

        (c) to adjourn the debate on the item under discussion;

        (d) for the closure of the debate on the item under discussion.

20. Decisions of the ieting on all matters of procedure shall be taken by a majority of the representatives participating in the Meeting, each of whom shall have one vote.

Languages

21. English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the official languages of the ieeting.

22. Any representative may speak in a language other than the official languages. However, in such case he shall provide for interpretation into one of the official langurges.

Recommendations and Final Report

23. The recommendations formulated by the Meeting shall be approved by all of the representatives present and shall be set forth in the final report.

24. The final r?port shall also contain a brief account of the proceedings of the ieeting. It will be approved by a majority of the reprusentatives present and shall be transmitted by the secretary of th. i?eting to all governments entitled to participate in the ieeting, for their consideration.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
- 5 -

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED

DOC./2 (Adopted)

10th July, 1961

(ORIGINAL IN ENGLISH)

Amendments

25. These Rules of Procedure may be amended by a two-thirds
majority of the representatives participating at the
Meeting. This rule shall not apply to Rule 23, amendment
of which shall require the approval of all the representatives
present at the Meeting.

MEETING UNCLASSIFIED
