Information exchanging--------Chinese Antarctic Scientific Database  
              
1. System of data management  
China acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 1983. As a member of the Treaty, China has to fulfill the 
obligation. China has set up the Chinese National Antarctic Data Center (CN-NADC), which 
manages and issues Antarctic research data directory and data for exchanging information 
according to the Article III of The Antarctic Treaty 
To insure the effective management of Antarctic data, Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration 
issued The Management Rules of Chinese Polar Scientific Data in May, 2001. It request that 
any group or individual engaging in Antarctic scientific research program has the responsibilities 
of keeping data, copying data and submitting the data copy to CN-NADC in time. CN-NADC will 
take charge of the data management and issue.  
The system of Chinese polar scientific data management is: The Expeditions collect the data, 
submit the brief metadata and data copy to CN-NADC in the prescribed time; CN-NADC 
manages the data collectively and issues the data on the Internet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Polar science data processing flow 
 
 
 
2. Chinese Polar Scientific Database System 
Chinese Polar Scientific Database System, which is based on the Internet, is the technical 
support of Chinese polar data management and share. This database mainly deals with and issues 
Chinese all previous polar research data. According to the data source, the database is going to be 
composed of 8 sub-database:  “Polar Oceanography Database”, “Polar Solar-terrestrial Physics 
Database”, “Polar Glaciology Database”, “Polar Meteorology Database”, “Polar Geology 
Database”, “Polar Earth Physics Database”, “Polar Geodesy Database” and “Polar Ecology and 
Environment Database”. 
The first-run project of Chinese Polar Scientific Database System (mainly “Polar Oceanography 
Original 
data 
Primary 
disposal
Observation
instrument 
Central copy
registration 
Discipline dadabase
Search and obtainment for 
Cooperative users 
Dispersed deposit
Editing metadata
Integrated 
arrangement
International 
polar metadata
inquery 
International 
polar database 
online inquery 
 
Share 
service
International 
polar science 
data users 
Raw data processing 
Database”, “Polar Solar-terrestrial Physics Database” and “Polar Glaciology Database”) supported 
by Ministry of Science and Technology of People’s Republic of China has been completed and the 
database runs well on the Internet. The database system provides a good technical platform for the 
aim of polar research data management and share. 
Up to now, the Database System has included Chinese all previous Antarctic research 
(1984— 1999, from the first to the 16th expedition) dataset of marine investigation and 
Solar-terrestrial Physics observation, 1981/1982 Chinese-Australian ecology research dataset and 
1999 the first Arctic research dataset of marine and atmospheric investigation, amounting to 940 
datasets. All these datasets have metadata of DIF format and most of them are in the table format, 
which can be downloaded as text files. Other datasets not in the table format can be downloaded 
as the compressed format (.ZIP). All metadata are online. Most datasets are online and a few of 
datasets are offline. 
This Database System uses the Metadata System as the search engine. The dataset is under the 
relative metadata. But metadata can be issued separately without the dataset. Unlike some data 
websites which provide the FTP download service, this System provides text and image form for 
the browsers. 
The metadata format: internationally current and extended DIF format (Data Exchange Format)  
The dataset format: All dataset have been changed into two-dimensional tables as they can. 
These datasets can be browsed as two-dimensional tables and downloaded with the metadata as 
text files. The datasets in other formats keep their original formats and can be stored, downloaded 
as binary-system files. But their metadata is still in text files. 
 
3. The future prospect 
The initiation and the first fruits of Chinese Polar Scientific Database System conform to the 
international trend of polar scientific data share. The setup of Oceanography Database, 
Solar-terrestrial Physics Database and Glaciology Database in the first-run project of our system is 
an active response to the challenge. Furthermore, it can be expected that more polar scientific data 
will be saved, protected and issued regularly, such as Polar Meteorology Database, Environment 
Database, Geology Database, etc.  
 
4.The website of the database (www.chinare.org.cn) 
When you are accessed to this website, please register at first and then you can enter the database 
and download freely.  
 
 
 
 
  
