XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-035
Agenda Item: ATCM 5b
ROMANIA
Original: English
         





                                   X XV ATCM – Warsaw, 
                                    September, 10-20, 2002









  


STATEMENT OF THE DELEGATION  OF  ROMANIA










                                                                      Submitted by 
                                                                      ROMANIA












                                     









 STATEMENT OF THE DELEGATION OF ROMANIA

                 Ladies and Gentlemen,

                 On behalf of the Romanian delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to express my vivid gratitude to the Government of Poland for its splendid hospitality, as well its excellent preparation for this meeting. 
     
              Romania signed in 1971 the Antarctic Treaty as the 17th state. We remain fully committed to the Antarctic Treaty and we hope that this meeting will represent an important step in the Antarctic Treaty system.   
                From the scientific point of view, our country has an old tradition in Antarctic research, as the Romanian scientist Emil Racoviţă was the very first biologist in the world that studied life in this continent. 
                 Romania participation in Antarctica consisted, up to now, in the following activities: 
           - scientific research projects within the national research - development  programs;
           - participation in scientific expeditions along with the teams of the states members of the Antarctic Treaty, such as the Russian Federation, Argentina, Australia; 
- participation in the working scientific meetings within the Antarctic Treaty sessions; 
- projects jointly developed with member states of the Antarctic Treaty, such as Argentina, Australia, United Kingdom, in the field of environmental protection in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.
                 Romanian current Antarctic research are of a practical interest for the Romanian scientists specialized in chemistry, biology, biochemistry, environmental protection, geology, geography, engineering, medical science, contributing to a development of the scientific knowledge regarding the zones of the Antarctic Treaty system. 
                  Referring to our future research, we are pleased to mention the ratification of the Cooperation Agreement in Antarctica between the Governments of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay and Romania.
                  Besides the scientific research, we are concerned with the environmental protection in Antarctica.  
                 Even the moment it has been recognized that there was an environmental crisis in Antarctica, it has been found that it is a global one, as the environment deterioration has no boundaries, especially as regards the air, but also the waters flowing from a country to another one, or the ocean that is a collective asset, as well as the plant and animal species jeopardized by the human activities. 
                If we look back, for a brief review, we notice a legislative concern of the Antarctic Treaty states, with or without a consultative party statute, destined to emphasize the idea of Antarctic environmental protection. In this regard, there has been adopted the Protocol of Madrid, that opened a new era for the 21 century as concerns the relationship of the mankind with the Antarctic environment and, to be more specific, with the Antarctic nature. 
                In the documents presented at the Antarctic Treaty meetings, as well as within the Committee of Antarctic Environment Protection, there has been officially recognized that the human activities can lead to the Antarctic environment disturbances, landscape and natural structure deterioration and living species jeopardizing.
                It is the duty of the 45 Antarctic Treaty member states, accounting for 85 % of the Earth population, not to allow the possible deteriorations to become extended or irreversible. 
               On the other hand, in our opinion, the concept of Antarctic nature protection should not be extended to closed areas in which only certain countries or researchers would have access. 
               Scientific and tourism activities cannot be conceived without a favorable environment, but the opposite is also true, as the large nature zones are justified only by reference to the people. 

                For example, the Great Canyon in USA, without its millions of visitors and the numerous researchers, would be but a huge opening in the Earth shell, to which only the human eye confers the quality of unique landscape in the World. In the same time, it is of interest to remember that, in the historical act of Yellowstone Park establishment there was mentioned that it was created “for the people benefit and joy”.
               The anticipated results can be obtained following the cooperation of all of the member states of the Antarctic Treaty, that try to save the exceptional objects and the great Antarctic values, not only for ourselves, but only for the generations to come.
               I would like to thank once again the Polish authorities for their hospitality and to wish you every success in this meeting.

                 
              


