XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-021
Agenda Item: ATCM 11
UNITED KINGDOM
Original: English


UK policy regarding visits by tourists to British stations and historic sites in Antarctica

In July 2002, the UK released a revision of its policy regarding visits by tourists to British research stations and historic sites in Antarctica. The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) prepared this policy, which is attached for information.

The major requirement of the UK policy is that BAS will only accept visits to its stations and historic bases by bona fide members of the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO). This means that non-IAATO companies are denied access to the historic British base at Port Lockroy (one of Antarctica’s top visitor destinations), as well as the opportunity to see at first-hand the high quality science being undertaken at the BAS research stations.

The UK has adopted this policy because it supports IAATO as a means of responsible and active tourist industry self-regulation in Antarctica. Also, the UK considers that IAATO has set high standards for membership entry, maintains and enforces responsible by-laws and guidelines on its members, and acts as an effective contact point for the international Antarctic tour industry. In addition, the UK considers that established member companies of IAATO have proven themselves over the past decade to be experienced, safe and environmentally responsible operators in Antarctica. 

The UK considers that its tourism policy has helped to strengthen the position and role of IAATO in Antarctica, prevented disruption to important British scientific research and minimised impacts to historic British bases. It is hoped that other Consultative Parties might find the policy useful when determining access to their stations, or historic sites in Antarctica.


PROCEDURES FOR TOURIST OR NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS REQUESTING A VISIT TO A
BRITISH ANTARCTIC SURVEY RESEARCH STATION OR HISTORIC SITE


The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) welcome visits to its Antarctic facilities by tour operators who are bone fide IAATO members.  To assist such operators the BAS has developed the following Procedures to help manage such visits : 

1.	The BAS will consider requests for visits to its Signy, Rothera, and exceptionally Halley research stations.  Please note however that the airstrip at Rothera is not available for use by tourist or non-governmental expeditions, except in an emergency. 

2.	IAATO member operators are welcome to visit the historic British base at Port Lockroy, which is operated by BAS on behalf of the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust (UKAHT). The base is usually open from late November until mid-March each Antarctic summer. Visit arrangements should be made with the on site manager via normal established HF and VHF contact.

3.	The Government of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (GSGSSI) research station at King Edward Point (KEP) South Georgia is managed by the BAS but all requests for visits to South Georgia, including the station at KEP must be routed through the GSGSSI.

4.	To help maintain best practice within the Antarctic tourism industry, the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) uses the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) as its main contact point with commercial tour companies. In so doing the BAS will only accept requests for tour ship visits from full members of IAATO.  These bids must be coordinated by IAATO and submitted en-bloc to the Operations Manager, BAS Cambridge, UK by the end of July each year.  

Signy. 		Up to a maximum of four visits per season. 	
(To prevent environmental impact and avoid interference with scientific investigations, tour operators are requested not to land tourists at Signy Island, other than at the Station itself.)  
Rothera.  	Up to a maximum of two visits per season.
Halley.		Visits will be considered on a case-by-case basis.

It is not possible for tourist or non-governmental expeditions to visit the BAS research station at Bird Island, which is a protected area.

Requests for visits should include the following information :	
    • Requested dates for visit(s) to BAS research stations;
    • Objectives of visit to each station;
    • Approximate number of visitors, including leaders;
    • Contact name and address of tour operator of expedition organiser (including telephone, e-mail address, fax and telex numbers).

5. 	Other Non-governmental expeditions must apply independently to the Operations Manager, BAS Cambridge.

6.	If proposed dates for visits cannot be met or clash with planned operations then BAS may offer alternative dates. The BAS will provide written site specific guidelines which may include restrictions on access, numbers of visitors and time ashore. 

7.	Once a provisional date is agreed the organiser is requested to provide the following additional information :
    • Name of the expedition leader;
    • Name of the Captain of the ship;
    • Name, port and country of registration of the ship;
    • The latest edition of the cruise itinerary;
    • Contact details at sea (including Inmarsat telephone, fax and telex numbers, e-mail address, as well as HF radio call frequency).

8.	Final arrangements to visit must be made with the station by HF radio or satellite communication (Inmarsat) 48 hours in advance of the expected time of arrival.  
	The final decision has to be at the discretion of the Base Commander or Station Leader who is free to decline because of weather conditions or possible disruption of base activities.   Please note:  Unscheduled visits are not accepted.

9.	Visitors will normally be briefed either onboard ship or immediately on arrival at the station by the Base Commander. Visitors will then be shown around in small groups (maximum of 30 people at any one time).  Station tours last approximately 30-45 minutes per group.  The tour company is expected to ensure that parties are under the supervision of experienced guides/lecturers. 

10.	It is expected that all tour expeditions and non-governmental expeditions are self-sufficient, have proper medical support and carry adequate insurance cover.

11.	The BAS asks that historic sites, emergency refuge huts, fuel dumps and food stores belonging to BAS should not be interfered with. BAS does not permit tourist or non-governmental expeditions to overnight or stay at its historic huts or refuges, except if prior permission has been given by the BAS Operations Manager. If, in an emergency, materials or supplies are used, BAS must be informed as soon as possible and arrangement made for their replacement.

12.	Post Office facilities will usually be available on Station plus, in addition, the Stations may provide the opportunity for visitors to purchase a range of BAS merchandise (e.g. postcards, cloth patches, pin badges, T shirts). 

13.	The BAS contact point for visit requests is:-

	The Operations Manager		Phone:	 # 44 (0) 1223  221400 Switchboard
	British Antarctic Survey			 #  44 (0) 1223  221637 Direct Dial
	High Cross			Fax:	 #  44 (0) 1223 362616
	Madingley Road			E-mail:		medi@bas.ac.uk
	Cambridge CB3 0ET


Version: July 2002


