XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-017
Agenda Item: ATCM 13
Ukraine
Original: Russian





Ukrainian Antarctic Research Program for 2002 - 2010

I. Introduction

Up-to-date research in Antarctica reflects the people aspiration to sustainable and stable development. The Antarctic Treaty countries are providing the long-term national Antarctic programs to solve the modern problem as global climate changes, an ecological pure food supply, and space weather forecast.
The state program of Ukrainian researches in Antarctica for 2002 –2010 adopted by Cabinet Ministries of Ukraine act of 13 September 2001 No 422-r had defined the strategy of Ukraine activity in Antarctic region for development and support of social-economic, ecologic, scientific and technical, national culture and other activity. Program is formed by accounting of world development directions and progress in sphere of Antarctic researches, and is created the conditions to the Ukraine integration into the world scientific sphere.
Program is the complex of projects of scientific researches in Antarctica and foreseen the development of new technology (Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty).

II. The Program Goal

The main tasks of the Program are the fundamental and applied scientific researches in Antarctic region, which is a unique world scientific range, for solving of global mankind problems and for realization by the Ukraine the International commitments (Article X of the Antarctic Treaty).

III. THE directions of Ukrainian research in Antarctica 

Ukrainian Antarctic Center (UAC) Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine carry out the Ukrainian researches in Antarctica with involvement of the National Academy of Science Institutes and other departments of the country.
At the Vernadsky Antarctic station (65º 15' S, 64º 16' W) the researches in upper atmosphere and earth magnetic field, observations on ozone layer conditions, measurements of the ocean level changes, fundamental meteorological parameters changes observations, biology research are carried out. Besides that glaciology, ecology and synoptic researches are executed. At the summer season the field works on gathering the geological and ice samples are provided.
Oceanography and biological resources researches are divided on two independent blocs: researches during the transatlantic passage and researches on the Scotia sea, South Orkney, South Shetland Islands and Bransfield strait region.
The results of research are processed in Kiev, Sevastopol, Odessa, Kharkov, and Lvov laboratories. The reports on the state of pelagic ecosystems, biological resources are transferred to CCAMLR.
Meteorological data, observations on the total ozone contents, and magnetic field measurements are transferred to World Data Centers and to the British Antarctic Survey according to the Memorandum.
The results of researches on the station are published annually in Ukrainian Antarctic Center Bulletin and other international issues.

Ukrainian Antarctic Research Program for 2002 – 2010 includes thematic researches on the nine directions

    1. Upper atmosphere physics
The new methods of the distant sounding for the gas and plasma state in the upper atmosphere over Antarctica, studying of small gas components in Antarctic atmosphere, studying the polar stratosphere clouds and their influence on ozone layer condition, changes of ultraviolet radiation, studying and forecasting of meteorological and ice situation in West Antarctic on the base of remote soundings.
Priority of the researches on the Vernadsky is program “Investigation of energy spreading processes from Earth surface up to ionosphere and magnetosphere”. The studying of resonance variations of magnetic field of the Earth in its connections with Hall conductivity of lower ionosphere at magnetic conjugate regions is executed. Investigation of world thunderstorm activity by VLF and ULF monitoring is provided. The identification of the upper ionosphere perturbation wave sources using the multi positioning method of coherent HF-signal transmitted by broadcast stations. Research the variations of Alfven ionosphere resonator parameters. Study the nonlinear interaction effects of the electromagnetic fields of different bands with the near-Earth plasma. Study the levels of natural electromagnetic noises and possible impact of industrial contamination emission perturbations in Antarctica. Searching of quasi-periodic variability of upper profile of electronic concentration parameters at the period of passing of acoustic gravity waves, which are spreading from Earth surface.
Researches executed with the purpose of control and warning the possibility of electromagnetic pollution of Antarctica, to studying of correlations between metes-, seismic-, and other disturbances in troposphere and lower atmosphere on ionosphere, definition of the role this processes in formation of global environmental changes. 

2.Oceanography and biological resources research
The oceanography researches in Antarctic part of Atlantic ocean with the goals of the navigation and dynamics, structure and regularity investigation of spatial and temporary variability of hydrological, hydro chemical, hydro physical, optic, acoustic fields and ice cover formation of South ocean. Studying of structure and the pelagic ecosystem dynamics of South Ocean; creating the database of morphology and phenology indications of biodiversity of the Argentina Islands and Antarctic Peninsula to study their role in Antarctic ecosystems.

3. Hydrometeorology
The monitoring of meteorology situation, state of ozone layer, the climate of Antarctic Peninsula region in frame of international Global system of climate changes observations; execution of polar circulation system of middle atmosphere on long term changes of full concentration of ozone over polar regions. Providing by weather forecasts for navigation safety, working out of monitoring system for sea ice cover conditions in association of climate changes; investigation of synoptic phenomenon for fundamental regularity revealing in behavior of large-scale circulation in South troposphere and stratosphere.

4. Geology and Geophysical researches 
Studying of the structure, evolution regularity and mineral composition peculiarity of Antarctic lithosphere, geology and geophysics researches of main regions of Antarctic in the frame of international Programs, executions of geophysical researches and monitoring in West Antarctic directed to studying of deep processes in the lithosphere and their influence to environment.

5. Medical and physiological researches
Development of the functional diagnostic and adaptation technologies methods to provide the effective work of man in extreme Antarctic conditions; creating the information base of the regulatory documents of medical security of long living in Antarctica, studying of physical state changes of man in connection to biology rhythms variability within Antarctic winter; studying of physiologic reaction and medical security technology at the period of diving work in Antarctic condition.

6. Ecology
Investigation of character, quality and quantity the anthropogenic and natural impact to modern climate; working out the concept, ways and possibilities of environment security; development the ecology monitoring according to the Madrid Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty; researches on anthropogenic pollutions spreading within the sea in Argentina Islands archipelago area.

7. New technology
Creating the geographical informational system (GIS) for the region of activity of Ukrainian Antarctic station Vernadsky; working out and instillation of autonomous automatic meteorological complex for measurement of meteorological parameters of surface layer of atmosphere on Antarctic Peninsula; creation of autonomous point of energetic supplying (solar battery, wind generators); creating of equipment for domestic water cleaning; creation and manufacture of fuel tanks; production of high effective panoramic hydro acoustic multi-aim complex for bathymetry works. 

8. Information activity
Publishing the Ukrainian Antarctic research results received at Vernadsky station; creation of database and WEB-page for main field of researches, providing the scientific and popular information according to Antarctic Treaty system for education purposes to Ukrainian schools, organization of permanent exhibition “Ukraine in Antarctica”.

9. System management of the Program
Development of the regulation acts for the physical and juridical Ukraine person’s activity in Antarctica according to the Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol system.

In the frame of the Program the four main research ways are planned:
- the continuous observations and researches on the Akademik Vernadsky Antarctic station;
- the season researches at the station region with extension of work region to the West part of Antarctic Peninsula;
- the researches during the of Transatlantic voyage of research vessel;
- the new technologies development and instillation.

IV. The termS of activity 

The period of the Program activity is 2002-2010. Realization of main Program tasks had divided to three stages:
The first stage is in 2002 – 2004.
The second stage if in 2005 –2007.
The third stage is in 2008 – 2010.

According to the nine fields of research to provide the instillation of the research equipment and the scientific data collection. Provide the scientific experiments. Process the data and carry out the theoretical, physical, and technical possibilities to create the new scientific instruments. Create the models of investigated phenomenon and processes, the new methods of researches.

V. International cooperation 	

The international cooperation in logistics and research in Antarctica have to increase the economic, research and technical level effectiveness of the Program. 
VI. The expected results

As a result of fundamental and applied researches we are expecting the new knowledge on Antarctic environment. The results will be useful in space research, fishing, ecology, communications, biology, medicine, hydrometeorology, and in political, education and information spheres.

The Program gives the possibilities:

To receive the results of the influences of industry and endogenous factors on climate change in XXI century;
To research the energy exchange in global system “ocean – atmosphere – ionosphere – magnetosphere“ which gives the possibility for forecasts of natural and industrial disturbances;
To work out the new methods of remote sensing for gas-plasma upper atmosphere conditions over Antarctica;
On the base of the geophysical spatial and temporal structure monitoring using the geomagnetic field measurements to receive information on processes in Earth lithosphere;
To build the evolution geodynamic model of the region;
To research the connection between global long term climate and environment changes within the geophysical factors;
To provide the recommendations to fishing;
To provide the weather forecasts for safe navigation;
To work out the effective technologies for expedition staff survival in climatic and geographical conditions of the region; 
To produce the human organism monitoring system for operational diagnostic and pathologic changes correction;
To develop the functional and diagnostic methods for adaptation technology to provide the effective work of people in the extremely Antarctic conditions;
To provide the permanent ecology monitoring according to the Madrid Protocol.
