XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-091
Agenda Item: 
ARGENTINA
Original: English

ASSISTANCE TO THE VESSEL “MAGDALENA OLDENDORFF” PROVIDED BY THE ARGENTINE ICEBREAKER “ALMIRANTE IRIZAR”.

	On June 25, 2002, “Almirante Irizar “Icebreaker of the Argentine Navy, began an operation in order to assist the “Magdalena Oldendorff” merchant vessel of Liberian flag as request of the shipowner, Oldendorff Carriers, a German company. The vessel was trapped since June 11, 2002, in an old icefield at 69º 56’ 24” (S) 001º 23’ 40” (W).

	The Magdalena Oldendorff freighted by the “Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute”  (A.A.R.I.) of Saint Petersburg, Russia, sailed to start scientific research and bring supplies to Novolazarevskaya base, at 70º 45’ S latitude and 011º 51’ E longitude.

	The merchant vessel sailed towards Antarctica in the middle of May, from the port of Cape Town, South Africa, with a crew of 107 people, 79 of them were scientists.

	The plan for this operation was to use the A.R.A. Almirante Irizar Icebreaker with two Sea King Helicopters on board, ready for action in the Antarctic.

	A deep analysis of the ice situation of the area where the operation was going to take place, and its possible evolution, was made while planning the operation. Since the beginning of the operation, the technical and scientific capacity of the Glaciology Division of the Navy Hydrography Service, the information supplied by the “National Ice Centre” (N.I.C.) of the United States, through high resolution satellite images, and by the “Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute” of Saint Petersburg, were taken advantage of.  Satellite reception capacity of the Almirante Irizar icebreaker was also considered.

	After a careful analysis, it was calculated that the operation would take between 70 to 90 days minimum to fulfil some of the following tasks:

	- Approach the area of operations and in situ assessment of the glaciology conditions and the possibility of penetrating the icefield to perform other tasks.

	- recuperate as much of the “non essential” crew as possible. (Task performed by helicopters of the South African Air Force from the Agulhas scientific vessel, a distance of 120/180 naval miles (NM), before Irizar’s arrival).	

	- Refuel and provide food supplies by means of helicopters if the weather conditions allowed it. 

	- Coupling to the Magdalena Oldendorff vessel to supply it (if Muskegbukta Bay was approachable, where the Magdalena Oldendorff was luffed).

	- Provide convoy icebreaker and/or tow services if, considering the characteristics of the icefield and the vessel, it were possible to open a sailing canal for the Magdalena Oldendorff.

	- Provide any other reasonable assistance.

	According to the plan made before weighing anchor, a course was chosen to reach the area as soon as possible, saving supplies and fuel and with the lowest possible exposure to the South Atlantic storms.

	The Icebreaker, after promptly getting ready, sailed on June 25 from Buenos Aires towards Puerto Galván (Bahía Blanca) where it refuelled to its maximum capacity (including 800 cubic metres of Fuel Oil for the Magdalena Oldendorff), and, on July 11, arrived at a set point at 60º (S) latitude, 0º longitude, to then penetrate the icefield and side with the Magdalena Oldendorff on July 17.

	In summary, in only 22 days after leaving, the Almirante Irizar sailed more than 8,000 NM (540 of these across solid icefield), being able to side the Magdalena Oldendorff stuck in an old icefield.

	After the icebreaker arrived, the Magdalena Oldendorff was refuelled with 600 m3 of Fuel Oil, and approximately 50 tons of food were supplied.

	When this task was finished, the operation to return North began searching for free waters, which at this time of the year (July 19) were found at 58º 30’ S latitude.

	Once the two convoy units started sailing and due to the weather changes that modified the characteristics of the icefield (more concentration, more thickness, more pressure, more refreezing and less movement of the ice masses), it was decided to return to the area of the Muskegbukta Bay to avoid drifting to the West-South West that unavoidingly led both units into the Sea of Weddell stream, which meant they could be trapped in the ice until the next summer.

	The convoy of both vessels drifted for eight days, until the Magdalena Oldendorff was set free and under protection. Later, the Almirante Irizar explored new courses across the icefield trying to find an alternative to sail in convoy towards free waters.

	The Commanders of the Antarctic Navy and of the Icebreaker, and the Captain of the Magdalena Oldendorff analysed the situation and decided that if the alternative routes to the North could not be jointly navigated, the survival of the crew and of the supplies of both vessels was reasonably certain, even in the hypothetical case of being forced to wait for the ice to melt in summer.

	On July 28, while the units were luffed in Muskegbukta Bay, glaciology flights were made in order to find possible navigation courses.

	Alternative courses of action were analysed, then the Company and the Argentine Navy agreed that the Magdalena Oldendorff vessel would remain luffed and ready to spend the winter there. To this purpose, fuel (200 m3  of Fuel Oil), lubricants (4,000 lts. of Disola Oil M40 and 410 lts. Omala Oil 320), food and medicine were supplied. At request of the Magdalena Oldendorff, a doctor in medicine of the Icebreaker crew stayed on board.

	On July 30, the A.R.A. Almirante Irizar Icebreaker was left free to manoeuvre and return to Buenos Aires port, where it arrived on August 18, 2002, after sailing across 850 NM of solid ice and more than 16,500 NM (more than 30,000 km).

