XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-079 
Agenda Item: CEP 4g 
CHILE 
Original: English 
 
 
Installation of a structure and appropriate signaling at the ruins of President 
Pedro Aguirre Cerda Base, Pendulum Cove, Deception Island. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At the XXIV ATCM (Saint 
Petersburg, Russia, 9-20 July 2001) 
Chile introduced Working Paper  34, 
proposing inclusion of the ruins of 
Base Pedro Aguirre Cerda, 
Pendulum Cove, Deception Island 
on the List of Historic Sites and 
Monuments annexed to 
Recommendation VII-IX. 
The Committee for Environmental 
Protection recommended that 
Measure 2 (2001) 
approving such inclusion be adopted by the XXIV ATXCM. 
The relevant text adopted on that ocassion was: 
 
“The ruins of the base Pedro Aguirre Cerda, being a Chilean metereological and volcanological 
centre situated at Pendulum Cove, Deception Island, Antarctica, that was destroyed by volcanic 
eruption in 1967 and 1969. 
 
The Base was inaugurated on February 18 1955 with the presence of the Minister for National 
Defense, Tobías Barros Ortiz and other high officials. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was 
represented by Oscar Pinochet de la Barra. The Pedro Aguirre Cerda Base  was built and 
operated by the Chilean Air Force as a Metereological Centre. At the annual WMO Meeting in 
Australia, January  1966, the centre was designated  as 
Regional Metereological Centre and Regional Telecommunications Centre for the Antarctic 
Peninsula region, on the same rank that McMurdo (USA and Mirny (USSR) held for other areas 
of Antarctica. 
 
In addition to metereology, scientific activities including seismology, volcanology, atmospheric 
radioation, biology, geology and other studies were supported by the Base. 
 A Seismological Station registered horizontal and vertical movements, while the Volcanological 
Centre had a number of thermometers buried in the ground at different depths, in order to 
register variations in the earth´s temperature. 
 
It should be remembered that from October 1967 onwards,  seismic activity increased in 
frequency, intensity and magnitude, there were 341 seismic movements during November 
culminating in a volcanic eruption on the island, 4 December 1967. This caused rapid 
evacuations of Argentine, British and Chilean stations. Chilean naval vessel “Piloto Pardo”, 
which hade enterd Port Foster on 29 November, was able to leave five hours before the seaquake 
ocurred in the bay, due to millions of tons thrown by the Deception volcano. Further eruptions 
took place in February 1969 and 
August 1970, and totally 
destroyed the Pedro Aguirre 
Cerda Base. 
 
At ATCM XXIV, Chile 
informed that the description of 
the site would be further 
clarified in order to guide 
tourists and other visitors, and 
with a view to indicating the 
extent of debris that might be 
removed. Such revised 
description could not be made 
available during the review of 
the List of Historic Sites and 
Monuments to be carried inter-
sessionally because information gathered during the International Expedition to Deception Island 
had to be processed and evaluated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the basis of a report submitted by Chilean architect Guillermo Muñoz, there is now  a 
preliminary assessment on the relative amount of debris to be removed. During the month of 
February 2003, an aluminum structure identifying the ruins  in conformity with the sentence 
contained in Measure 2 (2001) will be installed. The plaque shall also contain a chart with the 
ground plant of the Base and other installations, and a notice of the activities developed at the 
station. At that time, clean-up and removal of all debris not considered ruins shall be effected by 
sea. The results of this operation will be duly reported to the ATCM and to the Coordinating 
Party of the Historic Site Review if such review is not yet concluded at the time. 
 
Chile will also consider the issue of drawing a boundary of the Historic Site, in order to enhance 
its protection, in the context of on-going consultations concerning  a proposed ASMA for 
Deception Island, encompassing ASPAs and Historic Sites. 
 
 
