The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
The Antarctica Project
ASOC Secretariat
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W.
Washington, DC 20009 USA
Tel +1 202 234-2480
Fax +1 202 387 4823
antarctica@igc.org
www.asoc.org


XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-083
Agenda Item 11 
ASOC
Original language: English

Regulating Antarctic Tourism

Information Paper submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)


Summary

ASOC has, over a number of years, provided papers on particular aspects of Antarctic tourism activity. These are listed here. At the St. Petersburg ATCM in 2001, ASOC reopened the issue of regulation of Antarctic Tourism. The present paper aims to assist Parties in taking the policy discussion forward. It reprises key issues in ATCM XXIV/IP 40, challenges arguments against regulating commercial tourism and outlines a number of options open to Parties. The most appropriate options appear to be regulation through one or more of: an additional annex under the Protocol; an Antarctic Treaty Measure; or a new Antarctic Treaty System instrument – a Convention for the Regulation of Antarctic Tourism.


Introduction

At XXIV ATCM, the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) reopened the question of regulation of Antarctic Tourism, which had lain dormant in the decade since the adoption of the Protocol – at which time, a number of Consultative Parties had recognised the need for regulation.

During this decade, annual discussion of tourism has been largely directed towards issues of data collection, reporting, environmental impact assessment (EIA) and monitoring – worthy technical issues – while fundamental questions about the wider implications of this industry have not been posed. 

ASOC’s paper (XXIV ATCM/IP 40 – Antarctic Tourism) suggested that in the face of a rapidly growing Antarctic tourist industry, Parties need to take responsibility for regulation, recognising the potential for the industry to cause unwanted impacts on the region’s environment, and destabilisation of its limited political regime and key institutions. We argued that in order to avoid the Antarctic becoming the object of international discord, Parties needed to constrain and directly manage commercial activities such as the Antarctic tourism industry, and that self-regulation by the industry was not sufficient.

This proposal generated a lively debate in St Petersburg, which is partly reflected in the report language for Agenda item 13 (XXIV ATCM Final Report, paragraphs 104-112), where Parties recognised that tourism is an important Treaty issue, and should be the subject of detailed discussion at XXV ATCM (paragraph 112).

We have subsequently called for regulation of Antarctic tourism elsewhere, including in a paper prepared for the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD), just concluded in Johannesburg (Antarctica and the Southern Ocean: Global Commons, Global Wilderness, Global Heritage).

Specific responses to particular aspects of tourist industry management have been proposed by ASOC in other papers:

    • In relation to improving Protocol compliance by yachts, in: XXV ATCM/IP 76 Improving Awareness of Protocol Obligations amongst Antarctic Yacht Operators;

    • In relation to large ships, and a dependence on EIA, in: XXII ATCM/IP 121 - Large Scale Antarctic Tourism;

    • In relation to tourism overflights, in XIX ATCM/IP 38 – Qantas Antarctic Overflights;

    • In relation to problems of EIA application to tourist activity, in: Hemmings, AD & Roura, R. A Square Peg in a Round Hole: Fitting Impact Assessment under the Antarctic Environmental Protocol to Antarctic Tourism – paper presented at Assessing the Impact of Impact Assessment: Impact Assessment for Informed Decision Making, The Hague, June 20021;

    • In relation to Strategic Environmental Assessment, in: XII SATCM/IP 10 – Antarctic Strategic Environmental Assessment: Application to the Growing Antarctic Tourism Industry; and

    • In relation to improving the regulation of tourist vessels flagged in non-Party states, in:  XXV ATCM/IP 63 – Port State Jurisdiction: An Appropriate International Law Mechanism to Regulate Vessels Engaged in Antarctic Tourism. 

A listing of ATCM materials relating to Antarctic tourism is provided separately as XXV ATCM/IP 52 – ATCM Papers, Discussions & Recommendations relating to Tourism and Non-governmental Activities.

The purpose of this paper is to assist Parties in taking the policy discussion forward, to challenge the assumptions of the supposed status quo, and suggest in outline a number of options which Parties might examine as a means of regulating Antarctic Tourism. ASOC is encouraged by the fact that a number of Parties have plainly given thought to these issues in the period since XXIV ATCM, and looks forward to a substantial discussion of policy issues at XXV ATCM in Warsaw.

Reprise of Issues

ASOC’s XXIV ATCM/IP 40 presented concerns about the implications of a continually growing tourism industry in some detail. Those issues are only revisited in outline here.

Antarctic tourism grew substantially from the early 1990s, climbing from around 4,800 passengers in 1990/91 (when the Protocol was adopted), to over 12,200 in 2000/01 and over 15,000 in 2001/02 (with a spike of over 14,700 in the “millennium” year 1999/2000). In the decade following Protocol adoption, annual tourist numbers increased by around two and a half times. This is a steeply climbing curve – and indications are that this trend will continue for the foreseeable future. The Antarctic tourism industry itself estimates a steady annual increase in numbers over the next few years, reaching 26,000 tourists by 2006/07 (XXV ATCM/IP 73). 

One must be cautious with the publicly available figures – they rarely seem to measure the same things. Some include only IAATO member activity; some only landings (which is curious, since neither environmental impacts, nor the obligations of the Protocol, are restricted to activities ashore); some exclude aircraft overflights. This is further complicated by inter-annual variation due to such events as the 1999/2000 “millennium” year (where there was a spike in numbers) and the 2002/03 year where there are some indications of a post-“September 11” depression of numbers. However, if one looks at numbers of paying passengers entering the Antarctic Treaty Area (which is at the core of the issue requiring management initiatives), the picture overall is one of a steady yearly increase. Some industry insiders have projected steeper growth rates (eg Naveen et al, 20012, whose statistical projection suggested “in excess of 75,000 visitors by the 2003/04 season” – a figure that presently seems unlikely that early, but plausible in the near-term)

But, even given total tourist numbers kept within the range 25,000 – 30,000 by the second half of the decade, we are seeing something like a doubling of annual tourist numbers over this period. It therefore appears that not only are the numbers increasing, but also the rate of growth is accelerating. 

As we noted in XXIV ATCM/IP 40, this is the classic pattern of tourist development anywhere in the world, and there is nothing peculiarly Antarctic which will of itself limit this, apart from a horrific accident – and then probably only temporarily (consider the resumption of Antarctic overflights by Qantas and others within 15 years or so of the tragic Air New Zealand aircrash on Mount Erebus in 1979). Antarctic Treaty Parties need to manage Antarctic tourism to head-off the traditional problems associated with unrestricted tourism growth, including: environmental impact, conflict with other established uses and values, operational safety standards, search and rescue responsibility, and the peculiarly Antarctic problem of the risks that large-scale commercial activity poses to the stability of the thin, discontinuous (and politically fragile) Antarctic governance regime. This will be much easier to do if the means of regulation are put in place now, and not left until we have an established mass tourism industry in Antarctica.


The Tenability of Arguments Against Action

There are various arguments posed by officials, industry representatives and others against the need for action to regulate Antarctic tourism. 

It is sometimes denied that the level of industry activity is in fact increasing in any consistent manner – whatever increases we see in the statistics are (somehow) temporary aberrations, which will inevitably be constrained by natural limits on either the market or operational difficulties. Others concede growth, but dispute its rate, shape and absolute levels – again, usually on market or supposed operational-constraints assumptions. Some others cast the present absolute scale of Antarctic tourism activity not in terms of other existing human activities in Antarctica (long since surpassed on numbers alone), but in global tourism industry terms. The scale is slight, they say, compared with everywhere else – ergo, no problem.  This seems to ASOC a particularly pernicious line. It dooms Antarctica to complacency until the intensity of human activity reaches levels of impact found elsewhere on our planet, and thereby abandons the reasonable stance that Antarctica can and should be managed to avoid the sort of unfortunate effects we have seen elsewhere. It is an argument for treating Antarctica like everywhere else – raw material for exploitation until the danger signs become so obvious that we can no longer ignore them.

A different line of argument is to assert that all human activities in Antarctica are of equal moral standing, and that as a consequence one cannot single out a particular activity for constraint. It is all or nothing – essentially the post-modern critique. This of course ignores the fact that Parties have designated Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science. The trinity of environment, science and peace have been determined to be the priorities of Antarctic concern. Tourism, while a legitimate activity, has not been accorded a similar status, and there is nothing improper about Parties regulating it to safeguard those priority values.

There is a presumption on the part of some, that the growing tourism industry can be sufficiently regulated by the industry itself (self-regulation).  To challenge this is to cause offence to the present industry, and to stimulate its champions in government agencies to rise in defence. In fact, the present industry has very little to do with the shape and size of the Antarctic tourism issues we have to face.

The present industry – and its association - has particular historic roots in the small, owner/operated, ship-based, polar-specific companies of the late 80s, largely (although not solely) based in the United States. While comprising different companies, the scale and model of activity was internally reasonably consistent. It was fairly easy to adopt industry standards – and these included, initially, commitments in relation to passenger capacity as a requirement of membership.

As the industry diversifies, however, the viability of this sort of association comes into question. It faces difficulties whichever way it turns. Hold onto existing small-ship terms of membership, and newer and larger operators cannot join - and the association loses influence (and utility to its supporting Parties). Jettison problematical entry requirements to encourage new operators to join, and you maintain the influence, but invariably lower standards. As the tourism industry follows the usual pattern, and larger conglomerates become the dominant players, the need to enter any association may decline – and certainly changes the shape of any association that is maintained.

The cruel fact of the matter is that, if experience in the tourist industry elsewhere is any guide (and it surely is), the present Antarctic tourist operators will not be the determinants of the industry’s future form, scale or direction.

In even the medium-term (and this may be less than a decade) the viability of an Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) strategy predicated on industry-association management will become untenable – which is not a reflection on the integrity of anybody presently involved in it, but a recognition that this is the way that the tourism industry normally transforms itself. The consequence of this is that, on pragmatic grounds alone, something more is required.

But there are also other arguments for relying on more than “self-regulation”. If Parties are in fact building their regulation of Antarctic tourism through an industry association (or associations), they are ceding substantial control of a major human activity across some 10% of the planet to commercial interests. 

Large parts of the world have previously been handed over to incorporated or charted companies such as the Hudson Bay Company, Verenigd Oost-Indische Compagnie, International Association for the Congo, etc. It is not clear that the wider public good, and non-commercial interests in particular, can be adequately secured under this sort of dispensation. This model also seems unlikely to be an acceptable system of regulation to the wider international community, and risks stresses even within the ATS, given Antarctica’s unresolved sovereignty positions and the restricted beneficiaries of the industry.

It is also an approach quite different to that adopted by the ATS towards previous emerging industries in Antarctica, where there have been attempts to regulate these through discrete, activity-specific conventions.


The Options for Regulation

    1. No Action

The consequences of deciding to take no action include serious risk to the Antarctic environment, potential instability in the Antarctic Treaty System, and a projection to the global community by Parties that Antarctica has here – as with fishing – been effectively handed over to private corporations.

    2. Additional Guidelines

Guidelines have become a favoured mechanism for introducing voluntary technical standards – particularly of an environmental nature. Since the revision of the Recommendations system in 1995, Guidelines have invariably been adopted as a “Resolution”. A number of Resolutions apply to Antarctic tourism (see XXV ATCM/IP 52).

This mechanism works well enough as the first stage in a developmental sequence, where the issue is narrow (and best practice liable to change quickly). However, as merely hortatory text – albeit adopted at an ATCM – a Resolution lacks the legal weight to effectively regulate Antarctic tourism.

    3. Regulation through an additional Protocol Annex

The proposition that Antarctic tourism poses particular issues that warrant specific treatment in a dedicated annex to the Protocol was first publicly put forward by France, Chile and Italy in 1992 (XVII ATCM/WP1). The three states made a careful, reasoned case for this approach. The approach is revisited in XXV ATCM/WP2, where France notes its intention to submit a draft annex or similar to XXVI ATCM.

ASOC is not opposed to such an approach, notwithstanding our opposition to the proposal a decade ago3. The concern then was that in the immediate aftermath of the abandonment of CRAMRA, there should be no distractions from the priority goal of achieving a strong, generically applicable Protocol. From the current standpoint, with a decade’s experience of the application of the Protocol (albeit for an extended period on an informal basis) behind us, and the foregoing analysis of tourism developments and trends, the perspective can obviously be somewhat different.

The difficulty with attempting to regulate Antarctic tourism through an additional annex to the Protocol really relates to the purposes of the Protocol. At issue is whether a specific tourism annex is a sufficient and appropriate basis for regulation. The Protocol is directed to managing human activity in order to secure comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. It implicitly assumes that basic questions about access, purpose and propriety of activity in general have in some sense been resolved elsewhere. The brief for the Protocol is essentially the moderation of activities for their environmental effect, not the a priori determination of the legitimacy or overall scale of the activity.

While tourism – like other activities – certainly does pose particular issues in relation to the environment, this is not the only sort of problem that ASOC sees emerging as the tourism industry grows. These problems may indeed feed back and thus exacerbate environmental pressures and impacts, but they have other sorts of consequences along the way. It is not clear to us that a regime directed to environmental protection is therefore necessarily the most appropriate instrument to regulate these wider aspects.

It is conceivable that if the more general issues posed by the Antarctic tourism industry are addressed elsewhere, either no change, or only supplementary changes, may be necessary to the Protocol. Whether any such supplementary changes would best be accomplished through an additional annex, or through specific amendments to the other annexes, is not yet clear. ASOC does not have a fixed position on what may in any case be necessary by way of updating the Protocol annexes.

    4. Antarctic Treaty Measure

A “Measure” is a text that contains provisions intended to be legally binding once it has been approved by all the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (Decision 1, 1995). It thus has the capacity to impose substantive obligations. Moreover as a mechanism under the 1959 Treaty, as opposed to the Protocol, it provides a basis for regulation beyond the environmental brief of the latter. 

Using a Measure to establish general regulation of Antarctic tourism would see more far-reaching use of the mechanism than hitherto. There is a worthy precedent for substantive treatment in this manner, the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. The Agreed Measures were adopted as Recommendation III-VIII in 1964, and introduced key early elements of Antarctic environmental protection such as the concept of “harmful interference”, “specially protected species” and “specially protected areas”. Indeed, the Agreed Measures remained the basis for these important obligations until the entry-into-force of the Protocol in 1998 when the operative mechanism for these obligations (updated) became its annexes.

    5. New ATS Instrument

Antarctic Treaty System practice has been to address emerging industry interest in Antarctica through autonomous international treaties – situated under the umbrella of the 1959 Treaty. 

The apparent resurgence in interest in an Antarctic sealing industry in the 1960s led to the adoption of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) in 1972, the prospects of major interest in Antarctic krill, whitefish and other marine harvesting stimulated adoption of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) in 1980, and the interest in Antarctic minerals led to the adoption of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities in 1988 (although this was subsequently abandoned). On the face of it, this would be the logical and system-consistent route to regulating Antarctic tourism.

The development of a separate instrument – a Convention for the Regulation of Antarctic Tourism (CRAT) – would leave the existing instruments untouched, and would still require the application of Protocol obligations, but these would now operate downstream from more general guidance on the modalities of Antarctic tourism.


Conclusions

Plainly ASOC sees the options of “No Action” and “Additional Guidelines” as entirely untenable. They simply cannot address the need for regulation of Antarctic tourism. 

There are strengths and weaknesses with each of the other three mechanisms. ASOC does not assert a preference between them at this point, nor do we see any objection in principle to a combination of mechanisms, if this will best achieve effective regulation.

The immediate task is to begin a substantive discussion at the policy level at XXV ATCM in Warsaw about how the Antarctic Treaty System can develop a means of regulating Antarctic tourism, so that the vital interests of the Antarctic environment and polity can be securely protected.
