The Antarctic and Southern Ocean 
Coalition 
The Antarctica Project 
ASOC Secretariat 
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W. 
Washington, DC 20009 USA 
Tel +1 202 234-2480 
Fax +1 202 387 4823 
antarctica@igc.org 
www.asoc.org 
 
 
XXV ATCM 
Information Paper 81 
 Agenda Item 8 
ASOC 
Original: English 
 
On Worst Case Scenarios 
 
Information Paper submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 
(ASOC) 
 
Introduction 
 
COMNAP’s Working Paper XXV ATCM/WP 25 addresses “worst case” and “less than 
worse case” scenarios for environmental emergencies. It is described as a “work in 
progress”. ASOC provides this Information Paper as a contribution to this work – and to 
assist Parties in their discussions on these matters in the Liability sessions in Warsaw. 
 
The Conception of Environmental Emergencies 
 
ASOC was encouraged at XII SATCM when the US appeared to refine the conception of 
environmental emergency in its draft Liability Annex to include chronic or systemic 
impacts. The COMNAP paper, by contrast, still seems largely focussed on the idea of 
environmental emergencies as discrete catastrophic events.  
 
Sea-based Worst-case Scenarios  
 
COMNAP’s identification (in the first bullet point of paragraph 4) of vessel loss and 
resulting fuel release to the marine environment as the worst case scenario for a sea-based 
environmental emergency may be reasonable. Few, in any case, would doubt that it 
constitutes an extremely serious event, that we should build into our calculations. 
 
The reservation ASOC has about the scoping of this scenario is that it needs to better 
consider the consequences of such a contingency in the general marine environment – not 
just on “environmentally sensitive areas”. The danger with this term, is that it may be 
taken to mean essentially the coastal environment. It is a widespread and common fallacy 
– by no means restricted to the Antarctic – that discharges into the sea which are not near 
concentrations of wildlife, beaches or other types of coastline, are somehow inherently 
less significant. ASOC does not believe this thinking should prevail in Antarctica. It may 
be that the authors did not intend this interpretation, in which case it should be made 
more explicit. A sea-based environmental emergency may occur anywhere south of 60o – 
and indeed, the Protocol’s commitments in relation to dependent and associated 
ecosystems suggest an even wider application.  
 
The third bullet point of paragraph 4 notes the additional problems which may be posed 
by “heavy fuel” rather than “Arctic diesel”. This is an important point. However, we 
believe that it is larger vessels, rather than tourism vessels per se which are likely to use 
heavy fuel – particularly some of the very large cruise vessels now appearing in Antarctic 
tourist use. 
 
Land-based Worst-case Scenarios  
 
ASOC does not believe that the three scenarios listed at paragraph 6 are necessarily the 
only, or most serious, scenarios. 
 
Whilst we are not suggesting this as a definitive listing, we believe that the following 
additional scenarios warrant consideration: 
 
• Mass mortality of chicks, egg loss and/or desertion by parent birds resulting from 
harmful interference at avian breeding colonies (most obviously with southern giant 
petrel, or penguin species) resulting from pedestrian, vehicular or aircraft activity; 
 
• Destruction of breeding habitat, stands of vegetation, or ground forms by vehicular or 
pedestrian traffic – either catastrophically in a single incident, or chronically; 
 
• Intra-antarctic transfer of organisms (eg through equipment, clothing or footwear 
used in different parts of the Antarctic Treaty Area). Benninghoff and Bonner (1985) 
observed that, in terms of environmental impact, internal introductions may be a 
significant issue.  
 
In paragraph 6, it is declared that the “introduction of non-indigenous species or disease” 
is “mentioned for the sake of completeness”. It is asserted that there are “no known cases 
of any viable presence of non-indigenous species on the Antarctic or the islands of the 
northern Antarctic”, and “no known cases for the introduction of disease”. 
 
The assertions about non-indigenous species are – unfortunately – wrong.  
 
 
Non-indigenous species 
 
The viability of experimentally-introduced organisms in the Antarctic Treaty Area was 
demonstrated decades ago (eg: Holdgate, 1964; Edwards and Green, 1973; Edwards, 
1980). 
 
Examples of actual, apparently unintentional, introductions of non-indigenous species 
into the Antarctic Treaty Area have also been well documented for decades: 
 
• Deception Island, South Shetland Islands - two non-indigenous grass species (Poa 
annua and P. pratensis) (Longton, 1966; 1985); 
• Larsemann Hills - “seeds of grasses and other plants … have been introduced and … 
appear to be capable of reproducing and establishing in the Antarctic environment” 
(Australia, 1995); 
 
• near Syowa station - an alien grass (Poa trivialis) 5 metres from a hut, forming a tuft 
circa 20 cm across, which is known to have flowered, and is believed to have 
survived for more than 3 winters (Japan, 1996);  
 
• Signy Island (South Orkney Islands) - non-indigenous chironomid midge, 
Eretmoptera murphyi, and enchytraeid worms belonging to an undescribed species, 
and probably a new genus (Block, Burn and Richards,1984). The latter may be the 
same taxa as found at another site in the South Orkneys and at Deception Island. The 
authors report that these taxa (sourced to plant material from the Falklands and/or 
South Georgia) “have survived at least 17 years on the site” - adjacent to the British 
Antarctic Survey station Signy – and successfully reproduced and adapted.  
 
• Dry Valleys - evidence for introductions of non-indigenous micro-organisms. A study 
monitoring the Dry Valley Drilling Project, reported “increased number of microbial 
contaminants in the surrounding environment as a result of drilling and field camp 
activities”, and identified Penicillium spp (“notorious camp followers”), “previously 
undetectable molds” and “spore-forming bacteria such as Bacillus spp and 
nonindigenous coryneforms” (Cameron, Honour and Morelli, 1977). The well-known 
early SCAR examination of human impact on the Antarctic environment notes, 
apropos the introduction of alien biota, that micro-organisms pose the greatest threat 
and that those surviving and propagating “may have an impact anywhere in the 
Antarctic” including in “sterile areas, such as the Dry Valleys [where] even the 
introduction of forms occurring naturally elsewhere in the Antarctic will have an 
impact” (Benninghoff and Bonner, 1985).  
 
There may be other instances. Drawing on the pre-1990 reports, a leading Antarctic 
ecologist has observed that “the potential for adequately preadapted vascular plants and 
soil invertebrates to become established has been demonstrated by both controlled 
experimental introductions … and, more seriously, by unintentional invertebrate 
introductions” (Lewis Smith, 1990).  
 
Introduced disease 
 
The paper asserts that there have been no known cases for the introduction of diseases. 
COMNAP appears to have overlooked the substantial work on Antarctic disease risk led 
by Australia in recent years.  
 
The question is less whether it has been conclusively proven that particular events are the 
result of specifically isolated and identified non-indigenous organisms, than whether 
there are reasonable grounds for considering that such organisms may be implicated in 
disease events. The difficulties of proving an unambiguous causal link between a 
particular disease organism and specific mortality or morbidity in wild animal 
populations is a global, rather than a particularly Antarctic, problem. Whatever gaps in 
knowledge remain, there remains a reasonable basis for believing that the discovery of 
Infective Bursal Disease Virus (IBDV) antibodies in some Adelie penguin populations 
may be indicative of exposure to this virus. Until there is some demonstration that this is 
naturally occurring in Antarctica, or has been transported by natural vector, it is also 
reasonable to consider that it may have been introduced through human agency, 
particularly since it is an established problem in poultry stocks.  
 
Hazardous Materials 
 
The list of hazardous materials considered at paragraph 7 omits an important and, by 
volume, possibly a major source of hazardous materials - drilling fluids (often 
hydrocarbons such as diesel) and the extremely toxic chemicals used as anti-freezes in 
Antarctic equipment and operations.  
 
Secondary Fuel Containment 
 
The reference to secondary fuel containment - and COMNAP guidelines – at paragraph 8 
is a valuable one. However, the critical question is what proportion of existing fuel 
facilities actually comply with these guidelines. The risk of environmental emergency is 
contingent upon what people actually do, rather than what they should do, and plainly, 
major plant replacement tends to lag considerably behind the guidelines that argue for it. 
  
References 
 
Australia (1995) ‘Conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna’. XIX ATCM/WP 29 
 
Benninghoff, W.S. and Bonner, W.N. (1985) Man’s Impact on the Antarctic 
Environment: A Procedure for Evaluating Impacts from Scientific and Logistic Activities. 
SCAR, ICSU Press. 
 
Block, W.; Burn, A.J. and Richard, K.J. (1984) ‘An insect introduction to the maritime 
Antarctic’. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 23: 33-39. 
 
Cameron, R.E.; Honour, R.C. and Morelli, F.A. (1977) ‘Environmental impact studies of 
Antarctic sites’ pp 1157-1176 in Llano, G.A (ed) Adaptations Within Antarctic 
Ecosystems: Proceedings of the Third SCAR Symposium on Antarctic Biology. 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC.  
 
Edwards, J.A. (1980) ‘An experimental introduction of vascular plants from South 
Georgia to the maritime Antarctic’. Bulletin of the British Antarctic Survey 49: 73-80. 
 
Edwards, J.A. and Green, D.M. (1973) ‘The survival of Falkland Islands transplants on 
South Georgia and Signy Island, South Orkney Islands. Bulletin of the British Antarctic 
Survey 33: 33-34. 
 
Holdgate, M.W. (1964) ‘An experimental introduction of plants to the Antarctic’. 
Bulletin of the British Antarctic Survey 3: 13-16. 
 
Japan (1996) ‘A grass (seed plant) found in Syowa Station area, East Antarctica’. XX 
ATCM/INF 66. 
 
Lewis Smith, R.I.L (1990) ‘Signy Island as a paradigm of biological and environmental 
change in Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems”. pp 32-50 in: Kerry, K.R. and Hempel, G. 
(eds) Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological Change and Conservation. Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin. (cf p 46) 
 
Longton, R.E. (1966) ‘Alien vascular plants on Deception Island, South Shetland 
Islands’. Bulletin of the British Antarctic Survey 9: 55-60. 
 
Longton, R.E. (1985) ‘Terrestrial Habitats – Vegetation’. pp 73-105 in Bonner, W.N. and 
Walton, D.W.H. (eds) Key Environments – Antarctica. Pergamon, Oxford. 
 
 
