Page 1 of 5 
XXV ATCM – CEP V 
Warsaw, Poland, 10–20 September 2002 
 
INFORMATION PAPER 
Submitted by SCAR 
 
CEP Agenda Item 4c 
XXV ATCM Agenda Item 13 
 
EXPLORING SUBGLACIAL ANTARCTIC LAKES: 
A SCAR REPORT ON PROGRESS 
 
Introduction 
1. 
Subglacial lake exploration has caught the imagination of the scientific community and 
general public around the world.  Interest in the lakes has been growing over the last 
decade and scientific information about the lakes has increased enormously in the last 
few years.  A number of workshops have considered the scientific value and assessed 
the scientific advances to be gained from an exploration of subglacial lakes.  There was 
consensus that an exploration programme and its scientific objectives were worthy of 
the financial and logistic support that will be needed to successfully accomplish the 
goals of a subglacial lake exploration.  Consideration of the details of an exploration 
programme were deemed to be an important next step in the realization of a major 
programme to study subglacial environments. 
2. 
To further the discussions and provide the explicit plans necessary for the development 
of subglacial programmes within various countries, SCAR formed a Group of 
Specialists (GoS) to consider the various aspects of subglacial lake exploration.  The 
GoS was formed at SCAR XXVI in Tokyo in July 2000.  This report provides an 
update on the activities of the Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration Group of 
Specialists (SALEGOS).  Ten (10) members were named with J C Priscu (United 
States) the Convenor and M C Kennicutt II (United States) the Secretary.  Other 
members included I Tabaco (Italy), J C Ellis-Evans (United Kingdom), H Miller 
(Germany), J-R Petit (France), S Bulat (Russia), V Lukin (Russia), R D Powell (United 
States), and R E Bell (United States).  The expertise of the GoS membership covers a 
wide range of scientific disciplines and includes extensive experience in complex 
Antarctic projects. 
3. 
The following provides a brief update of the progress SALEGOS has made to 
date.Further details and the complete meeting reports can be viewed at the SALEGOS 
web site at http://salegos-scar.montana.edu/. 
 
Meetings 
4. 
SALEGOS has conducted two meetings: 29–30 November 2001 in Bologna, Italy and 
23–24 May 2002 Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, United States.  Two more 
meetings are tentatively planned for October 2002 in the US and May 2003 in Russia. 
5. 
At these meetings the GoS endorsed the findings and conclusions of the first 
Cambridge Workshop in 1999.  The guiding principles for subglacial lake exploration 
are: international coordination, interdisciplinary scientific objectives, contamination 
Page 2 of 5 
and disturbance must be minimized, the ultimate goal is lake entry and sample retrieval, 
and the ultimate target of exploration is Lake Vostok. 
6. 
It was also agreed that the overarching scientific objectives are: 
a. 
to determine the form, distribution, and activity of life in the lake water, the 
sediments below and the ice above; 
b. 
to recover climatic information contained in ice overlying the lake and sediment 
underlying the lakes; and 
c. 
to understand the origins of subglacial lakes and its impact on the evolution of life 
under the ice. 
7. 
A phased in approach is endorsed with parallel development of technologies to support 
the scientific mission and sample acquisition objectives.  The use of analog settings 
such as ice shelves, glaciers, and other ice accumulations for “proof of concept” 
projects is encouraged.  A ten-year time frame is envisaged for the programme. 
 
Terms of Reference 
8. 
The GoS has made substantial progress in addressing its terms of reference (ToR): 
ToR-1) 
Refine, expand and embellish the Cambridge 1999 workshop's scientific 
objectives. 
Extensive detail was provided in the SALEGOS Report 1 on specific timelines 
and how the scientific objectives would be accomplished in a coordinated manner.  
Based on the framework provided in the first report, more detailed analyses of 
scientific objectives will be integrated into the timelines matching scientific 
objectives with technological milestones.  Coordination of these various “needs” 
assessments provides a detailed blueprint for implementation of a subglacial lake 
exploration programme.  In general, SALEGOS felt that the scientific objectives 
as expressed in the Cambridge workshop were clear and required little additional 
discussion.  It was also recognized that the national authorities within each 
country will set the scientific agenda and there will be a need to harmonize and 
coordinate these efforts.  One future action item for SALEGOS is to develop 
similar timelines on a discipline-by-discipline basis to provide additional details 
for planning purposes. 
ToR-2) 
Develop the critical requirements/criteria for lake(s) selection. 
This ToR has not yet been discussed by SALEGOS.  Site selection criteria were 
proposed in the Cambridge workshop.  Objective, agreed criteria for site selection 
are important.  SALEGOS endorses the concept that the greatest scientific return 
would result from a Lake Vostok campaign.  Studies in larger lakes will accrue 
the greatest scientific return as these are locations where subglacial processes are 
expected to be most fully expressed and observable. 
ToR-3) 
Provide scientific guidance and input to COMNAP deliberations on logistics 
and drilling technologies for subglacial lake entry and sample retrieval. 
The SALEGOS Report 1 provides a 9+ year timeline for technological 
requirements and milestones.  The report provides a discussion of “clean 
technologies” used in planetary exploration, environmental assessment 
requirements, an approach to ice drilling and its support requirements, and a 
discussion of applicable technologies for sensing lake environments.  SALEGOS 
Page 3 of 5 
will continue a dialogue with COMNAP to determine if the guidance being 
provided is sufficient to convene a workshop on technology and logistical 
requirements for subglacial lake exploration as recommended at Cambridge.  A 
joint SCAR/COMNAP forum in Shanghai included presentations on subglacial 
lake exploration. 
ToR-4) 
Develop a set of objectives for technology developments related to the science 
objectives as opposed to only entry and retrieval. 
A first technology “needs” assessment was presented in SALEGOS Report 1.  
SALEGOS will continue a dialogue with the scientific community and COMNAP 
to determine how these issues can be advanced. 
ToR-5) 
Consider and recommend organizational strategies/models for managing an 
international exploration programme. 
Models for the management of a subglacial lake exploration programme are 
discussed in SALEGOS Report 2.  Experiences learned from programmes of 
similar scope and magnitude provided guidance on how an international 
exploration programme might be organized. 
ToR-6) 
Delineate information gaps and the sequence or timing that is needed to 
progress toward the ultimate goal of lake entry and sample retrieval - are 
there milestones along the critical path and what are they? 
A preliminary “needs” assessment was provided in the SALEGOS Report 1.  
These “needs” assessments will continue to be refined and revised during future 
SALEGOS meetings. 
ToR-7) 
Consider the environmental ramifications and how the Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) and Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) process needs to be applied to subglacial lake exploration and the role 
of SCAR and Treaty bodies [Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs 
and Conservation (GOSEAC) and the Committee on Environmental 
Protection (CEP)]. 
This issue was considered during the first SALEGOS meeting.  It was recognized 
that the choice of lead nation will be a major determinant in the environmental 
requirements for subglacial lake exploration since national legislation generally 
stipulates the required procedures.  It was also recognized that environmental 
planning should involve several documents addressing various phases of the 
programme and that one overall CEE was not realistic or desirable.  These 
discussions are reported in SALEGOS Report-1.  SALEGOS is constituted to 
assess and evaluate various aspects of subglacial lake exploration and does not 
endorse one approach or another.  The partners will decide the ultimate approach 
to environmental assessment of subglacial lake exploration activities.   
TOR-8) 
Devise a series of SCAR activities to facilitate and promote the exploration of 
subglacial lakes such as targeted workshops. 
A joint forum with SCAR and COMNAP was conducted July, 2002 in Shanghai, 
China.  Three members of SALEGOS will also participate in an upcoming drilling 
technology workshop (FASTDRILL).  Other recommended activities are 
discussed in SALEGOS Report 2. 
Page 4 of 5 
TOR-9) 
Be a proponent of subglacial lake exploration with National Antarctic 
Programmes to garner the financial and logistical resources needed for the 
programme. 
Communication of the importance of subglacial lake exploration is being pursued 
through various activities such as broad dissemination of SALEGOS reports, 
dedicated sessions at scientific meetings, press conferences, and publication of a 
book on subglacial lakes.  Other promotional activities are discussed in 
SALEGOS Report 2. 
 
Developing a Management Approach 
9. 
The SALEGOS Report 2 considered a number of issues, most importantly international 
management models for complex programmes and development of a scientific portfolio 
for subglacial lake exploration.  The ANDRILL programme structure was seen as an 
effective model.  It includes formation of an international scientific steering committee, 
a science management office, and an operations management group.  Each organization 
has specified responsibilities and authorities closely coordinate their activities.  
Consideration of the cost of similar projects suggests that a ten-year subglacial lake 
exploration programme could cost as much as US $ 50 million.  More accurate cost 
estimate will be made as the details of the programme are refined. 
 
Developing a Science Portfolio 
10. The GoS decided that the development of more specific and explicit science portfolios 
would be useful in moving planning efforts forward.  The approach is intended to 
encourage wide participation in the programme by allowing interested parties to 
identify a role they might play in the larger programme.  The portfolio approach also 
breaks the complex programme down into smaller sets of inter-related but independent 
objectives and milestones that can be accomplished in an orderly manner.  While 
several discrete projects are described it is not intended that these are necessarily 
progressed one-after-the-other, but may well be pursued in parallel.  Actual timing will 
be dependent on the availability of resources and logistical support.  One possible set of 
portfolios include: 
• 
Portfolio 1: Remote Studies- Accreted Ice, Modelling, and Remote Sensing 
• 
Components – Vostok Borehole and Ice Core Studies, the Study of Analogue 
Settings, Remote Sensing Surveys of Subglacial Lakes, and Modelling of 
Subglacial Lakes and Systems 
• 
Portfolio 2: Deployment of Remotely Operated in situ Observatories 
• 
Components – In situ Lake Observations and Down-Hole Ice Studies. 
• 
Portfolio 3: Subglacial Lakes as Systems 
• 
Component – Survey and Inventory of Subglacial Lakes 
• 
Portfolio: Studies of Subglacial Lake Processes and Histories 
Each portfolio will have its own set of technological, environmental, and logistical 
requirements that will need to be considered in detail in an implementation plan. 
The GoS will continue to meet and refine the details of a science plan for subglacial 
lake exploration.  Many important issues remain to be considered. 
 
Page 5 of 5 
Recommendation from XXVII SCAR 
At the XXVII SCAR meeting in Shanghai, China, 15–26 July 2002, Delegates adopted the 
following recommendation with respect to investigations at Vostok Station: 
Being aware that the proposal to drill a further 50 m in the existing borehole 
at Vostok Station, to extract additional accretion ice as a proxy for 
sampling the lake water, has significant scientific value; 
Noting that there is uncertainty about possible lake contamination during 
further drilling; 
Noting also that the intention of all interested parties is to ensure proper 
stewardship of subglacial lake environments; 
SCAR recommends that additional studies should be carried out before further 
drilling towards Lake Vostok is undertaken in the existing hole. 
 
 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
ANDRILL 
Antarctic Geological Drilling Project 
ATCM 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
CEE 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation 
CEP 
Committee on Environmental Protection  
COMNAP 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes 
EIA 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
FASTDRILL 
Fast Mechanical-Access Drill (for Polar Glaciology) 
GoS 
Group of Specialists 
GOSEAC 
Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation  
SALEGOS 
Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration Group of Specialists  
SCAR 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
ToR 
Term of Reference  
 
