
XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP- 003
Agenda Item: ATCM 16
POLAND
Original: English



FORTY YEARS OF ANTARCTIC TREATY1


Forty years seems long enough to try to appraise the functioning of so important an instrument of international law as the Antarctic Treaty, signed in Washington on 1 December 1959. Such appraisal seems all the more to the point as the relevant opinions held in different countries and milieus widely differ. Some people refer to the Treaty as an example of a superb instrument which helped affect legal international relations on the vast Antarctic continent in a peaceful way. The others see the Treaty as a typically “rotten” Cold War compromise which from the day it was arrived at has been not only politically defective and legally ineffective but has been a source of controversies and international conflicts. Still, between these extreme opinions there is enough room for a factual and fair assessment of the Treaty.2

ORIGIN, AIMS AND CONTENTS OF ANTARCTIC TREATY
Unlike the Arctic which became a theatre of devastating military operations, World War II spared the Antarctic, but after the war the Antarctic was transformed into “the Cold War’s coldest front.” There was a real danger of the Antarctic being drawn into the East-West conflict. In the 1946–47 season the Americans held military manoeuvres in the Antarctic, codenamed “Operation High Jump”, in which they used 13 warships, icebreakers, military aircraft, 27-ton “snow cruisers” and 4,000 soldiers. They held similar military exercises in 1947–48 (“Operation Windmill”) and in 1955–56. The simultaneous appearance of the Soviet whaling fleet and polar expeditions signalled an inevitable transformation of the Antarctic into yet another battleground of the growing East-West conflict. To make things worse, seven nations renewed ancient territorial claims to the Antarctic. As a result, expeditions to the Antarctic began gradually to lose their scientific character and, instead, to serve primarily political and military goals.3
A swiftly advancing process of politicizing and militarizing the Antarctic prompted scholars from different countries to take firm measures to reverse such tendencies and to restore that part of the world to science. Their specific answer to those tendencies and dangers was the tremendous success in the Antarctic of the 3rd International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957–58. Its crowning achievement was the Antarctic Treaty, signed in Washington on 1 December 1959. The Treaty was seen as a universal remedy for all the troubles plaguing this part of the world after World War II.
The governments of the 12 countries participating in the IGY Antarctic research were secretly negotiating in Washington from June until October 1958. Negotiations were taking place in the atmosphere of distrust and suspicions, mutual grievances, claims and accusations. The only thing to save the situation was the rare unanimity of views, despite their otherwise discordant interests, of the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union. The two countries were completely united in their repudiation of any territorial claims in the Antarctic and in repulsing attempts to transpose from the Arctic the legal theory of polar sectors.4 As a result of numerous compromises the Washington conference worked out an instrument of international law which is in many respects unusual and, from the political and legal points of view, so deficient that from the beginning, even its signatories have not had confidence in it.5 Therefore, four decades later, the fact that it has survived unchanged can be recognized as a tremendous success. The document not only has survived but for 40 years has been acting as a kind of “Antarctic constitution,” applying to the vast land and sea area south of latitude 60° south (Article VI of the Treaty), which is excluded from the sovereignty and jurisdiction of states, is designated “treaty territory”, and covers about 15 million sq. km, i.e. 3 per cent of the surface of Earth and nearly 10 per cent of its land area.
The concise Antarctic Treaty, numbering barely 14 articles, set its signatories several fundamental goals. It provided for the peaceful and scientific use of Antarctica. It demilitarized and denuclearized Antarctica (Articles I and V) and ensured freedom of scientific investigation (Articles II and III).
In the past 40 years the periodic Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM), provided for in Article IX, have became an internationally unique organ which, within the scope of the Treaty, actually fulfilled both quasi-legislative and quasi-executive functions. The international conventions and recommendations, decisions and resolutions adopted by ATCM now add up to a coherent and extensive corpus iuris Antarcticae which operates on the basis of universal international law and the evolving Antarctic law.6 They laid down the legal basis for an informal Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) which governs international relations with respect to law on the territory covered by the Treaty.7
TREATY OF UNRESOLVED CONFLICTS AND UNSETTLED MATTERS
The Treaty signed in 1959, which raised such great hopes of solution of the festering problems in Antarctica, failed to resolve even one political conflict or one of the fundamental legal problems of this part of the world. The unsatisfied territorial claims of seven nations which had nearly frustrated the Washington conference persisted as Antarctica’s key problem. As a result of the compromise arrived at during the conference, the negotiating parties “agreed to disagree”. Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty “froze” the status quo, i.e. it recognized neither the current nor the future claims for territorial sovereignty in Antarctica, but without any of the parties renouncing its prior claims.8 
The fact that the fundamental political problem of territorial claims was not solved made it impossible for the authors of the Antarctic Treaty to solve other key problems, particularly the legal ones, such as determination of Antarctica’s legal status and the questions of territorial sovereignty and jurisdiction. Lawyers describe the undefined (res nullius or res communis?) legal status of Antarctica as sui generis.9 Next, the absence of an explicit definition of Antarctica’s legal status made it impossible for the authors of the Washington treaty to solve the problems of sovereignty and jurisdiction on the territory covered by the Treaty. Article VIII enigmatically linked nations’ jurisdiction with regard to observers and scientific personnel to their citizenship, i.e. in a manner typical of the jurisdiction in areas with res nullius status.
On the basis of the aforementioned Article IV, which deals with the questions of sovereignty in fairly unusual fashion,10 the Antarctic Treaty proclaimed a number of functional rights of the parties, such as the right to the peaceful use of Antarctica (Article I), the right to free scientific investigation (Articles II and III), the right to inspection (Article VII.1), the right to jurisdiction over observers and scientific personnel (Article VIII), and the right to take part in the ATCM and to put forward recommendations (Article IX). Moreover, the Antarctic Treaty specifies obligations and prohibitions such as bans on establishment of military bases and fortifications, military manoeuvres or testing of any type of weapons (Article I), the obligation to cooperate with other scientists (Articles II and III), and prohibition of nuclear explosions and storage of radioactive wastes (Article V).
Thus the unspecified and peculiar legal status of Antarctica is comprised of certain elements characteristic of both res nullius (citizenship criterion) and res communis regimes (possibility of common exploitation of the area) but minus a rule of non-appropriation, with “frozen” territorial claims and with some forms of international management (ATCM).11
Besides the already mentioned shortcomings, the imprecision and legal half-measures resulting from political compromises, the Antarctic Treaty has numerous loopholes. Its authors, who concentrated on protecting Antarctica against direct political, military and nuclear threats, did not even try to deal with, save for research, other scientific and ecological problems and such important issues as exploitation of Antarctica's natural and mineral resources or protection of its unique natural environment.
Although the Washington Treaty spread a protective umbrella over Antarctica, and effectively shielded it from a real danger of transformation into a nuclear testing ground, from militarization and involvement in global political and armed conflicts, it did not manage to protect the continent against embroilment in controversies in East-West and North-South relations. Controversies and disputes within the ATS took place on two intersecting planes: the internal and the external.
The unsettled but merely “frozen” issue of claims to Antarctic territory divided parties to the Treaty within the ATS into two antagonistic groups (sometimes also at odds among themselves): claimants and non-claimants with varying interests and rights that constituted a potential source of contention.12
The main scene of external disputes between the ATS and third countries, particularly developing nations, is the United Nations General Assembly where since 1983 the “question of Antarctica” has been discussed despite the objections raised by parties to the Antarctic Treaty. Discussions in the United Nations have triggered very severe criticism of the Antarctic Treaty and ATS activities.13 The course and results of these discussions so far indicate that Antarctica is no longer the sole concern of the small group of states in the very exclusive “Antarctic Club,” which bar access to it. It has become a subject of common concern of the entire international community, a large part of which, represented by developing countries, has been calling for radical changes in the Antarctic Treaty. They have invoked new circumstances (rebus sic stantibus) which did not exist at the time the Treaty was signed.
For 40 years the Antarctic Treaty has staved off all assaults on its identity, endangered not only by Cold-War conflicts between East and West, but also by increasing antagonisms in relations between North and South. Closed ATCM debates, open only to the twelve original Atlantic Treaty signatories, for nearly two decades effectively rebuffed the new candidates knocking on the doors of the exclusive “Antarctic Club.” Only in 1977 were they forced open by Poland which thanks to its persistence cleared the path to consultative status for itself and other countries and thus contributed to a radical enlargement of the ATCM. This however did not satisfy the developing countries who in 1983 brought up the “question of Antarctica” in the United Nations. Despite sometimes ruthless attacks, the Antarctic Treaty has demonstrated a remarkable ability to survive and adjust to changing international conditions, and the Parties to it have mastered the difficult art of resorting to unconventional diplomatic and legal means. These successes are usually attributed to the all-important role played by scientists and Antarctica explorers from different countries in the establishment and operation of the ATS.
Despite ardent calls from the UN, parties to the Antarctic Treaty, although aware of its flaws, have resisted the temptation to amend the Treaty, although in 1991, 30 years after the Treaty entered into force, the provisions of Article XII(2) allowed them to. For the signatories realized that it would be tantamount to opening a proverbial Pandora’s box of mutual claims, grudges, ill-feelings, under the weight of which the delicately balanced ATS construction might collapse like a house of cards.14
Having given up the revision instrument, parties to the Antarctic Treaty adopted other measures, tried and tested in international law. Thus they supplemented it in 1991 with a Protocol regarding environmental protection, provided with numerous annexes open to further addenda should the need arise. This way they showed an efficient instrument of a relatively conflict-free adjustment of the Antarctic Treaty in the future to new conditions and circumstances, without undermining its political foundations.
ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM
Almost the day after the Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1961, its authors began correcting the errors and filling in the gaps. This process, now well into its fourth decade, has taken place primarily at the ATCM, but outside of it as well. Its result is the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), quite an unusual and informal product, difficult to define in legal terms.15
The whole of the ATS is made up of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 supplemented with such further international legal acts as conventions for the conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972), the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1980), Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources Activities (1988, which never came into force) and the Protocol Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991).16
These international agreements, although formally signed outside of the Antarctic Treaty, were nevertheless negotiated on the initiative and with the participation of its contracting parties, and were connected to it by coordinating provisions. They thus became the legal foundation of the ATS. The crowning achievement of that law-making process was the signing in 1991 of the Madrid Protocol on environmental protection, which not only solved this outstanding problem, overlooked in the Antarctic Treaty, but also in an innovatory way opened up prospects for future development of the ATS legal structures.
Their other consequential elements are recommendations, measures, decisions and resolutions. The 23 regular ATCMs have issued so far more than 200 of these, of various importance, legal validity and coverage of a wide range of issues such as conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna, monuments and historic sites, scientific research and data, polar logistics and communications, meteorology, tourism, safety of operations, liability for damages, etc.17
These legal instruments allowed to establish a whole system of intergovernmental, non-governmental and mixed bodies fulfilling executive, advisory, scientific, research and even judicial functions, all of them interlocking and cooperating with one another. Among those, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), a nonpolitical body, formally an organ of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), and actually the scientific pillar of the ATS, occupies a special position.
It is characteristic that the ATS, which prefers unconventional solutions and which shields itself against formalization and red tape, not only has not become transformed into an international organization, but has not even established its own standing secretariat. In rotation, parties to the Antarctic Treaty host and organize the ATCMs, while the US Department of State, the depositary of the Treaty, fulfils certain archival, documentary and coordinating functions.18
SYSTEM OF ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL LEGAL PROTECTION
The signature in 1991 of the Madrid Protocol on Antarctic Environmental Protection is one of the generally acknowledged, greatest achievements of the ATS in this decade. It not only closed the biggest loophole in the Antarctic Treaty, but became also a turning point in the ATS politics, and this is why it is worth studying this document. In the process of its preparation there came to light all the ATS’s apparent weaknesses and contradictions, and the controversies surrounding Antarctica.
After six years of negotiations, a Convention on Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources Activities was signed in Wellington (New Zealand) on 28 November 1988, in the face of strong objections from developing countries and against UN resolutions. That raised sharp protests among the world public and by environmentalists. As a result of their strong pressure certain governments (Australia, France, Italy) changed their position and declined to sign the convention. That accounted for the turnabout in the politics and internal alignment of forces within the ATCM where the document was recognized as a legal success but political defeat. Even the 50-year moratorium on exploitation of mineral resources did not satisfy the defenders of Antarctic environment. To the Wellington Convention they responded by signing, on 4 October 1991, in Madrid, after three years of negotiations, a Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, with five annexes regarding environmental protection.19 
The cornerstone of the Antarctic environmental protection system, as devised by the Madrid Protocol, is prohibition of the exploitation of its mineral resources, save recovery of polar ice.20 This problem has remained one of the significant matters at issue between ATCM members and the third countries.21
However, the main values of the Protocol, the most comprehensive international document ever negotiated in the area of environmental protection, were the bans, orders and measures it has set. By providing in article 2 that Antarctica was designated as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science, the Protocol introduced  the first in 32 years substantial change in the continent’s legal status. Elaborating on this obligation, article 3(1) provided that the fundamental considerations in the planning and conducting of all activities in the Antarctic should be the protection of its natural environment. These principal objectives are supplemented by several obligations, particularly: first, to comply with certain definite standards of environmental protection and to limit adverse impacts on the environment; second, to accord priority in Antarctical to scientific research aimed at preserving the continent for future studies open to every country; third, to plan and carry out activities in the Antarctic on the basis of a prior environmental impact assessment (Article 8); and fourth, regularly and effectively to monitor these activities and threats to the environment.
Annexes to the Protocol set out detailed rules and methods of protecting the Antarctic environment. These annexes provide for environmental impact assessment, conservation of fauna and flora, waste disposal  and management, prevention of marine  pollution, conservation and administration of the seas. Article 9 of the Protocol envisaged adoption of amendments and modifications to annexes which may be adopted and become effective in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article 9 of the Antarctic Treaty. At present, the ATCM is well-advanced in preparing futher annexes concerning Antarctic tourism and liability for environmental damage.
The Madrid Protocol provided for institutional protection of the established conservation system of the natural environment. For this purpose is providing the establishment of a Committee for Environmental Protection (Article 11) with limited advisory, reporting and proposing privileges vis-a-vis the ATCM which kept its decision-making prerogatives.
Irrespective of these and other shortcomings, the conciliatory Madrid Protocol has been recognized as not merely a significant step towards effective and comprehensive protection of the natural environment, but as a fundamental change in the Antarctic legal regime, as well as in ATS policy which resulted in the shifting of emphasis from economic exploitation of the resources that prevailed during the 1980s to conservation and protection of the natural environment in that part of the world. The latter idea, which had guided the ATCM activities from the day the Antarctic Treaty came into force, has acquired a new dimension in the 1990s. The Madrid Protocol regulates protection of the natural environment in Antarctica in a comprehensive and modern fashion. Therefore, ecologists hold this Protocol up as an example worth imitating elsewhere.
POLAND WITHIN ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM
Poland’s path to a permanent presence in Antarctica was both long and difficult. As it led through the Antarctic Treaty, it seems worth mentioning here on the Treaty’s anniversary. 
Reaching Antarctica was a dream of several generations of Polish polar explorers that never came true. In the course of two centuries, only four of them succeeded – as members of antartic expeditions organized by foreign countries.22
In the interwar period, Poland could barely afford Arctic studies, let alone costly expeditions to the distant Antarctica. After World War II, when in the ravaged country material and financial difficulties were exacerbated by political obstacles, the relevant plans became even more unworkable. One could not think of organizing polar expeditions in a country whose borders were tightly sealed off, isolated from the outside world by the “iron curtain”, where foreign travel was rationed on political grounds. In those circumstances, Polish pre-war polar explores concentrated on theoretical studies, but, in order to prevent a generation gap, they went in for educating young students as their successors in future polar expeditions.23
It was only in the mid 1950s that as a result of international and internal political changes, conditions in Poland became more favourable to the organization of polar expeditions. In the atmosphere of détente that prevailed after the 20th CPSU Congress and of the impending events of October 1956 in Poland, the fetters restricting science were somewhat loosened and the door to the world was set ajar. However, in the face of the rigours at the time, in order to be reckoned with among Polish sciences, polar research had first to become not only an important scientific, but also a political or at least economic problem. But soon, owing to a happy coincidence, it first  became the former, and then the latter.
Polish polar researchers showed a truly diplomatic skill in taking advantage of the fortunate situation that had emerged. Thus, as early as in August 1956, they set off on the first Polish post-war polar expedition to Spitsbergen to undertake studies in a region being traditionally the place of Polish investigation. That opened up bright prospects for extending Polish polar research unto Antarctica, which had for long been beyond the reach of Poles. At a SCAR meeting in Moscow, on 10 August 1958, Professor Stefan Manczarski, Secretary General of the Polish Academy of Sciences’ Committee on International Cooperation in Geophysics, announced Poland’s readiness to organize a scientific expedition to Antarctica. At the same time he began persuading his Soviet colleagues to hand over to Poland the Oasis Station in the Bunger Oasis in East Antarctica, free of charge. He was successful and on 23rd January 1959, Poland opened its first Antarctic station there, named for the 19th-century explorer A. B. Dobrowolski.
Those events coincided with intensive diplomatic endeavours to let Poland attend the Washington conference on Antarctica.24 The only state to back Poland’s bid was the Soviet Union which felt politically isolated and alone among the 12 invitees to the conference. Therefore it looked for a suitable partner among its allies among whom only Poland had a tradition and achievements in polar exploration which qualified it for seeking participation in the Antarctic conference. The opening of the Dobrowolski Station in Antarctica and the start of research there by Poland were to be another strong argument for its participation.
On 2 April 1959, the Polish Embassy in Washington circulated to the 12 participants in the Antarctic conference a diplomatic note demanding Poland’s admission to the conference. Although the note advanced legitimate arguments,25 all the countries participating in the conference, with the sole exception of the Soviet Union, rebuffed the Polish request, which was an expression of the prevailing international atmosphere at the time.26 In the face of ever greater détente, the Western countries agreed, although reluctantly, to Soviet participation in the conference in Washington, but they certainly were not ready yet to admit any country, let alone a communist country, to the exclusive “Antarctic Club” they were just establishing.
Undeterred by those refusals, Poland sustained its interest in Antarctica in three areas: scientific, diplomatic and economic. As early as 8 June 1961 in Washington, Poland deposited the instruments of ratification of the Antarctic Treaty as the tenth country, even before the three of its original signatories, Argentina, Australia and Chile have it done.27
That move ushered in the second stage of Poland’s bid for a permanent and due position in Antarctica, particularly for the consultative status, i.e. the right to take part in ATCMs where basic decisions were taken. In view of their precedence-creating character and the special role Poland played in the framing of ATCM procedural rules, it is worthwhile to take a closer look at the political and legal aspects of its endeavours.28
These, from the very beginning, had aroused concern and objections among the majority of the Antarctic Treaty parties who began, arbitrarily, to increase their demands on ATCM candidate countries. For example, they decided that the Polish exploratory expedition to Antarctica in the 1958–59 season was not actually a “scientific expedition” and that the seasonal, summer Dobrowolski Station was not a “scientific station” within the literal meaning of Article IX.2 of the Antarctic Treaty. This arbitrary and biased legal interpretation of the Treaty provisions has for fifteen years blocked access to the ATCM not only for Poland, but also several other countries which later signed up to the Antarctic Treaty and were waiting in line to be admitted to Consultative Meetings. The policy adopted by ATCM participants aroused sharp criticism on the part of developing countries and was met with accusations of barring their way to the hermetic and exclusive “Antarctic Club.” Finally, in 1983, developing countries raised the “Antarctic question” in the United Nations’ General Assembly and took there a very firm position on that issue.
International legal circles were as critical of the manner in which Poland had finally obtained the consultative status as they had been of its exclusion from the ATCM. This was summarily effected at a hastily convened ATCM special meeting in London, in July 1977, in response to the opening by Poland, on 26 February that year, of the Henryk Arctowski Station (its second) on King George Island in West Antarctica. Ignoring the earlier politically controversial and legally questionable objections advanced for more than 15 years in the discussions on the granting of the Antarctic Treaty consultative status, it was merely said that Poland met the formal conditions of Article IX of the Treaty and from then on might participate in the ATCM. This time it was economics that drove such a lightning decision which broke down the old barriers and unblocked the path to the ATCM not only for Poland, but also for several other countries on the waiting list.29 The meeting scheduled for September 1977 was to discuss the extremely important issue of exploitation of Antarctica’s living marine resources. As Poland was among the leading catchers of fish and krill,30 its participation was deemed necessary, and therefore all the earlier objections were forgotten and Poland was hastily granted the long sought consultative status.
At the IX ATCM in London, in September 1977 Poland, attending for the first time, announced access to wide-scale international biological research, including marine biology and earth sciences, geology in particular. Since then, owing to the contributions of its representatives in the ATCM, Poland has managed to achieve the position of not merely an active but also a very effective member.31
ON THRESHOLD OF 21ST CENTURY
The future of the Antarctic Treaty depends on too great a number of elements of international politics to predict its future evolution in greater detail. All the same, on the experience so far, and particularly the events of the last decade, one can make hazard a projection of the main development trends in the next century and draw from it few general conclusions stemming primarily from the entry into effect of the Madrid Protocol on environmental protection.
The development of the ATS so far has been dominated by a nexus of three factors: science-politics-economics. The signs are that in the coming century ecology will join as the fourth factor. Should in the ATS the trends encouraged by the Protocol of Madrid continue, this new factor could dominate the three others in future activities in Antarctica. This is betokened by the fact that increasingly often and more extensively ecology is given priority over or even thought to overrule them. As ecological arguments are by definition of a restrictive character (“limits of development,” “sustainable development”) with regard to other activities aimed at preventing the effects deemed harmful to the environment and its ecosystems, a question arises: To what extent is ecology of an antagonistic and to what extent of a co-creative nature in its relations with the other three factors which affect the status and development of Antarctica?
The history of the Madrid Protocol accentuated a profound conflict between ecology and economics in Antarctica where two tendencies, exploitative and conservationist, both of a global dimension, clashed. In their extreme manifestations, the former treated Antarctica as a field of unrestricted political and economic rivalry among states and people, while the latter insists that Antarctica is part of the common heritage of all mankind, and therefore aspires to transform the continent into a universal World Park, a huge, international and closed wilderness sanctuary and a “land of science”. Between those two extremes there lies broad scope for negotiations and compromises, the Madrid Protocol being one of the fruits.
The spectacular victory of the idea of conservation of the unique Antarctic environment, which is extremely susceptible to destruction, nevertheless left open and unresolved the question of the terms of exploitation of Antarctica’s mineral resources, including ice.32  It seems very unlikely that the vehemently criticized Wellington Convention of 1988 will ever come into force, even though it contained a number of practical formulations which even became the point of departure for some of the more radical provisions of the Madrid Protocol of 1991.
In the unique natural environment of Antarctica, of considerable importance is the matter of maintaining balance in relations between ecology and science. The special position of the latter has been ensured by freedom of scientific investigation, dealt with in Article II of the Antarctic Treaty. A majority of scientists reject the idea of an allegedly antagonistic relationship between freedom of investigation and protection of the environment. On the contrary, scientists emphasize this relationship's equal and complementary nature. This is why scientists do not treat the organization of ever more numerous and vaster resticted protected areas in Antarctica as an assault on their right to freedom of investigation, but on the contrary, as measures in the interest of science, aimed to protect valuable objects of their scientific studies.33 This position has been confirmed by Articles 3 of the Madrid Protocol which is clearly according priority to scientific research in Antarctica and obliges scientists to preserve the value of Antarctica as an area of research essential to understanding global environment. This gives one hope that in the coming century processes of globalization, internationalization and extension of the scope of Antarctic investigation will get accelerated. For scientists all over the world Antarctica constitutes a huge scientific laboratory and both a place and a subject of their studies.
Taking the present state of affairs and political tendencies as the point of departure, one can assume that the Antarctic Treaty will remain a binding instrument for many more years in its original form, although by no means perfect. As the authors of the United Nations Charter, the authors of the Antarctic Treaty alike realize that any attempt at undermining the foundations of a legal document based on a shaky political compromise threatens the collapse of its whole construction, which otherwise might be a very useful institution as the ATS proved to be during the 40 years of its operations. The political and legal success of the Madrid Protocol allows us to believe that the further development of the Antarctic Treaty and the process of its adjustment to changing circumstances will be taking place, as need be, by way of devising new protocols and appendices to the unchanged Treaty and by further development of the ATS legal instruments. Yet, nothing seems to indicate that the ATS might be transformed into an international organization, all the same it is increasingly more likely that it will have a permanent secretariat, something that has been for years rendered impossible by a dispute about its location.
The growing tendency in international politics towards globalization and the United Nations enduring interest in Antarctica, will undoubtedly favour a continuous increase in the number of states willing to participate in the Antarctic Treaty. On the other hand, the growing criticism of the requirement that a state seeking consultative status should have its own research station – which, in turn, leads to multiplying and an excessive increase in the number of people and equipment in Antarctica, and, as a result, an increasing ecological threat – is likely to contribute to a further easing of conditions of admittance to the ATCM, and thus to a larger number of participants of the meetings.
A diplomatic conference and a special meeting of foreign ministers of state-parties to the Antarctic Treaty organized in February 1999, for the first time ever, in Antarctica, to mark the 40th anniversary of the Treaty, became a symbolic drawing of that last continent into the sphere of global politics. In the solemn declaration made during the 23rd ATCM in Lima (Peru), in June 1999, participants pronounced that “at the threshold of the new millennium, Antarctica shall continue to be devoted forever to peace and science, and reaffirm their resolve to face together future challenges and to continue, in a spirit of cooperation and solidarity, to pursue the historic mission that was laid out forty years ago in the Antarctic Treaty.”34


