XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-094
Agenda Item: ATCM 5a
SCAR
Original language: English



THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR SCIENCE

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH












SCAR Report to XXV ATCM
Warsaw, Poland
2002


XXV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Warsaw, Poland, 10–20 September 2002

SCAR Report to XXV ATCM
Warsaw, Poland
10–20 September 2002


Report under Recommendation XIII-2


Executive Summary
The Twenty-seventh Meeting of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (XXVII SCAR), held in Shanghai, China, 15–26 July 2002, was a landmark meeting at which the major work of re-structuring SCAR was achieved.  The process of re-organization will continue during the next two years, as the new Scientific Standing Groups refine their modi operandi, and will be completed at XXVIII SCAR in 2004 with the new style of SCAR meeting.
The first week began with the meetings of the SCAR Working Groups, followed on Wednesday by a successful symposium on “The Antarctic sea ice zone: physical and biological processes and interactions”.  On Thursday and Friday three new Scientific Standing Groups on Geosciences, Life Sciences and Physical Sciences were formed.  This new structure will enable SCAR to address inter-disciplinary science more efficiently and integrate more effectively with other international and global programmes.  Each group elected three officers and established sub-groups to accommodate their various activities.  During the week the Executive Committees of SCAR and COMNAP held a joint meeting.  On Saturday morning there was a SCAR–COMNAP discussion forum with presentations on: Subglacial Lakes, Antarctic Neotectonics, the Cybercartographic Atlas, and the Southern Ocean.
At the SCAR Delegates Meeting, Delegates accepted Peru as a Full Member of SCAR and noted, with regret, the withdrawal of Estonia from Associate Membership.  Two Delegate Committees were formed to discuss scientific and organizational matters and two. new Standing Committees were established on the Antarctic Treaty System, and on SCAR Finance.  The arrangements for the XXVIII SCAR meeting in Germany during 2004 were confirmed to provide a SCAR Science week in July followed by the Delegates meeting about 3 months later, thereby allowing more adequate consideration of the reports from the Scientific Standing Groups.  A new President, Professor Dr Jörn Thiede (Germany), and two new Vice–Presidents were elected.  Delegates also agreed that an Executive Director should be appointed to reinforce the staffing of the SCAR Secretariat.
The highlight of the year was the award to SCAR of the Prince of Asturias Prize for International Cooperation 2002 in recognition of SCAR’s role in international cooperation in Antarctica.  Delegates agreed that the Prize should be used to establish a SCAR Fellowship Programme to fund five young scientists to undertake Antarctic research in a country other than their own.

SCAR Report to XXV ATCM
Warsaw, Poland
10–20 September 2002


Report under Recommendation XIII-2


1.	Introduction
Since XXIV ATCM in St Petersburg, Russia, July 2001, the principal event for SCAR has been the XXVII SCAR Meeting, held in Shanghai, China, during July 2002.  The fourteenth annual meeting of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP XIV) was held in parallel during the first week of the SCAR meeting.  The SCAR and COMNAP Executive Committees held a joint meeting during this time.
The highlight of the year was the award to SCAR of the Prince of Asturias Prize for International Cooperation 2002.  This prestigious Spanish prize is awarded in recognition of SCAR’s role in international cooperation in Antarctica.



2.	XXVII SCAR Meeting
The Twenty-seventh Meeting of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (XXVII SCAR) was held in Shanghai, China, 15–26 July 2002 at the Shanghai Exhibition Centre.  This was a landmark meeting for SCAR as the re-structuring of SCAR, recommended by the ad hoc Group on SCAR Organization and Structure and adopted by the Delegates at XXVI SCAR in Tokyo, Japan, July 2000, was put into place.
The first week of the meeting began with the traditional meetings of all the SCAR Working Groups plus meetings of some Groups of Specialists.  These groups completed the reports of their final meetings on Tuesday.  Wednesday was devoted to a very successful symposium on “The Antarctic sea ice zone: physical and biological processes and interactions”.  On Thursday and Friday the members of the former Working Groups and Groups of Specialists reconvened in three new Scientific Standing Groups on Geosciences, Life Sciences and Physical Sciences.  Each group elected a Chief Officer, Deputy Chief Officer and a Secretary, and established a number of sub-groups to accommodate their various activities.
On Saturday morning there was a SCAR–COMNAP discussion forum with presentations on four main themes: Subglacial Lakes, Antarctic neotectonics, Cybercartographic Atlas, and the Southern Ocean.
The SCAR Delegates Meeting took place during the second week.  Delegates first agreed to accept Peru as a Full Member of SCAR, bringing the number of Full Members to twenty-seven.  Delegates also noted with regret that Estonia had withdrawn from Associate Membership of SCAR.   After receiving presentations by the Chief Officers, the Delegates divided into two Delegate Committees to discuss scientific and organizational matters.  Two new Standing Committees were established on the Antarctic Treaty System, and on SCAR Finance but a third Standing Committee on Antarctic Data was not considered necessary.  Delegates also agreed that the Prince of Asturias Prize for International Cooperation 2002 should be used to establish a SCAR Fellowship Programme to fund five young scientists to undertake relevant Antarctic research in a country other than their own.  The planned arrangements for the XXVIII SCAR meeting in Germany during 2004 were confirmed.  Elections were held for a new President and two new Vice-Presidents.  Delegates also agreed that an Executive Director should be appointed to reinforce the staffing of the SCAR Secretariat.
Thus the major work of re-structuring SCAR was achieved.  The process of re-organization will continue during the next two years, as the new Scientific Standing Groups refine their modi operandi, and will be completed at XXVIII SCAR in 2004 with the new style of SCAR meeting.
The SCAR Executive Committee is scheduled to meet at Brest, France, July 2003, in conjunction with the COMNAP XV meeting.  The XXVIII SCAR meeting will be held in two parts: a SCAR Science Week to be held in Bremen, Germany, 25-31 July 2004 when the Scientific Standing Groups will meet around a symposium on a relevant subject; and the Delegates Meeting to be held in Bremerhaven, Germany, 3-9 October 2004.  The COMNAP XVI meeting is scheduled to be held in conjunction with the SCAR Science Week.


SCAR Executive Committee (2002–04)
President:	Professor Dr J Thiede (Germany)
Past President:	Dr R H Rutford (United States)
Vice-Presidents:	Dr R Schlich (France)
	Professor C G Rapley (United Kingdom)
	Professor J López-Martínez (Spain)
	Dr C Howard-Williams (New Zealand)

Professor A C Rocha-Campos (Brazil) was elected an Honorary Member of SCAR.


Scientific Standing Groups
The Standing Scientific Groups have established a number of sub-groups to accommodate the various activities in progress and being planned.  Action Groups are short-term groups to address specific matters and will normally be expected to complete their activity in 2–4 years.  Expert Groups will address matters on a longer time-scale.  Scientific Programme Planning Groups may be established to develop plans for a research programme that will be presented to SCAR for adoption as a Scientific Research Programme.  Such proposed programmes will normally be multi-disciplinary and will normally involve more than one Scientific Standing Group.  There will normally be up to five Scientific Research Programmes representing priority research fields for SCAR.  Each programme will be coordinated by a Scientific Programme Group.
At XXVII SCAR the Delegates approved the following sub-groups to take account of existing activities of the former Working Groups and Groups of Specialists and to prepare for activities planed for the future.

Geosciences
Chief Officer:	Dr P E O’Brien (Australia)
Deputy Chief Officer:	Professor A Capra (Italy)
Secretary:	Professor B C Storey (New Zealand)
Action Groups on:
Age, Growth and Evolution of Antarctica (AGEANT)
Permafrost (PAG)
Communication and Outreach
Expert Group on:
Geospatial Information
Scientific Programme Planning Groups on:
Antarctic Climate Evolution (ACE)
Antarctic Neotectonics (ANTEC)
Scientific Programme Group on:
Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration (SALE)

Life Sciences
Chief Officer:	Professor S L Chown (South Africa)
Deputy Chief Officer:	Professor L A Palinkas (United States)
Secretary:	Dr A H L Huiskes (The Netherlands)
Action Groups on:
Global International Waters Assessment (GIWA)
Best Practices for Conservation
Biological Monitoring
Expert Groups on:
Birds
Seals
Human Biology and Medicine
Scientific Programme Planning Group on:
Evolution and Biodiversity in Antarctica: the Response of Life to Change
Scientific Programme Groups on;
Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone (EASIZ)
Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS)
Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms (EVOLANTA)

Physical Sciences
Chief Officer:	Dr J Turner (United Kingdom)
Deputy Chief Officer:	Dr M Candidi (Italy)
Secretary:	Dr T H Jacka (Australia)
Action Groups on:
Plateau Astronomy Site Testing in Antarctica (PASTA)
Middle Atmosphere Dynamics and Relativistic Electron Precipitation (MADREP)
Antarctic Peninsula Tropospheric–Ionospheric Coupling (APTIC)
Oceanography
Reference Antarctic Data for Environmental Research (READER)
Antarctic Katabatic Winds
Antarctic Tropospheric Aerosols and their Role in Climate (ATAC)
Expert Groups on:
Solar–Terrestrial Processes and Space Weather (STEPS)
Antarctic Astronomy and Astrophysics (AAA)
Operational Meteorology in the Antarctic
Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level (ISMASS)
International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE)
Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate (ASPeCt)
Scientific Programme Planning Groups on:
Antarctica and the Global Climate System
Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy on Environmental, Solar–Terrestrial and Atmospheric Research (ICESTAR)


Standing Committees
Antarctic Treaty System
Chief Officer:	Professor D W H Walton (United Kingdom)
Member:	Professor M C Kennicutt II (United States)
Member:	Professor D M Stoddart (Australia)
To provide SCAR with independent scientific advice on issues relating to the Antarctic Treaty System, particularly the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and to other relevant organizations as appropriate.

Finance
Chief Officer:	Dr R Schlich (France)
Member:	Dr G Kleinschmidt (Germany)
Member:	Dr S H Lee (Korea)
To advise SCAR on all financial matters, to prepare annual accounts and to propose balanced annual budgets.

[SCAR–COMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management (JCADM)]
Chief Officer:	Mr D Peterson (New Zealand)
Deputy Chief Officer:	Dr L Belbin (Australia)
Secretary:	Dr T de Bruin (The Netherlands)
To advise SCAR (and COMNAP) on all aspects of Antarctic data matters.
3.	Outline Structure of SCAR


Executive Committee
SCAR Secretariat



	Delegates Meeting	



	Delegate Committee		Delegate Committee
	on Science Direction		on Administration
	and Oversight		and Outreach


	Scientific Standing Groups		Standing Committees


	Geosciences		Antarctic Treaty System


	Life Sciences		Finance


	Physical Sciences		[SCAR–COMNAP Joint
			Committee on Antarctic
			Data Management]
	
	Scientific Research Programmes




4.	Prince of Asturias Awards
The Prince of Asturias Awards recognize the scientific, cultural and social work conducted internationally by individuals, groups and institutions whose achievements represent an example for mankind.
The Awards were established in 1980 by the Prince of Asturias Foundation, a non-profit institution that aims to promote the Sciences, Technology, Concord, Arts and Letters.  HRH Crown Prince Felipe of Spain, the Prince of Asturias, presides over the Foundation and presents the awards annually at a symbolic ceremony in Asturias, Spain, before an invited audience from the worlds of society, politics and culture in Europe, Japan and the Americas.  The ceremony attracts extensive international press, radio and television coverage and is considered one of the principal events in the European and Latin American cultural calendar.
Each Award comprises a diploma, a sculpture by the Spanish artist Joan Miró and a cash prize of 50,000 Euros.
There are eight different Prince of Asturias Awards: Communications and Humanities; Letters; the Arts; Technical and Scientific Research; International Co-operation; Concord; Social Sciences; and Sports.

Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation 2002
This Award will be bestowed upon the individual, work group or institution whose work has contributed in an exemplary and significant way to mutual understanding, progress and brotherhood among nations.
The jury for the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation 2002 has agreed to bestow this Award on the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for international collaboration in Antarctica.  The Jury expressed its satisfaction at being able to recognize such important cooperation for the benefit of the international scientific community.
SCAR is deeply honoured by this illustrious award that recognizes its contribution to international science and cooperation for almost half a century.

Appendix 1
Membership of SCAR
Full members:	Date of admission to	Date of admission to
		Associate Membership	Full Membership
	Argentina		3 February 1958
	Australia		3 February 1958
	Belgium		3 February 1958
	Chile		3 February 1958
	France		3 February 1958
	Japan		3 February 1958
	New Zealand		3 February 1958
	Norway		3 February 1958
	South Africa		3 February 1958
	Russia (formerly Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)	3 February 1958
	United Kingdom		3 February 1958
	United States of America		3 February 1958
	Germany (including former German Democratic Republic)	22 May 1978
	Poland		22 May 1978
	India		1 October 1984
	Brazil		1 October 1984
	China		23 June 1986
	Sweden	(24 March 1987)	12 September 1988
	Italy	(19 May 1987)	12 September 1988
	Uruguay	(29 July 1987)	12 September 1988
	Spain	(15 January 1987)	23 July 1990
	Netherlands	(20 May 1987)	23 July 1990
	Korea, Republic of	(18 December 1987)	23 July 1990
	Finland	(1 July 1988)	23 July 1990
	Ecuador	(12 September 1988)	15 June 1992
	Canada	(5 September 1994)	27 July 1999
	Peru	(14 April 1987)	22 July 2002
Associate Members:
	Switzerland	16 June 1987
	Pakistan	15 June 1992
	Ukraine	5 September 1994
	Bulgaria	5 March 1995

ICSU Union Members
	IGU	International Geographical Union
	IUBS	International Union of Biological Sciences
	IUGG	International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
	IUGS	International Union of Geological Sciences
	IUPAC	International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
	IUPS	International Union of Physiological Sciences
	URSI	Union Radio Scientifique Internationale


Appendix 2
SCAR Executive Committee

President
Professor Dr J Thiede
Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung, Columbusstraße,
Postfach 120161, D-27568 Bremerhaven, Germany 
Tel:	+49 471 4831 1100 / 1101;	Fax:	+49 471 4831 1102;
E-mail:	jthiede@awi-bremerhaven.de

Past President
Dr R H Rutford
Geosciences Program, The University of Texas at Dallas, PO Box 830688,
MS: FO 21, Richardson, TX 75083–0688, United States of America.
Tel:	+1 972 883 6470;	Fax:	+1 972 883 2482;
E-mail:	rutford@utdallas.edu

Vice-Presidents
Dr R Schlich
Ecole et Observatoire des Sciences de la Terre,
5 Rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.
Tel:	+33 3 88 45 01 91;	Fax:	+33 3 88 60 38 87;
E-mail:	roland.schlich@eost.u-strasbg.fr

Professor C G Rapley
British Antarctic Survey,
High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ET, United Kingdom.
Tel:	+44 1223 221524;	Fax:	+44 1223 362616;
E-mail:	c.rapley@bas.ac.uk

Professor J López-Martínez
Departamento Geología y Geoquímica,
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Facultad de Ciencias, Madrid 28049, Spain
Tel:	+34 91 397 4513;	Fax:	+34 91 397 4900;
E-mail:	jeronimo.lopez@uam.es

Dr C Howard-Williams
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research,
Box8602, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Tel:	+64 3 348 8987;	Fax:	+64 3 348 5548;
E-mail:	c.howard-williams@niwa.co.nz

Executive Secretary
Dr P D Clarkson
SCAR Secretariat, Scott Polar Research Institute,
Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB2 1ER, United Kingdom.
Tel:	+44 1223 362061;	Fax:	+44 1223 336550;
E-mail:	execsec@scar.demon.co.uk
Web-site:	http://www.scar.org
Appendix 3
SCAR Chief Officers
STANDING SCIENTIFIC GROUPS
Geosciences
Dr P E O’Brien, Australian Geological Survey Organization, PO Box 378, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
E-mail:	Phil.OBrien@ga.gov.au
Life Sciences
Professor S L Chown, Department of Zoology, University of Stellenbosch,         Private Bag X1, Matieland 7602, South Africa
E-mail:	slchown@sun.ac.za
Physical Sciences
Dr J Turner, British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge    CB3 0ET, United Kingdom.
E-mail:	j.turner@bas.ac.uk

STANDING COMMITTEES
Antarctic Treaty System
Professor D W H Walton, British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ET, United Kingdom.
E-mail:	d.walton@bas.ac.uk
Finance
Dr R Schlich, Ecole et Observatoire des Sciences de la Terre, 5 Rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.
E-mail:	roland.schlich@eost.u-strasbg.fr
SCAR–COMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management
Mr D Peterson, Antarctica New Zealand, International Antarctic Centre,        Orchard Road, Private Bag 4745, Christchurch, New Zealand.
E-mail:	d.peterson@antarcticanz.govt.nz

Appendix 4
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations

AAA	Antarctic Astronomy and Astrophysics
ACE	Antarctic Climate Evolution
AGEANT	Age, Growth and Evolution of Antarctica
ANTEC	Antarctic Neotectonics
APIS	Antarctic Pack Ice Seals
APTIC	Antarctic Peninsula Tropospheric–Ionospheric Coupling
ASPeCt	Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate
ATAC	Antarctic Tropospheric Aerosols and their role in Climate
ATS	Antarctic Treaty System
COMNAP	Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
EASIZ	Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone
EVOLANTA	Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic Organisms
GIWA	Global International Waters Assessment
ICESTAR	Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy on Environmental, Solar–Terrestrial and Atmospheric Research
ISMASS	Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level
ITASE	International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition
JCADM	Joint SCAR–COMNAP Committee on Antarctic Data Management
MADREP	Middle Atmosphere Dynamics and Relativistic Electron Precipitation
PAG	Permafrost (Action Group)
PASTA	Plateau Astronomy Site Testing in Antarctica
READER	Reference Antarctic Data for Environmental Research
SALE	Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration
SCAR	Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
STEPS	Solar–Terrestrial Processes and Space Weather



Appendix 5
Papers Scheduled to be Presented to XXV ATCM
Working Papers
Marine Acoustic Technology and the Environment
Scoping the Data for a State of the Antarctic Environment Report
Revision of Annex II
Specially Protected Species
Information Papers
SCAR Report to XXV ATCM
Marine Acoustic Technology and the Environment: Workshop Report
Exploring Subglacial Antarctic Lakes: A SCAR Report on Progress
Some Highlights of SCAR Science


