XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-007 
Agenda Item: CEP.... 
NEW ZELAND 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
Ross Sea Region 2001: A State of the Environment Report  
for the Ross Sea Region of Antarctica 
 
Key Findings 
 
 
In November last year, the New Zealand Antarctic Institute (Antarctica New 
Zealand), in association with the New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade, published Ross Sea Region 2001: A State of the Environment 
Report for the Ross Sea Region of Antarctica.  The report was launched at 
Parliament by Deputy Prime Minister Hon Jim Anderton and is the first 
comprehensive state of the environment report produced for any region of 
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.  It represents over 3 years of work by 
more than 20 leading authors and other experts.   
 
The report includes over 250 pages of detailed information about the state of 
the atmosphere, terrestrial, and marine environments of the Ross Sea region 
of Antarctica and the activities that occur there.  Overall, the report provides 
insights into the environment of this diverse and unique region, identifies 
where we lack information and knowledge, and where we have improved 
our environmental performance. 
 
State of the Environment Reporting is a process for describing, analysing 
and communicating information on the condition and trends in the 
environment and their significance.  It is about the integration of disparate 
information which by itself may mean very little, but when pulled together 
provides a clearer picture of the environment.  Ross Sea Region 2001: A 
State of the Environment Report for the Ross Sea Region of Antarctica 
aimed to achieve this.  
 
The overall conclusion from the report was that: 
 
"Most of the Ross Sea region environment is in a pristine state, exceptionally 
so by global standards.  The region contains some of the most undisturbed 
ecosystems in the world, and its value as a vast natural area, and for the 
conduct of scientific research, is immeasurable." 
 
The key findings of the report are included in the attached paper. 
 
 
