ANDRILL - The McMurdo Sound Portfolio 
Environmental Impact Assessment Process 
 
 
Information Paper 
New Zealand 
 
 
What is ANDRILL? 
 
ANDRILL is a multinational scientific initiative to investigate Antarctica's role in Cenozoic 
to recent (65 million years ago to the present) global environmental change, and hence it's 
potential future role, through stratigraphic drilling of Antarctica's ice marginal sedimentary 
basins.  An ANDRILL consortium has been established, comprising five countries - 
Germany, Italy, New Zealand, United Kingdom, and the United States of America.  There is 
interest from other countries in joining the consortium. 
 
A key aim of ANDRILL is to understand the role of Antarctic drivers on global climate 
variability, which requires a fundamental knowledge of cryospheric evolution not only in 
recent times, but also for times as long ago as 40 million years into the past. This was a time 
when global temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) were last similar to that 
which might well be reached by the end of this century.  Better understanding the interaction 
between the Antarctic cryosphere (ice sheets, ice shelves, and sea ice) and global systems 
during previous warmer periods, will enable a more comprehensive understanding of the 
impacts of predicted future climate warming - both in Antarctica and globally.   
 
The goals of ANDRILL are to: 
• Determine the fundamental behaviour of the Antarctic cryosphere (ice sheet, ice shelf and 
sea ice), including the magnitude and frequency of its changes on centennial to million 
year time-scales. 
• Obtain geological records from critical intervals in the development of the Antarctic 
cryosphere to guide and constrain glaciological and climatic models. 
• Document the evolution and timing of major Antarctic rift and tectonic systems, and the 
stratigraphic development of associated sedimentary basins.   
• Determine, by correlating near-ice margin and Southern Ocean stratigraphic records, the 
role of the Antarctic. 
 
 
The McMurdo Sound Portfolio 
 
There has been interest from a number of countries to perform circum-Antarctic margin 
drilling.  A number of proposed target areas have been identified.  Logistical considerations, 
the extent of knowledge of the region, a proven chronological study, and the majority of 
initial interest dictates that McMurdo Sound in the Ross Sea region should be the first region 
for further Antarctic drilling under ANDRILL.  The McMurdo Sound Portfolio will be Phase 
1 of this project.   
 
ANDRILL, the McMurdo Sound Portfolio is an eight to nine year plan spanning from 2001 to 
2010.  It is focused on survey, geophysical and drilling work in the McMurdo Sound area of 
the Ross Sea region.  The project will involve a four to five year drilling programme at four 
different locations and at seven to nine specific drill sites.  
Four locations have been proposed for potential drilling sites:  
• New Harbour, Western McMurdo Sound;  
• Mackay Sea Valley in Granite Harbour;  
• Windless Bight/NW Ross Ice Shelf and  
• Southern McMurdo Ice Shelf/Black Island.   
 
Drilling will take place on sea ice, ice shelf, and land.  Two drilling systems are being 
considered for use in this project.  At New Harbour a drilling system, similar to that used by 
the Cape Roberts Scientific Drilling Project (CRP) and also in the CIROS-1 drilling 
programme, may be employed.  It is proposed that at the three remaining areas, a specially 
modified multipurpose drill rig will be used, incorporating some aspects of the Cape Roberts 
Project system.   
 
The objective is to obtain seven to nine drill cores of high resolution, stratigraphic records 
from the Antarctic continental margin.  The drill core lengths will vary from 200 m to 1000 m 
and the water depths vary from 200 m to 1000 m.  Drilling may begin in the 2004/05 season 
and will progress through to the 2008/09 season.  One to two holes will be drilled per season. 
The target ages are Eocene-Pliocene, pre-Quaternary and Quaternary, Plicocene - Pleistocene, 
and Palaeogene.  
 
 
The Environmental Impact Assessment Process 
 
The ANDRILL project in McMurdo Sound involves scientific drilling at four separate drill 
sites over seven seasons with associated logistics and science support spread throughout the 
area.  At each of the sites, activities are expected to be of a similar size to the Cape Roberts 
Project.  A level of environmental impact assessment at the comprehensive environmental 
evaluation stage (CEE) is considered appropriate for a project of this scale and nature.  A key 
consideration given the multiple sites and timeframe will be identification and assessment of 
potential cumulative impacts. 
 
The Environmental Protocol requires that a draft CEE be forwarded to the CEP and all Parties 
at least 120 days before the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).  A period of 
90 days is to be allowed for comment.  A final CEE must be circulated to all Parties at least 
60 days before the commencement of the proposed activity in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
Given this timeframe and for drilling to commence in the summer of 2004/05, a draft CEE 
should be circulated by the end of 2002.  It is expected that the draft CEE will be considered 
at the June 2003 ATCM.  The ANDRILL Steering Committee has contracted Antarctica New 
Zealand to prepare a draft CEE. 
 
The process for the preparation of the draft CEE runs parallel to ANDRILL project planning. 
At this stage the timeline assumes a first drilling objective undertaken in the 2004/05 austral 
season and propositioning of project equipment in the 2003/04 season. 
 
2002 
January 
 
Commence process for drafting CEE. 
October-December 
Further fieldwork/site assessments carried out if required. 
1 February 
 
Complete draft CEE 
6 February 
Circulate draft CEE to Antarctic Treaty Parties and chair of Committee 
for Environmental Protection (CEP) 
 
(CEP intersessional contact group may be established) 
 
2003 
1 May  
 
Deadline for comments on draft CEE 
June 
 
 
Draft CEE considered by CEP and ATCM 
June – October 
Final CEE prepared taking into account comments received 
 
 
 
Final CEE circulated.  
 
