 
1
The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 
The Antarctica Project 
ASOC Secretariat 
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W. 
Washington, DC 20009 USA 
Tel +1 202 234-2480 
Fax +1 202 387 4823 
antarctica@igc.org 
www.asoc.org 
 
 
XXV ATCM 
 Information Paper … 
 CEP Agenda Item 4c 
 ASOC 
Original: English 
 
 
STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT IN ANTARCTICA: 
A “STEPPING STONE” TO MADRID PROTOCOL OBJECTIVES 
 
Information Paper submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) 
 
Summary 
 
This paper discusses the application of Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) to 
Antarctic activities.  It discusses the potential application of SEA as an approach to meet the 
objectives of the Protocol, and to improve its implementation standards. 
 
ASOC argues that the sustainability of the Antarctic ecosystem can only be achieved with 
long-term conservation of the entire region. In turn, this requires the application of tools 
designed to look at the region as a whole in order to determine which activities are consistent 
with this purpose.  In view of a rapidly changing world and the growing levels of human 
activities in Antarctica, the sustainability of the region will not be achieved by accumulated 
ad hoc measures generated in reaction to events, or by industry self-regulation.  The 
inadequacy of these approaches is demonstrated by developments in the Antarctic fishing and 
tourism industries over the past decade.  
 
Progress towards Protocol implementation by the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) as a whole 
has been slow. Adoption of SEA approaches would improve consistency across the ATS. 
SEA also offers a means of addressing emerging strategic issues not sufficiently covered by 
the Protocol or related to standards of Protocol implementation. The strategic environmental 
needs of a changing Antarctic context need to be addressed proactively in order to ensure a 
sustainable future for the region. SEA may be used as a means to pursue and manage 
sustainability.  Antarctic SEA would bring environmental consideration as early as possible 
into the planning process in order to determine what is to take place, leaving EIA to resolve 
how activities should be carried out.  SEA can be used as a “stepping stone” to Protocol 
objectives (including those contained in Art. 2), which might not otherwise be reached.  
 
ASOC urges the ATCPs to move forward in developing and testing Antarctic SEA.  One 
initial step is to examine existing strategic processes in the ATS for compatibility with SEA.  
ASOC has identified some elements in common between a SEA process and the process in 
place for the establishment of an ASMA at Deception Island. In addition, the Subglacial 
Antarctic Lake Exploration Group of Specialists (SALE GOS), in its November 2001 
meeting, discussed employing SEA for its overall program.  An SEA would streamline the 
 
2
production of IEES or CEEs for the different sub-components of the program.  These 
examples suggest that the principles of SEA could easily be adapted to existing ATS 
institutions and decision-making procedures.  A rolling review of the Annexes of the Protocol 
may provide an opportunity to formally incorporate SEA to the Protocol’s existing impact 
assessment processes.  
 
SEA in itself will achieve nothing without the political will to ensure long-term conservation 
of the Antarctic region.  However, Parties committed themselves to this when they ratified the 
Protocol and SEA is a tool that can help them to deliver on that commitment. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Since XXIII ATCM, ASOC has been arguing that the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) should 
recognize longer-term strategic environmental needs in Antarctica beyond those of individual 
activities by individual operators, and generally above and beyond the present level of 
application of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) under the Protocol. EIA – the 
Protocol’s main mechanism to ensure that the planning and conduct of activities conforms to 
its goals – operates at the level of individual activities.  Global environmental management 
experience shows that EIA is a necessary but not sufficient basis for achieving environmental 
protection goals. More sophisticated assessment tools are required than those presently used, 
and appropriate strategic processes should be in place to plan for a sustainable future. ASOC 
has suggested that Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) processes should complement 
existing EIA processes under the Protocol.  SEA is a structured, proactive process to 
strengthen the consideration of environmental issues in strategic decision-making. SEA does 
not substitute for EIA, but sets the context for project-specific EIAs (ASOC 1999a, 2000, 
2001, 2002).  SEA can operate at different levels – from simply a technical tool to an 
approach that is based on a motivating philosophy (Sheathe, 2001).1   
 
This paper discusses the potential application of SEA to outstanding issues in the 
implementation of the Protocol, in particular where there is inconsistency on implementation 
criteria used by different operators, and also as a new approach that would help Parties meet 
the objectives of the Protocol.   
 
2. Outstanding Protocol implementation issues  
 
Implementation refers to all the measures that have been taken by a Party to fulfil the 
objectives of the Protocol (Bastmeijer, 2001).2  When the Protocol entered into force in 1998, 
some Parties already had implementing legislation in place and well-established practical 
procedures resulting from their 1991 commitment to interim implementation pending 
Protocol ratification.  In contrast, other Parties still needed to develop a legal framework 
and/or operational procedures that were compatible with the Protocol’s objectives and 
principles.   
 
Progress towards implementation by the ATS as a whole has been slow (ASOC, 2000b; 
ASOC, 2001b; Roura and Mikityuk, 2001).  By 2001 most Consultative Parties had passed 
enabling legislation of some sort (ASOC, 2001b), in some cases going beyond Protocol 
                                                 
1 “Over time many tools have evolved from being merely technical ‘tools’ (‘things used in performing an action”) 
to be ‘techniques’ (“means of achieving one’s purpose”) or even ‘approaches’ (“act or means of setting about a 
task”) where there is a driving philosophy.  Or they may, indeed, operate at all these levels (as, for example, can 
SEA).” (Sheathe 2001). 
2 Implementation can be considered to have two separate components, which at times operate in parallel and at 
times sequentially: legal implementation – incorporation of the relevant provisions of the Protocol into the national 
legal system – and practical implementation – the measures taken to put the Protocol into action, including the 
application and enforcement of the national law (Bastmeijer 2001). 
 
3
requirements (ASOC, 1999b).  However, recent official inspections of a representative 
number of research stations Antarctic-wide have described various deficiencies in the 
implementation of the Protocol, recommending improvements in fuel transfer and storage, 
development of contingency plans, energy efficiency and use of alternative energy, dealing 
with abandoned stations, better waste management and sewage treatment, and adherence to 
required EIA procedures.  Some cases of very inadequate implementation of the Protocol’s 
regulations on waste management were also documented (United Kingdom-Germany, 1999; 
Norway, 2001; USA, 2001).  This empiric evidence shows that overall practical 
implementation is lagging behind legal implementation.  The failure of some Parties to 
adequately address implementation issues reduces the effectiveness of Protocol implementing 
by the ATS as a whole.  
 
The adoption of SEA approaches would contribute to more consistent implementation of the 
Protocol across the ATS.  This would result from increasing interaction and cooperation 
among different Parties, with the consequence of developing compatible operational 
standards, and from the development of a common strategic vision regarding policies, plans 
and programs for specific areas of Antarctica, types of Antarctic operations, or other issues in 
which two or more Parties work together.  SEA could also be applied by a single operator for 
the identification of gaps in the implementation process that could have an effect on that 
Party’s contribution to the Protocol’s long-term objectives. SEA approaches would 
complement those approaches that already exist in the ATS.   
 
Described below are examples of ongoing processes or proposals that suggest that, 
notwithstanding other potential uses, that application of SEA approaches could streamline the 
application of Annex I and facilitate the implementation of Annex V in the context of 
programs or areas of activity where several Antarctic programs are involved.   
 
3. Sustainability objectives and the Protocol 
 
A second concern refers to emerging strategic issues that at present are not sufficiently 
covered by the Protocol and/or necessarily related to the standards of Protocol 
implementation.  Individual operators may perform adequately in terms of Protocol 
implementation requirements, but this does not prevent risks caused by the sum of operations 
nor does it prevent undesirable impacts, especially cumulative impacts, from occurring.  The 
Protocol’s main mechanism to ensure that the planning and conduct of activities conform to 
these goals – EIA – operates only at the level of individual activities (ASOC, 2000; 2001).  
We have argued that the various instruments and processes in place within the ATS, while 
individually effective in meeting their conservation goals, may not collectively provide the 
“lucky combination” required to ensure adequate long-term protection of the Antarctic 
environment (ASOC, 2001).  Further, the Protocol’s more technical guidelines, especially if 
taken literally, do not cover all possible aspects of Antarctic operations, and therefore are a 
necessary but not sufficient set of tools to achieve the Protocol’s overall objectives.   
 
ASOC argues that the sustainability of the Antarctic ecosystem can only be achieved with 
long-term conservation of the entire region. In turn, this requires the application of tools 
designed to look at the region as a whole to determine which activities are consistent with this 
purpose.  In view of a rapidly changing world and the growing levels of human activities in 
Antarctica, the sustainability of the region will not be achieved by the accumulation of ad hoc 
measures generated in reaction to events, or by industry self-regulation.  The failure of these 
approaches is demonstrated by developments in the Antarctic fishing and tourism industries 
over the past decade (ASOC, 2002).  These have resulted in largely unregulated industries in 
which environmental considerations are secondary to their overall commercial objectives. In 
practice, no significant restriction on the timing, scope or scale of either fishing or tourism 
operations currently exists. 
 
 
4
It follows that the strategic environmental needs of a changing Antarctic context need to be 
addressed proactively in order to ensure a sustainable future for the region. SEA may be used 
as a means to pursuing and managing sustainability (Eggenberg and Partidário, 2000; 
Stinchcombe and Gibson, 2001).  SEA could be applied to emerging issues within a 
reasonable time frame – months rather than years.  The main role of an Antarctic SEA would 
be to influence the way decisions are taken by bringing environmental consideration as early 
as possible into the planning process in order to determine what is to take place, leaving EIA 
to resolve how activities should be carried out (ASOC, 2001). The early consideration of 
strategic environmental issues in the context of SEA could contribute to meeting objectives of 
the Protocol that may not otherwise be met solely by the application of its Annexes.  
 
4. Conclusions: SEA as a “stepping stone” to Protocol objectives 
 
Since ASOC’s initial suggestion that a more strategic form of impact assessment for Antarctic 
activities is required (ASOC, 1999a), SEA has been proposed elsewhere as one of the 
potential tools for assessing the impacts of Antarctic tourism and cumulative impacts 
(Bastmeijer, 2000; Kriwoken and Rootes, 2000) and of subglacial lake research (SALE GOS 
2001).  How SEA would be applied in practice in the Antarctic context is still a matter of 
speculation (ASOC, 2000; ASOC, 2001) although the theory and practise of SEA provides 
some guidance.  While the concept of SEA should follow some guiding principles, the 
process could take many different forms (Verheem and Tonk, 2000).  SEA should fit into 
existing decision-making processes (Brown and Thérivel, 2000; Sheathe et al, 2001; Nitz and 
Brown 2001).  SEA can be EIA-derived or inspired, or it can be objective-led. Both 
applications can be complementary and integrated into an SEA (Sheath, 2001). Antarctic SEA 
could follow any of these models, as explained by the following two examples.  
 
ASOC has identified some elements in common between an SEA process and the process in 
place for the establishment of an ASMA at Deception Island (even though this process lacks 
some critical elements of SEA) (ASOC, 2001). This is an objective-led process applied to a 
particular area, in which the objective is to avoid conflict of interests between the natural 
environment and human activities, and between different types of human activities, beyond 
the present level of activity on the island.   
 
The Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration Group of Specialists (SALE GOS), in its 
November 2001 meeting in Bologna, Italy, discussed employing SEA for its overall program.  
This is an international, multidisciplinary subglacial lake research program involving drilling 
into subglacial lakes several thousand meters below the surface of the Antarctic ice cap.  An 
overall SEA would streamline the EIA processes – the production of PAs, IEEs or CEEs – for 
the different sub-components of the program:   
 
“The Group recognized that due to the complexity and magnitude of the proposed 
scientific plan, which will require a wide range of different activities over several 
years that a series of EIAs will be necessary.  Preliminary assessments (PA), initial 
environmental evaluations (IEEs), comprehensive environmental evaluations (CEEs) 
would all be needed at some stage to adequately cover the range of activities 
envisioned during subglacial lake exploration.  Also the range of activities that will 
be conducted, will probably require differing levels of environmental assessment.  
This highlights the need for a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) to 
adequately plan the exploration program including the assessment of cumulative 
impacts.”  (SALE GOS, 2001). 
 
As envisioned in this proposal, SEA would apply EIA approaches but transcend the 
limitations of the activity-based EIA process by setting impact assessment in a broader 
context.  It would address a certain type of activity (deep ice drilling) across a particular 
Antarctic environment – the subglacial lake environment.  If nothing else, this application of 
 
5
SEA would ensure that EIA or EIAs under the Protocol are conducted where needed at the 
appropriate level, and more likely would improve the quality of EIA and the overall 
effectiveness of the EIA process given the level of scrutiny and accountability involved.   
 
ASOC continues to urge the Parties involved in the Antarctic region to move forward in 
developing and testing Antarctic SEA.  Over the longer term, the principles of SEA could 
easily be adapted to existing ATS institutions and decision-making procedures.  We have 
suggested, as have others elsewhere (Sheathe et al, 2001), that one of the initial steps is to 
examine existing strategic processes in the ATS for compatibility to SEA.  The examples 
above give a hint of some of the ways in which this could work.  The ongoing Deception 
Island ASMA process has proceeded through the drafting of a management strategy, a series 
of workshops and an international expedition.  A way forward to complete the process has 
been proposed (Downie and Smellie, 2001; United Kingdom 2002).  The SALE GOS 
Bologna report has identified as short-term (0-3 years) scientific and technical milestones the 
“…identification of a lead nation, or at a minimum, the formation of an interim planning 
group charged with conducting a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of the overall 
program.”  (SALE GOS, 2001).  
 
In addition, a rolling review of the Annexes of the Protocol (which will be starting in 2002 
with Annex II on the Protection of Fauna and Flora) provides the Antarctic community with 
an opportunity to evaluate the effectiveness of existing impact assessment procedures under 
the Protocol’s Annex I, and to incorporate additional instruments such as SEA.  A second-
stage challenge would be attempting to apply SEA across the major regime boundary within 
the ATS, i.e., to issues which transcend the largely terrestrial focus of the Protocol and 
Antarctic Treaty on the one hand, and the essentially marine focus of CCAMLR on the other 
(Roura and Hemmings, 2002).    
 
The two examples mentioned above suggest that SEA (or SEA-like) processes could become 
part of the decision-making procedures in the Antarctic context to address specific strategic 
needs, and that they are indeed possible within the ATS framework.  Conceptually, these 
examples represent progress towards understanding how to best meet Protocol objectives 
beyond the standard (and in some cases minimalist) application of Protocol requirements, and 
illustrate the potential role of SEA in Antarctica.  SEA can be applied at different levels and 
for different purposes, and can fill in the gap created by strategic needs that are not 
necessarily covered by specific Protocol requirements.  Thus, SEA can be used as a “stepping 
stone” to the long-term objectives of the Protocol, including those contained in Art. 2, which 
might not otherwise be reached (Roura and Hemmings, 2002).   
 
As a word of caution, it should be noted that SEA is not and cannot be a panacea to each and 
all of Antarctica’s environmental issues.  SEA in itself will achieve nothing without the 
political will to take concrete action to achieve long-term conservation of the Antarctic 
region.  Parties committed themselves to this when they ratified the Protocol, however.  SEA 
is a tool that can help deliver on that commitment. 
 
 
6
References 
 
ASOC (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition) (1999a): Large scale Antarctic tourism. 
Information Paper 121, XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. (Lima, Peru). 
ASOC (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition) (1999b): Good practice in implementing 
legislation. Information Paper 127, XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 
(Lima, Peru). 
ASOC (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition) (2000a): Antarctic Strategic Environmental 
Assessment: Application to the Growing Antarctic Tourism Industry.  Information 
Paper 10, XII Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  (The Hague, The 
Netherlands). 
ASOC (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition) (2000b): An evaluation of progress towards 
implementation of the Madrid Protocol.  Information Paper 22, XII Special Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting. (The Hague, The Netherlands). 
ASOC (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition) (2001a): Strategic Needs and Decision-
Making in Antarctica.  Information Paper 54, XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting.  (St. Petersburg, Russian Federation). 
ASOC (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition) (2001b): Legal Implementation of the Five 
Annexes of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.  Information Paper 
55, XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. (St. Petersburg, Russian 
Federation). 
ASOC (Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition) (2002): Antarctic and Southern Ocean: 
Global Commons, Global Wilderness, Global Heritage.  Paper submitted to World 
Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, Republic of South Africa, 
August 26-September 4, 2002.) 10pp.  
K Bastmeijer (2000): “Implementing the Protocol domestically”.  In: D Vidas (ed.): 
Implementing the environmental protection regime for the Antarctic.  (Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht-Boston-London). 
A L Brown and R Thérivel (2000): “Principles to guide the development of strategic 
environmental assessment methodology”, Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal 
18:3, p.187. 
R H Downie and J L Smellie (2001): A management strategy for Deception Island.   (British 
Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, United Kingdom.)  
M Eggenber and M D R Partidário (2000): “Development of a framework to assist the 
integration of environmental, social and economic issues in spatial planning.” Impact 
Assessment and Project Appraisal 18:3, p. 204. 
T Nitz and A L Brown (2001):  “SEA must learn how policy making works.”  Journal of 
Environmental Assessment Policy and Management 3:3 pp 329-342.  Special Issue: 
Strategic Assessment Tools.  W Sheathe (ed.). 
Norway (2001): Antarctic Treaty report of the Norwegian Antarctic inspection under Article 
VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Oslo, Norway).  
52pp. 
R Roura and A D Hemmings (2002), “Introducing Strategic Environmental Assessment in a 
new context: Strategic needs and decision-making in Antarctica, and the need for 
SEA”. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference Event of the International 
Association for Impact Assessment: Assessing the Impact of Impact Assessment, 15-
21 June 2001. (The Hague, The Netherlands). 
R Roura and I Mikityuk (2001): “Green legislation for Antarctica: Theory and practice in the 
implementation of the Antarctic environmental protocol” Abstracts, First Ukrainian 
Antarctic Meeting, June 4-7 2001 (Ukrainian Antarctic Center, Ministry of Education 
and Science of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine) p.90 
 
7
SALE GOS (Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration Group of Specialists) (2001): Report of 
the Subglacial Antarctic Lake Exploration Group of Specialists. Meeting I.  Bologna, 
Italy, 29-30 November 2001.  Available from:  
http://SALE GOS-scar.montana.edu/docs. 
W Sheathe (2001): The rise of strategic assessment tools. Journal of environmental 
Assessment Policy and Management 3:3 pp iii-x.  Special Issue: Strategic Assessment 
Tools.  W Sheathe (ed.).  
W Sheathe, S Dagg, J Richardson, R Aschermann, J Palerm and U Steen (2001): Strategic 
Environmental Assessment (SEA) and integration of the environment into strategic 
decision making.  European Commission Contract NoB4-3040/99/136634/MAR/B4. 
Available from: http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/eia/sea-support.htm). 
K Stinchcombe and R B Gibson (2001): “Strategic Environmental Assessment as a means of 
pursuing sustainability: Ten advantages and ten challenges.” Journal of 
Environmental Assessment Policy and Management 3:3 pp 343-373.  Special Issue: 
Strategic Assessment Tools.  W Sheathe (ed.). 
United Kingdom-Germany (1999):  Antarctic Treaty report of a joint inspection under Article 
VII of the Antarctic Treaty by United Kingdom and German observers.  (Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office, London, United Kingdom and Auswartiges Amt., Bonn, 
Germany). 
United Kingdom (2002): An International Expedition to Deception Island.  Joint Information 
paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by Argentina, Chile, 
Norway, Spain, UK, USA, ASOC and IAATO. Information Paper 028, XXV Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting. (Warsaw, Poland). 
United States of America (2001): Report of the United States Antarctic inspection team.  
February 2-16, 2001 (United States Department of State, Washington DC, USA), 
78pp. 
R Verheem and J A M N Tonk (2000): “Strategic Environmental Assessment: One concept, 
multiple forms”, Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal 18:3, p.177. 
