XXV ATCM 
CEP Information paper  
Submitted by the United Kingdom  
 
 
Agenda 4E: Waste disposal and waste management 
 
The clean-up and removal of abandoned British stations in Antarctica 
 
The UK has begun a major five-year programme to remove abandoned British stations and 
waste dumps from Antarctica, in accordance with the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic 
Treaty (1998). The clean-up of these bases and dump site, some of which date back to the mid 
1950s and are spread over a wide geographical area, represents a significant logistical 
challenge for the UK. The £2 million clean-up programme is a major step forward in the UK 
efforts to protect the Antarctic environment.  
 
Removal of the disused facilities at Signy began on 17 November 2001 and was completed on 
5 April 2002. A team of ten specialists from a British construction company - Morrison 
Construction – carried out the work, assisted by three BAS staff. The manager of the project 
was Dr John Shears (BAS Environmental Officer), who also supervised works at Signy. 
 
By 2005, the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) plans to remove the waste dump at Fossil Bluff 
summer field station, and the three remaining abandoned British bases along the Antarctic 
Peninsula.  
 
Clean-up and demolition at Signy comprised: 
 
• Removal of asbestos walls panels and lagging; 
• Pumping out of 40,000 litres of waste fuel and sludge from the disused bulk fuel tank; 
• Demolition and removal of two large disused buildings, the empty bulk fuel tank, and 
several other smaller facilities; 
• A wide range of extra works, including the installation of a new diesel generator. 
 
A total of 810 cubic metres (equivalent in volume to eight London double-decker buses) of 
wastes, weighing about 400 tonnes, were loaded onto the BAS vessel RRS Ernest Shackleton 
and shipped to the Falkland Islands and UK for recycling or safe disposal. Specialist 
contractors in UK disposed of all hazardous wastes. 
 
Signy Research Station remains an important location for the scientific study of Antarctic 
lakes and terrestrial habitats, particularly their response to climate change. During the clean-
up, great efforts were made to protect the local environment and scientific research, and to try 
to recycle waste fuel and building materials. A special fuel purification system was used to 
filter 20,000 litres of the waste fuel, which was used in the station diesel generators and 
meant that no bulk refuelling was required during the season. Also, the ground floor of one of 
the disused buildings was converted into a cargo storage platform, and waste building 
materials were reused to construct walkways and handrails around the site.  
 
The demolition works at Signy were completed on budget and ahead of schedule, without any 
loss of scientific research and minimal impact on the environment. Signy Research Station is 
now an excellent, modern, cost-efficient and highly compact biological research facility. The 
science carried out by BAS at Signy Island concentrates on the study of penguins and 
terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems, and currently includes collaborative projects with 
researchers from Japan and the Netherlands. The station is open each austral summer 
(October – April) and can accommodate eight to ten people. 
 
The clean-up at Signy was highly successful and clearly demonstrates how effectively 
national Antarctic operators can work in partnership with commercial companies, and is a 
model for similar initiatives currently being organized or planned in Antarctica. 
 
For further information about the UK clean-up programme visit the BAS web site at 
www.antarctica.ac.uk or contact: 
 
Dr John Shears 
Environmental Officer 
British Antarctic Survey 
High Cross 
Madingley Road 
Cambridge 
UK 
CB3 OET 
 
E-mail: jrs@bas.ac.uk 
 
 
Demolition and clean-up of disused facilities at Signy Research Station – 2001/02 
 
Top photograph shows Signy after demolition and clean-up works were completed 
successfully in April 2002. Bottom photograph shows Signy before removal works began in 
April 2001. 
 
 
