Antarctic Meteorites Study and Management in China 
 
1. Introduction 
Meteorites preserve a variety of information related to formation and 
evolution of the solar system. Furthermore, some of them came from the 
Moon and the Mars, and some other primordial ones even contain presolar 
grains from various kinds of stars. Meteorites are most precious samples for 
scientific researches. Up to date, only about 3000 meteorites (except those 
from Antarctica and desert) have been collected in the world. However, 
more than 26000 pieces of meteorites have been collected from Antarctica. 
As its unique environment, Antarctica has become a place most enriched in 
meteorites in the world. 
China began the scientific study on Antarctic meteorites in 1980s. With the 
international cooperation with Japan, USA,UK and Switzerland, Chinese 
scientists obtained the samples of Antarctic meteorites and got the progress 
on the scientific research on such aspect.  
In 1998, the 15th team of Chinese Antarctic Expedition were doing geology 
study in Grove Mountains region. There, they found four meteorites on the 
surface of blue ice, including one unusual iron meteorite with the finest 
octahedral structure. In 1999, the 16th Chinese Antarctic Expedition 
collected 28 new meteorites in the same region. 
 
2. Progress on the meteorites study  
CAA held a meeting in the Institute of Polar Research, Shanghai, on Dec. 
2000. Participants came from meteorite scientists, members of Chinese 
Antarctic Expedition, officials of CAA and Chinese National Natural 
Science Foundation. The purpose of the meeting is to preserve the precious 
meteorites collected and to prompt the scientific study on this regard. As a 
result, the Chinese Antarctic Meteorite Research Committee were 
established whose responsibilities are followings:  
1. Providing advising on Chinese Antarctic meteorite study, meteorite 
collecting and management.  
2.Screening application for samples of the meteorites, and organize 
scientific activities related to Antarctic meteorite;  
The Committee has made out the guidelines on the Antarctic meteorite 
application and usage, procedures of collecting, meteorite keeping. 
According to the guidelines, Institute of Geochemistry, Institute of Geology 
and Geophysics, Nanjing University, and National Beijing Astronomic 
Observatory were qualified for analyzing the new 28 Antarctic meteorites. 
The Chinese Antarctic Meteorite Committee held the second meeting in 
Beijing on Feb 2002. During the meeting, there was a workshop in which the 
scientists presented their reports on the meteorites studies. The Committee 
recommended to carry out more studies on meteorites and proposed to build 
up the storeroom for the samples of Antarctic meteorites.  
 
3.Measures have be taken on the management of meteorites 
1.All meteorites collected by Chinese Antarctica Expedition are stored in the 
Institute of Polar Research, Shanghai; 
2.Any possible contamination and weathering of the meteorites should be 
avoided during collecting in the field, transferring from Antarctica to the 
Institute, sample preparing and the long-term storage;  
3. Applications for samples of meteorites are screened by the Chinese 
Antarctic Meteorite Committee 
4. Scientists in China and all other countries can apply for samples of the 
meteorites for purpose of scientific research. Applicants should submit 
formal applications to clarify names, types and mass of the meteorites, and 
to outline the related study and the scientific significances;  
5. All efforts should be applied to minimize wastage of the samples. In 
principle, the smallest meteorites are unavailable for application in the near 
future. All of the samples are loans, and they must be returned before 
expiring the time limits;  
6. The applicants are responsible to acknowledge in their publications that 
the samples are from the Institute of Polar Research, and to supply the latter 
with data related to these meteorites. 
