XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-012
Agenda Item: ATCM 14
Estonia
Original : English


PLANNED ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES OF
ESTONIA

PLANNED ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES OF ESTONIA


Since the International Geophysical Year around 30 scientists and logistical personnel from Estonia have participated the Antarctic expeditions of the former Soviet Union and some other countries. Considerable amount of research has been carried out resulting in a significant number of publications, especially in the fields of limnology, glaciology and isotope geochemistry.

On May 17, 2001 Estonia acceded to the Antarctic Treaty with the aim to establish a national Antarctic research program and to contribute to the international scientific cooperation in Antarctic research.

The adherence to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty by Estonia, as a precondition of any national activities in the Treaty area, is under preparation and will be finalized in the near future.

On March 19, 2002 Estonian Polar Research Committee adopted the preliminary program for starting national Antarctic activities in few years. The project called Estonian Antarctic Expedition foresees the following key elements:

    • Building or conversion of a small ice strengthened research vessel suitable for summer operations in the Ross Sea.
    • Using Hobart as a gateway to Antarctica.
    • Establishing a small summer only station on the coast of Northern Victoria Land.
    • Operating the station and the vessel simultaneously in the Western Ross Sea area annually during the austral summer.
    • The preliminary scientific program includes oceanography of the near coastal zone, sea ice studies, limnological investigations and isotope geochemistry.

It should be underlined, that the principles of the Protocol have been implemented from the earliest stage of planning of the operations and are strictly followed.

We would like to thank a number of Parties, especially Italy and Finland for the assistance we have received and to stress our readiness for future cooperation with all Parties on the basis of mutual interest.

