				ATCM XXV 
Information Paper IP-109
Agenda Item: ATCM 4b
ITALY
Original: English
			

18th September 2002

Working Group on the Secretariat 
Chairman’s report




	
1. Opening of the Meeting
The meeting was opened by Professor Francesco Francioni who had been elected Chairman of the Working Group on the Secretariat. Professor Francioni had also chaired the informal meeting on the Secretariat hosted by Argentina in Buenos Aires in June 2002. The Chairman expressed his gratitude to the Government of Argentina for facilitating the Buenos Aires meeting as well as to the Government of Poland for hosting so efficiently the XXV ATCM.

Subsequently, the Chairman introduced the discussion by giving an overview of the results achieved in Buenos Aires and referred to the Working Paper 044 (XXV ATCM/WP044) presented by Italy and containing the Chairman’s report of the Meeting as well as the four Annexes. The Chairman highlighted the main issues addressed in the report: 1) the nature and content of the constitutive instrument; 2) the legal personality and capacity of the Secretariat; 3) the functions; 4) the privileges and immunities; 5) the financial matters; 6) the staff matters.	

2. Adoption of the Agenda
A number of Delegations pointed out that, in view of the short time available, the Working Group should concentrate on legal and policy issues leaving technical and financial matters for discussion at the end of the meeting. Some participants noted the importance and political sensitivity of the discussion on financial and cost sharing issues. However, all Delegations agreed to leave these items for deliberation after a thorough examination of the legal issues involved in the establishment of the Secretariat.	

The German Delegation suggested a tour de table on two general issues that are likely to condition the outcome of the Meeting: 1) the choice of a “two-tier” approach involving a Decision to set up a Secretariat on an interim basis and a normative instrument definitively establishing the Secretariat and 2) the personality and legal capacity of the ATCM and the Secretariat.

	After a brief discussion, the Meeting, on a proposal by the Chairman, decided to concentrate first on the issue of the constitutive instrument. Several Delegations reiterated their preference for the “two-tier” approach as well as the adoption of a Decision in view of the lengthy procedure involved in the entry into force of a Measure. A number of Delegations, however, expressed the need for the parallel adoption of a Decision and a Measure in order to provide a clear legal and financial framework to enable national implementation of the constitutive instrument.



3. Constitutive Instrument:

The Chairman emphasized two requirements: on the one hand, the need to carry out the commitment undertaken by Decision 1 (2001) adopted in St. Petersburg to establish a permanent secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty in a timely manner, and on the other hand, respect for the legitimate concern expressed by a number of Delegations that such establishment should be realized by an instrument capable of national implementation such as a Measure.  
 
Argentina introduced two papers: a draft law on privileges and immunities of the Secretariat and a draft letter of commitment of the Argentine Government, which amends the letter of commitment included in Annex 1 of WP 044. The Argentine Delegation reiterated the urgent need to adopt a legal instrument capable of allowing the adoption of the appropriate legal and administrative framework necessary to ensure the timely operation of the Secretariat.   
   
According to some participants, no progress in establishing the Secretariat could be achieved without separating the financing and cost sharing issues from the drafting of the Measure, which will provide the legal framework for the functioning of the Secretariat.

Australia supported the idea of a two-track approach based on the adoption of both a Measure and a Decision.

At the end of the debate, the Chairman underscored the linkage between the three different elements of the debate – Decision, Measure and Headquarters Agreement. He proposed the establishment of a sub-group which will focus on the preparation of an overall package of constitutive instruments. He invited Delegations from the following countries to take part in this task: Argentina, Bulgaria, France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and Uruguay. The Chairman asked the Representative of France to kindly act as a convener of this sub-group.


4. Legal personality / Legal Capacity:

The Chairman reminded the consensus achieved at the Buenos Aires Informal Meeting in June 2002, where all Parties agreed that the Secretariat should not be an independent international body with international legal personality, but should rather act as an organ of the ATCM.

Therefore, the discussion centered on the following issues: who will sign the Headquarters Agreement on behalf of ATCM, the nature of the interim regime and the legal capacity of the Secretariat under the domestic law of the host country.

Some Delegations such as the United States, expressed the view that before signing the Headquarters Agreement some form of approval or authorization would be needed from the Parties. Some Delegations agreed that their governments needed more time to review the text of the Headquarters Agreement. 

On the issue of the signature of the Headquarters Agreement the Parties agreed that the chairman pro-tempore of the ATCM would be the most appropriate person to sign the Agreement on behalf of the ATCM. The substance of the Agreement was left for further discussions. 

The Netherlands pointed out that the mandate for the acting chairman to sign an Agreement between the ATCM and Argentina should be given in a Decision. However, Norway noted that ATCM does not have treaty-making powers, which means that the Secretariat cannot be established by internal decision only. As a solution, Norway suggested introducing a provision for this purpose in the Measure.

One delegation noted that the ATCM should not adopt a Decision authorizing the signature of the Headquarters Agreement before the Measure becomes effective. Argentina suggested not linking the entry into force of the Measure and that of the Headquarters Agreement. The Chairman shared the view that two moments should be distinguished – the signature of the Headquarters Agreement and the entry into force of the Measure after ratifications by appropriate authorities of States Parties. 

In the discussion on the interim regime the Chairman highlighted the problem of the legal basis upon which the interim Secretariat should perform its functions. Some Parties agreed that the interim arrangement may satisfactorily be covered by Argentine domestic law. Uruguay added, however, that some form of ATCM approval of the Argentine unilateral offering was also needed.

Several Delegations pointed out a list of practical aspects of the Secretariat functioning that should be clarified, in particular the issues of domestic law capacity, representation, ownership and contractual capacity.
 
Argentina stated that, in its internal law, the ATCM must necessarily be mentioned as the counterpart of the Headquarters Agreement and as the authority to appoint the Executive Secretary.   

Some Parties noted that the draft documents tabled for discussion do not sufficiently clarify the relations between the ATCM and the Secretariat, giving the impression they were separate bodies with the same functions and capacities.

The Chairman stressed that the ATCM as an intergovernmental meeting expresses the “collective will” of the Contracting Parties, whereas the Secretariat shall be its organ. This is the classical agency relationship, which should find its expression in the constitutive instruments. 

Many Delegations showed concern about the issue of the legal personality of the ATCM and the Secretariat itself. Argentina however assured that it would not and could not impose international personality on the ATCM Secretariat. The letter of commitment as well as the draft Argentine law on privileges and immunities have been prepared carefully in order to provide sufficient flexibility to accommodate the Decision and the Measure to be adopted by the ATCM. 

Summing up the discussion, the Chairman concluded that it was the general opinion of the Working Group that one must distinguish between international legal personality and domestic legal capacity. He further stressed that the Secretariat will exercise its function in the name and on behalf the ATCM and not in its own name and interest. Therefore, it is appropriate that the Secretariat be endowed with the necessary legal capacity in the domestic law of Argentina. At the same time, the Chairman pointed out that the many Delegations were concerned with the issue of appropriate governance of the Secretariat and recognized that such issue must be addressed by providing the ATCM with appropriate role in supervising the Secretariat. Finally, the Chairman summed up the discussion on the interim period of the Secretariat by pointing out that a general consensus emerged in the Working Group that the ATCM should not approve the unilateral interim arrangement provided by the Argentine law on privileges and immunities, but should simply note such law.

Australia announced the presentation of a paper proposing the creation of a Standing Committee for the Secretariat on the basis of Rule 9 of the Rules of Procedure. Such a Committee could give guidelines, as well as ensure appropriate supervision of the Secretariat between the ATCM sessions. Every Party to the Treaty could be represented in that body and it could be chaired by the acting ATCM Chairman. Australia presented the opinion that the idea of a long-term chair should be discussed. 

The Chairman welcomed the Australian suggestion, which could be very useful to meet the widely felt need for proper governance, but in view of the scarcity of time available proposed to defer the treatment of this issue to the Working Group on Legal and Institutional Matters. 


5. Financial and Staff Regulations:	

The Chairman opened the discussion on the Working Paper 046 (XXV ATCM/WP046) concerning budget projections for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat as submitted by the Delegations of Argentina and Australia.

The United States and the United Kingdom raised the question of the budget adequacy. The UK stressed the need to provide the Secretariat with sufficient funds so as not to constrain it at its very start. At the same time, the Representative of the United States inquired whether the estimated figures took into account the fact that 3 weeks of secretariat support is needed for a 2 weeks meeting – if the practice of moving the meetings is to be maintained.

	Discussing the list of professional staff members, several Delegations suggested that a post of environmental officer should be considered in view of the fact that the Secretariat is to serve also the CEP. Some Delegations indicated their wish that a legal officer should also be considered, but this view was not shared by other Delegations.
 
New Zealand expressed its concern in relation to the application of the UN scale as a reference for determining staff wages, given the problems that other organizations using this system are faced with. 

Russia inquired about the adequacy of the salary estimates with reference to the cost of living in Argentina in particular for the expatriate staff.  Argentina clarified that the figures were for the locally hired personnel.

Addressing the questions of budget adequacy, Australia stressed that the figures reflected only minimum levels and were based on CCAMLR assumptions. They also stated that costs in Australia and Argentina were lower than in the United Kingdom or the United States and that figures concerning interpretation and translation services as well as staff wages reflect the real situation in Argentina and Australia. On the other hand, they admitted that some changes might prove necessary with regard to travel costs. 

Chile underlined the fact that if the professional staff is to be skilled enough, higher costs should be foreseen and in such a situation, the budget was unrealistic. 

Brazil referred to translation services and asked whether figures in WP 046 included all required translations or whether they reflected savings applied by CCAMLR. Australia noted that Budget 3 provides for the costs of employing 16 interpreters for two weeks on UN basis and three permanent translators paid according to local rates in Argentina.

The Chairman asked whether the costs of pensions and similar allowances were included in the estimates. Argentina assured that they were included.

The Chairman thanked Argentina and Australia for the useful paper on budget projections and expressed his confidence that the relative discussion should provide a valuable basis for the drafting of the Decision and the Measure concerning the establishment of the Secretariat. 
	
	Since the CCAMLR experience was identified by some Delegations as an example worthy of following in the process of creation of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, the Chairman invited Mr. Denzel Miller, the Executive Secretary of CCAMLR, to give a presentation on the CCAMLR Secretariat. The Executive Secretary gave a brief historical overview of the CCAMLR Secretariat and indicated that the Commission of the CCAMLR was given legal personality under Art. 8 of the Convention while there was no similar provision concerning the ATCM set forth in the Antarctic Treaty. He also drew the attention of the Parties to the fact that there were also interim arrangements prior to the entry into force of the final Headquarters Agreement. 

Following the request of the Chairman, the Executive Secretary addressed the issue of financial regulations. First of all, he emphasized that in relation to financial provisions a balance needs to be preserved: the regulations should not only ensure the adequate level of financial accountability, but also, be reactive and flexible enough as to enable the Secretariat to operate in the efficient way.  

With regard to the budgetary procedures, the Executive Secretary highlighted some difficulties experienced with the current CCAMLR budgetary approach. The Secretariat and the Standing Committee for Administration and Finance are currently evaluating the consequence of moving from the current CCAMLR budgetary approach to one based on the accrual system. The Executive Secretary suggested that early agreement on the budgetary approach could avoid difficulties of having to institute some changes at a later date. He also addressed the problem of the budgetary contingencies and advised the Parties to consider the creation of a contingency fund.

In the last part of his speech, the Executive Secretary emphasized the need to ensure the timeliness and predictability of the contributions made by the Parties in order to prevent cash flow problems. He drew attention of the Meeting to the fact that in different countries different budgetary systems are applied, and he suggested that clear provisions concerning the date of payment be made.

Answering a question from Brazil regarding translation and interpretation costs, the Executive Secretary referred to Section 6 of Information Paper 011(XXV ATCM/IP 011) “Antarctic Treaty Secretariat” and informed the Working Group on the cost reductions applied by CCAMLR and on the translation policy adopted. 

As to a question raised by Norway concerning the size of the contingency fund in relation to the total budget, the Executive Secretary informed that in CCAMLR it initially hinged on the contributions made by Norway and subsequently by other States, which had acceded to the Convention. Further, he pointed out the relatively modest size of the fund.

Russia inquired about the percentage of the budget earmarked for personnel. The Executive Secretary referred to IP 11 and estimated that staff wages constitute 50-60% of the total budget. 

In relation to the Secretariat’s function in supporting the organization of the ATCM, the Representative of the United States asked about its foreseeable cost in light of the present rotation system among different countries. The Executive Secretary noted that costs depended on the duration of the meeting, the number of persons and the host country. He also remarked that for the 2-week meeting at least 3-week preparations were needed.

The Representative of the United Kingdom raised the issue whether there had been a formal interim agreement between the Commission and the Government of Australia before the headquarters agreement came into force.  The Executive Secretary confirmed that the Australian Government ensured provisional application of the headquarters agreement by way of appropriate schedule attached to the Australian law implementing the Canberra Convention.

Addressing the issue of nationality of the personnel, the Executive Secretary referred to Staff Regulations No. 5.2 and 6 and noted that the professional staff was selected from all the Member States while the administrative employees were recruited locally, which does not exclude appointment of non-Australian workers.

The Chairman thanked the CCAMLR Executive Secretary for his useful presentation and invited the Working Group to proceed with the substantive examination of the draft Headquarters Agreement.


6. Headquarters Agreement:

On invitation by the Chairman, the Working Group agreed to use as the basis for discussion the amended draft Headquarters Agreement, which corresponds to Annex 3 of WP 044. 

The ensuing discussion concentrated on the following specific issues:

First, Delegations raised the issue concerning who must sign the Agreement with the host country. The majority of Delegations believed that this task pertained to the ATCM’s Chairman as representative of the ATCPs. Other Delegations deemed that the lack of international legal personality of the ATCM required that the Agreement was signed by individual States Parties. Another solution might be that the Executive Secretary him/herself signs the Agreement, but such a solution was not welcomed by many Delegations who wanted to stress the nature of non-independent organ of the Secretariat with respect to the ATCM. The same problem arose with regard to the identification of who was to notify the appointment of the Executive Secretary to the Host Government. Most Delegations deemed that the ATCM should provide such notification.     

A second issue concerned the possibility of recognizing the immunity of the ATCM as such in the Agreement, as proposed by some Delegation. Such recognition was not supported by some Delegations, which objected to such recognition as a sort of indirect acknowledgment of the international personality of the ATCM.

Third, the Working Group discussed the question of who had the power to waive immunities. The prevailing view among Delegations was that the ATCM and specific proposal were presented jointly by the United Kingdom and Japan.
     
Fourth, the Working Group highlighted the need to make a distinction between the immunities of Staff Members, Delegates and Experts. It was agreed that the Executive Secretary and the Secretariat’s Staff enjoyed the immunities expressly provided for in the Agreement. Conversely, States Parties Delegates have privileges and immunities as ensured by the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. For such immunities States Parties must retain the waiving power. Finally, Experts enjoy privileges and immunities limited to the exercise of their official functions. The issue of immunities also affects the rights of the family members of the Secretariat’s Staff and Delegates. The definition of family members accepted by the Working Group is that contained in Art. 37 of the 1961 Vienna Convention, which is: “the members of the family…forming part of (the) household”.

Finally, the Working Group addressed the issue of dispute settlement. An aspect of the problem was identified with who should be the parties to the possible disputes. Under Art. 24 of the draft Agreement annexed to WP 044 the parties to disputes are envisaged to be the Host Government and the Secretariat. The United Kingdom proposed to substitute the Secretariat with the ATCM. Although it was generally recognized that since the Secretariat is only an organ of the ATCM, the latter should be the appropriate party to eventual disputes, some Delegations such as the United States and Russia expressed the concern that this solution should not result in individual Consultative Parties being adversely affected by the settlement of the dispute. On this point, there was consensus that no financial liability should arise for individual Consultative Parties from awards or other forms of settlement of disputes between the ATCM and the Host Government.

On a proposal by Russia, the Working Group agreed that any dispute with the Host Government concerning privileges and immunities of Delegates of States Parties should be the object of a distinct dispute settlement mechanism applicable on a bilateral basis between the Host State and the sending State. A suggestion was made to the effect of bringing this type of disputes within the scope of operation of the Optional Protocol to the 1961 Vienna Convention, although it was recognized that this solution was likely to raise legal problems.

7. Cost Sharing:

The Chairman opened the discussion on the cost-sharing mechanism to be included in the draft Measure necessary to establish the Secretariat. The Chairman recalled the different possible approaches to cost-sharing that have already formed the object of discussion at the informal meeting in Buenos Aires. One such approach is to build on the decision reached by the Consultative Parties in Venice in 1992, which involves a system of equal sharing for a period of three years after which the ATCM would consider alternative mechanisms of equitable sharing. Another approach would be to establish a scale of assessment based on different capacity to pay. A further approach would be to leave the cost-sharing mechanism to a future decision of the ATCM. 

All Delegations spoke on this issue. Many Delegations expressed the view that the consensus reached in Venice was still valid and provided a sufficient flexible mechanism to enable the establishment of the Secretariat. Other Delegations instead firmly maintained the position that a system of equal share was not acceptable to them and that the Venice consensus was not capable of accommodating such position. Other Delegations, although favoring a system of equal shares, declared their readiness to be flexible in order to permit the timely establishment of the Secretariat. 

	At the end of the discussion, the Chairman concluded that no consensus had emerged yet on the critical issue of cost-sharing and invited Delegations to pursue consultations beyond the end of the Working Group.


8. Conclusions:

	At the end of the meeting, the Chairman of the Working Group thanked all Delegations for their effort and good will in addressing a very complex set of issues in such a short time frame.

	He also thanked the Delegate of France who acted  as convener of the sub-group on the constitutive instruments, as well as the members of the sub-group, for their relentless effort at trying to reach agreement on a suitable text of the draft Decision and draft Measure.

The Chairman noted that, as compared to the Buenos Aires meeting, the Working Group had made a considerable progress on several important aspects. Consensus was reached on a number of important points: 1) the need to adopt both a Measure and a Decision according to the “two-tier” approach accepted by the meeting and in a timely manner consistent with Decision 1 adopted in St. Petersburg; 2) the need to elaborate and adopt the three fundamental instruments relating to the establishment of the Secretariat – the Decision, the Measure, and the Headquarters Agreement – as a single negotiating package: 3) the range of specific functions to be performed by the Secretariat; 4) the obligation of all Consultative Parties to contribute to the financing of the Secretariat.

Consensus was reached also on the great majority of the provisions forming the content of the draft Headquarters Agreement as well as on a substantial part of the provisions to be included in the constitutive instruments of the Secretariat.

In order to facilitate reaching consensus on the outstanding issue of cost-sharing, several Delegations raised the question whether an intersessional meeting could be useful before the next ATCM. The Chairman noted that a decision on this point could not be made by the Working Group and assured the Delegation that he would raise this question in consultations with the Chair of the ATCM and of other Working Groups.

Because of lack of time, the Working Group decided not to prepare and adopt its own report, but to leave to the Chairman the task of preparing a Chairman’s report. The Chairman accepted the task and assured the Working Group that he would prepare an informal report to which he would attach four documents, which were the object of the discussion and elaboration by the Working Group:

    1) a draft Measure on the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (Annex 1);
    2) a draft Decision on the functioning of the Secretariat in the interim period (Annex 2);
    3) the draft Headquarters Agreement discussed by the Delegations (Annex 3);
    4) two papers, presented by Australia, concerning respectively staff regulations and financial regulations (Annex 4).


The Chairman, Professor Francesco Francioni, closed the meeting by thanking all Delegations, the members of the XXV ATCM Secretariat, and the interpreters for their contribution to the valuable outcome of the Working Group.  
ANNEX 1

DRAFT MEASURE 

ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT


The Representatives,

	Recalling the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection (the Protocol);

	Recognizing the need for a Secretariat to assist the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) in performing their functions;

	[Recalling the elements for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat contained in the Final Report adopted by the XVII ATCM].

Recalling Decision 1 (2001) of the XXIV ATCM on the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

	Agree, pursuant to Article IX (4) of the Antarctic Treaty, that:
	

ARTICLE 1
Functions

The Secretariat shall perform those functions in support of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), which are entrusted to it by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Under the direction and supervision of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting the Secretariat shall, in particular:

A.	Provide, with assistance from the host government, secretariat support for meetings held under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and others meetings in conjunction with the ATCM. Secretariat support shall include:
i)	Collation of information for ATCM / CEP meetings e.g. Environmental Impact Assessments and Management Plans;
ii)	Preparatory work for and distribution of the meeting agendas and reports;
iii)	Translation of meeting documents; 
iv)	Provision of interpretation services;
v)	Copying, organizing and distributing meeting documents;
vi)	Assisting the ATCM in the drafting the meeting documents including the final report;
B.	Support intersessional work of the ATCM and the CEP by facilitating the exchange of information, organizing meeting facilities and providing other secretariat support as directed by the ATCM;
C.	Facilitate and coordinate communications and exchange of information amongst Parties on all exchanges required under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;
D.	Under guidance from the ATCM, provide the necessary coordination and contact with other elements of the Antarctic Treaty System and other relevant international bodies and other organizations as appropriate;
E.	Establish, maintain, develop and, as appropriate publish, databases relevant to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;
F.	Circulate amongst the Parties any other relevant information and disseminate information on activities in Antarctica;
G.	Record, maintain and publish, as appropriate, the records of ATCM’s and of other Meetings convened under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;
H.	Facilitate the availability of information about the Antarctic Treaty System;
I.	Prepare reports on its activities and presenting them to the ATCM;
J.	Assist the ATCM in reviewing the status of past Recommendations and Measures adopted under Article IX of the Treaty;
    K. Under the guidance of the ATCM, take up responsibility of maintaining and updating and an Antarctic Treaty System “Handbook”;
    L. Perform such other functions relevant to the purpose of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty as may be determined by the ATCM.

ARTICLE 2
Secretariat

The Secretariat will constitute an organ of the ATCM. As such it will be subordinated to the ATCM. It shall carry out functions and mandates entrusted to it by the ATCM.
	[The structure and composition of the Secretariat shall be set out in the staff regulations to be adopted by a decision of the ATCM.] 

ARTICLE 3
Executive Secretary

	The Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive Secretary who shall be appointed by the ATCM from candidates to be proposed by Consultative Parties. During the intersessional periods, the Executive Secretary shall consult with [ATCPs] [the Chair of the ATCM, or other organs established by it,] on any relevant issue related to the performance of its functions.
The Executive Secretary shall appoint staff members and experts essential for the carrying out of the functions of the Secretariat, in accordance with the procedures, terms and conditions set out in staff regulations to be adopted by a Decision of the ATCM.

ARTICLE 4
Budget

The Secretariat shall operate in a cost effective manner. 
The ATCM shall approve the budget of the Secretariat [by consensus].
[The Consultative Parties shall meet the expenses of the Secretariat as apportioned by the ATCM.]
The Consultative and Non Consultative Parties, in addition, may make voluntary contributions to the budget of the Secretariat.
Financial regulations are to be adopted by a Decision of the ATCM.

ARTICLE 5
Legal Capacity and privileges and immunities

The legal capacity of the Secretariat as an organ of the ATCM as well as its privileges and immunities and those of the Executive Secretary and other staff members in the territory of the host State shall be provided for in a Headquarters Agreement attached as Annex 1 to this Measure, to be concluded between the ATCM and the Argentine Republic. 
The ATCM hereby authorizes the person who holds the office of the Chair to sign the Headquarters Agreement on its behalf at the time Measure ... (2002) becomes effective.
The Secretariat may exercise its legal capacity as provided for in Article 3 of the Headquarters Agreement only to the extent authorized by the ATCM. Within the budget approved by and in accordance with any other decision of the ATCM, the Secretariat is hereby authorized to contract, and to acquire and dispose of movable property in order to perform its functions as set out in Article 1 of this Measure.
The Secretariat may not acquire or dispose of immovable property or institute legal proceedings without the prior approval of the ATCM. 

ANNEX 2

DRAFT DECISION

Antarctic Treaty Secretariat interim arrangements


The ATCM

Recalling Decision No. 1 of the XXIV ATCM on the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Recalling Measure .... (2002) of the XXV ATCM.

Convinced of the need to provide for certain interim arrangements concerning the establishment and functioning of the Secretariat until Measure ... (2002) of the XXV ATCM regarding the establishment and functioning of the Secretariat has become effective.

Decides that: 

1. 	The Secretariat shall perform those functions listed in Article 1 of Measure…(2002) until 1 January 2005, or until the Measure become effective, whichever is earlier.

2. 	The Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive Secretary who shall be appointed by the ATCM from candidates to be proposed by Consultative Parties for a specified term of office during the interim period.
	Other staff members and experts essential for the carrying out of the functions of the Secretariat during the interim period shall be appointed by the Executive Secretary. 

3.	The Secretariat will constitute an organ of the ATCM. As such, it will be subordinated to the functions and mandates entrusted to it by the ATCM. During the intersessional periods, the Executive Secretary shall consult with the Chairman of the ATCM, or other organs established by it, on any relevant issue related to the performance of its functions.

4.	Staff and financial regulations referred to in Measure ... (2002) shall apply during the interim period once they have been adopted.

5.	Once the Host State notifies the [the Chair of] ATCM that its internal procedures have been concluded, the Argentine Republic undertakes to apply provisionally the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement attached as Annex 1 to Measure ... (2002) until the entry into force of the Agreement.

6.	The Secretariat may exercise its legal capacity as provided for in Article 3 of the Headquarters Agreement only to the extent authorized by the ATCM. Within the budget approved by and in accordance with any other decision of the ATCM, the Secretariat is hereby authorized to contract, and to acquire and dispose of movable property in order to perform its functions as set out in Article 1.
The Secretariat may not acquire or dispose of immovable property or institute legal proceedings without the prior approval of the ATCM.

[7.	The Secretariat shall operate in a cost-effective manner and shall be supported during the interim period by financial or other contributions voluntarily made by Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.]

[8.	Rules 5 and 6 of the Rules of Procedure of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall be amended as follows:

“5. 	A Chairman from one of the Consultative Parties shall be elected at the beginning of each ATCM. Other Representatives of Consultative Parties shall serve as Vice-Chairmen of the Meeting in order of precedence. The Chairman normally shall preside at all plenary sessions. If he is absent from any session or part thereof, the Vice-Chairmen, rotating on the basis of the order of precedence as established by Rule 4, shall preside during each such session.”

“6. 	The officers mentioned in paragraph 5 shall continue to perform their functions until their successors are elected in the following ATCM.
During the intersessional period, the Chairman of the ATCM shall act as liaison between the Representatives of the Consultative Parties [and], the Executive Secretary [and the Government of Argentina]”.]


[8 bis. The Executive Secretary and the Consultative Parties shall consult through diplomatic channels on issues related with the performance of the functions of the Secretariat during the intersessional periods.]


















ANNEX 3

 DRAFT HEADQUARTERS AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN 
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING 
AND 
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC


The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and the Argentine Republic;

Convinced of the need to strengthen the Antarctic Treaty System;

Bearing in mind the special legal and political status of Antarctica and the special responsibility of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to ensure that all activities in Antarctica are consistent with the purposes and principles of the Antarctic Treaty; and its Protocol on Environmental Protection;

Having regard to Decision 1 (2001), Measure ...(2002) which provide for the establishment of a Permanent Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty at Buenos Aires, Argentina;

Desiring to enable the Permanent Secretariat as an organ of the ATCM to fully and efficiently fulfill its purposes and functions;

Have agreed as follows:

ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Agreement:

a)	´Antarctic Treaty´ or ‘The Treaty’ means the Antarctic Treaty adopted in Washington. on 1 December 1959;

    b) ‘Appropriate Authorities’ means the national, provincial, or local authorities of the Argentine Republic in accordance with the laws of the Argentine Republic:

c)	‘Archives’ means all correspondence, documents, manuscripts, photographs, computer data storage, films, recordings and any other records, in paper, electronic or any other form, belonging to or held by the Secretariat;

d)	‘Committee for the Environmental Protection’ or ‘CEP’ means the Committee established under Article 11 of the Protocol;

	e)	‘Delegates’ means Representatives, Alternate Representatives, Advisers and any other persons who represent the States Parties;

f)	‘Executive Secretary’ means the Executive Secretary appointed by the ATCM to head the Secretariat according to the instrument establishing the Secretariat;

g)	‘Expert’ means a person performing short term or temporary projects on behalf of the Secretariat or participating in the work of or performing a mission on behalf of the Secretariat without necessarily receiving remuneration from the Secretariat, but does not include staff members;

h)	´Government’ means the Government of the Argentine Republic;

i)	‘Headquarters’ means the premises, including buildings or parts of buildings and any land ancillary thereto, irrespective of ownership, occupied by the Secretariat for the performance of its official activities2;

j)	´Officia1 Activities’ means all activities undertaken pursuant to the Treaty and the Protocol including the Secretariat’s administrative activities;

k)	‘Protocol’ means the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted at Madrid on 4 October 1991;

l)	‘Secretariat’ means the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, established as a permanent organ of the ATCM;

m)	‘Staff member’ means the Executive Secretary and all persons appointed for employment with the Secretariat and subject to its Staff Regulations, but does not include persons recruited locally and assigned to hourly rates of pay; and

n)	‘States Parties’ means the States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. 



ARTICLE 2. LEGAL CAPACITY

The Secretariat as an organ of the ATCM has legal personality and capacity to perform its functions in the territory of Argentina. It has, in particular, the capacity to contract, to acquire and dispose of movable and immovable property, and to institute and be a party to legal proceedings. The Secretariat may exercise its legal capacity only to the extent authorized by the ATCM.


ARTICLE 3. HEADQUARTERS

1. The Headquarters shall be inviolable and shall be under the full authority of the Secretariat.

2. The Government shall provide rent-free, in the City of Buenos Aires, Argentine Republic, suitable as the Headquarters.

3. The Government shall take all appropriate steps to protect the Headquarters against any intrusion or damage and to prevent any impairment of its dignity.

4. The Government shall arrange for the Headquarters to be supplied by the appropriate authorities with available public services, such as electricity, water, sewerage, gas, mail, telephone, telegraph, drainage, garbage collection and fire protection, on terms no less favourable than those enjoyed by the Government.

5. Through the ATCM, the Secretariat shall make known to the Government the need for any changes to the location or extent of its permanent premises or archives and of any temporary occupation of premises for the performance of its official activities.  Where any premises other than those arranged under Article 4(2) of this Agreement are used or occupied by the Secretariat for the performance of its official activities, such premises shall, with the concurrence of the Government, be accorded the status of official premises of the Secretariat. Where any permanent or temporary changes are made to the premises of the Secretariat in accordance with this paragraph, any additional premises occupied by the Secretariat shall not necessarily be provided by the Government rent-free.

6. Without prejudice to the terms of this Agreement, the Secretariat shall not permit the Headquarters to become a refuge from justice for persons avoiding arrest or service of legal process or against whom an order of extradition or deportation has been issued.1

7. The Appropriate Authorities may enter the Headquarters to carry out their duties only with the consent of the Executive Secretary and under the conditions agreed by him/her. The Executive Secretary’s consent shall be deemed to have been given in the case of fire or other exceptional emergencies, which may necessarily require immediate protective action.


ARTICLE 4.  IMMUNITIES 

1. Subject to what is provided for in the Treaty, the Protocol, or this Agreement the activities of the Secretariat in Argentina shall be governed by the Argentine domestic law consistent with international law.

2. Within the scope of its official activities the Secretariat, as an organ of the ATCM and its property, premises and assets shall have immunity of jurisdiction in judicial and administrative proceedings except:


    b) in respect of any contract for the supply of goods or services and any loan or other transaction for the provision of finance and any guarantee or indemnity in respect of any such transaction or of any other financial obligation;

    c) in respect of a civil action by a third party for death, damage or personal injury arising from an accident caused by a motor vehicle belonging to, or operated on behalf of, the Secretariat to the extent the compensation is not recoverable from insurance;

    d) in respect of a motor vehicle offence involving a motor vehicle belonging to, or operated on behalf of, the Secretariat;

    e) in the event of a claim for salaries, wages or other emoluments owed by the Secretariat;

    f) in respect of a counter-claim directly connected with proceedings initiated by the Secretariat; 

    g) in respect of claims made on real estate situated on Argentine territory; and

    h) in respect of actions based on the Secretariat’s as heir or beneficiary of property situated on Argentine territory.


3. The Secretariat’s property, premises and assets, wherever situated, shall have immunity from any form of restrictions or controls such as requisition, confiscation, expropriation or attachment.  They shall also be immune from any form of administrative or judicial constraint provided that motor vehicles belonging to or operated on behalf of the Secretariat shall not be immune from administrative or judicial constraint when temporarily necessary in connection with the prevention of, and investigation into, accidents involving such motor vehicles.


ARTICLE 5. OBJECTIVE AND WAIVER OF PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES

1. Privileges and Immunities provided for in this Agreement are granted to ensure the unimpeded functioning of the ATCM and the Secretariat and the complete independence of the persons to whom they are accorded. They are not granted for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves. 

2. Except as provided in para. 3 of this Article, the privileges and immunities provided in this agreement may be waived by the ATCM. They should be waived in a particular case where the privilege and immunity in question would impede the course of justice and can be waived without prejudice for the purpose for which they are accorded.

3. In the case of Delegates, their privileges and immunities provided in this agreement may be waived by the States Parties which they respectively represent.


ARTICLE 6. ARCHIVES

The Archive   shall be inviolable wherever they are.


ARTICLE 7. THE TREATY FLAG AND EMBLEM

The Secretariat shall be entitled to display the Treaty flag and emblem on the premises and means of transport of the Secretariat and of the Executive Secretary.





ARTICLE 8. EXEMPTION FROM DIRECT TAXES

Within the scope of its official activities, the Secretariat, its property, premises and assets, and its income (including contributions made to the Secretariat as the result of any agreement arrived at by the States Parties) shall be exempt from all direct taxes including income tax, capital gains tax and all State taxes.  The Secretariat shall be exempt from municipal taxes with the exception of those which constitute payment for specific services rendered in accordance with Article 4(4) of this Agreement.


ARTICLE 9. EXEMPTION FROM CUSTOMS AND EXCISE DUTIES AND VALUE ADDED TAX

1. The property used by the Secretariat necessary for its official activities (including the ATCM publications, motor vehicles and items for official entertainment purposes) shall be exempt from all customs and excise duties.

2. The Secretariat shall be exempt from the Value Added Tax, or other similar taxes, for  services and goods, including publications and other information material, motor vehicles and items for official entertainment purposes, if the services and goods so purchased by the Secretariat are necessary for its official use.


ARTICLE 10. EXEMPTION FROM RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS

Goods imported or exported for the official activities of the Secretariat shall be exempt from prohibitions and restrictions applicable to such goods on grounds of national origin.


ARTICLE 11. RE-SALE

Goods which have been acquired or imported by the Secretariat to which exemptions under Article 9 of this Agreement apply and goods acquired or imported by the Executive Secretary or other staff members to which the exemptions under Article 16 or Article 17 of this Agreement apply, shall not be given away, sold, lent, hired out or otherwise disposed of in Argentina, except under conditions agreed in advance with the Government.


ARTICLE 12. CURRENCY AND EXCHANGE

The Secretariat shall be exempt from currency and exchange restrictions, including those in respect of funds, currency and securities received, acquired, held or disposed of.  The Secretariat may also operate without restrictions bank or other accounts for its official use in any currency, and have them transferred freely within Argentina or to any other country.


ARTICLE 13. COMMUNICATIONS

1. With regard to its official communications and the transfer of all its documents, the Secretariat shall enjoy treatment not less favourable than that generally accorded by the Government to any other government, including the latter’s diplomatic mission, in the matter of priorities, rates and taxes on mails and all forms of telecommunications.

2. The Secretariat may employ all appropriate means of communication, including messages in code or cipher.  The Government shall not impose any restriction on the official communications of the Secretariat or on the circulation of its publications.

3. The Secretariat may install and use radio transmitters only with the consent of the Government.

4. Official correspondence and other official communications of the Secretariat are not subject to censorship and will enjoy all the guarantees established by the National Constitution and the Argentine legislation.


ARTICLE 14. PUBLICATIONS

The importation and exportation of the Secretariat’s publications and other information material imported or exported by the Secretariat within the scope of its official activities shall not be restricted in any way.


ARTICLE 15. PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF DELEGATES 

1. Delegates of the States Parties shall enjoy, during their stay in Argentina for exercising their official functions, the privileges and immunities existing for diplomatic agents as established in the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, signed on April 18, 1961.

2. The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall be applicable irrespective of the relations existing between the governments which the persons referred to represent and the Argentine Government, and are without prejudice to any additional immunities to which such persons may be entitled.

3. The privileges and immunities described in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be accorded to any delegate of the Government or to any Argentine or foreign citizen with permanent residence in the Argentine Republic.

4. The Government shall treat delegates with all due respect and shall take all necessary measures to prevent encroachment on their person, freedom and dignity.  Where it appears that an offence may have been committed against a delegate, steps shall be taken in accordance with Argentine legal proceedings to investigate the matter and to ensure that appropriate action is taken with respect to the prosecution of the alleged offender.


ARTICLE 16. EXECUTIVE SECRETARY

In addition to the privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities provided for in Article 17 of this Agreement, the Executive Secretary, unless he/she is an Argentine citizen or a permanent resident in Argentina, shall enjoy the privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities to which a diplomatic agent in the Argentine Republic is entitled, including privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities in respect of the members of their family which form a part of the household .


ARTICLE 17. STAFF MEMBERS

Staff members of the Secretariat and as applicable the members of their families forming a part of the household:

    a) shall have, even after the termination of their service with the Secretariat, immunity from suit and any other legal process or judicial request in respect of acts and things done by them in the exercise of their official functions, including words written or spoken.  This would also apply to the Executive Secretary without regard to his nationality or permanent residence; 

    b) the immunity set out in the previous paragraph shall not, however, apply in the case of a motor vehicle offence committed by such a staff member or the Executive Secretary nor in the case of civil or administrative proceedings arising out of death, damage or personal injury caused by a motor vehicle belonging to or driven by him or her to the extent the compensation is not recoverable from insurance;

    c) shall be exempt from any obligations in respect of military service and all other kinds of mandatory service, unless they are Argentine citizens or permanent residents in the Argentine Republic; 

    d) shall be exempt from the application of laws relating to the registration of aliens and immigration;

    e) unless they are citizens of or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic, they shall be accorded the same exemption from currency and exchange restrictions as is accorded to an official of comparable rank from an international agency in the Argentine Republic; 

    f) unless they are citizens of or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic, they  shall when taking up their post in the Argentine Republic for the first time, be exempt from customs duties and other such charges (except payments for services) in respect of import of furniture, motor vehicles and other personal effects in their ownership or possession or already ordered by them and intended for their personal use or for their establishment; such goods shall be imported within six months of a staff member’s first entry into the Argentine Republic but in exceptional circumstances an extension of this period shall be granted by the Government; goods which have been acquired or imported by staff members and to which exemptions under this sub‑paragraph apply shall not be given away, sold, lent, hired out, or otherwise disposed of except under conditions agreed in advance with the Government; furniture and personal effects may be exported free of duties when leaving the Argentine Republic on the termination of the official functions of the staff member; 

    g) shall be exempt from all taxes on income received from the Secretariat. This exemption shall not apply to staff members who are residents in the Argentine Republic for services rendered in Argentina, 


    h) shall have similar repatriation facilities, including such facilities in respect of a spouse and dependent relatives, as are accorded to representatives of international agencies in times of international crisis; and

    i) shall have personal inviolability with respect to any form of personal arrest or detention or seizure of their personal baggage unless they are citizens or permanent residents of Argentina. 


ARTICLE 18. EXPERTS

In the exercise of their functions experts shall enjoy the following privileges and immunities to the extent necessary for the carrying out of their functions, including while travelling in Argentina to that effect:

    a) immunity from legal process in judicial and administrative proceedings or from judicial request in respect of acts and things done in the exercise of their official functions, including words written or spoken; this immunity shall not, however, apply in the case of a motor vehicle offence committed by such experts nor in the case of civil or administrative proceedings arising out of death, damage or personal injury caused by a motor vehicle belonging to or driven by him/her to the extent the compensation is not recoverable from insurance; such immunity shall continue after the expert’s function in relation to the Secretariat have ceased; 

    b) inviolability for all their official papers and documents as well as other official materials, which are related to the performance of the functions of the Secretariat;

    c) unless they are citizens of or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic, the same exemption from currency and exchange restrictions as is accorded to a representative of a foreign Government on a temporary mission in Argentina on behalf of that Government; and

    d) unless they are citizens of or permanent residents of the Argentine Republic, immunity from personal arrest and detention and from attachment of personal luggage.


ARTICLE 19. VISAS

1. All persons having official business with the Secretariat, namely (a) Delegates and members of their families forming a part of the household),  (b) staff members of the Secretariat (and any members of their families forming a part of the household), and c) the experts referred to in article 18 shall have the right of entry into and exit from the Argentine Republic.

2. The Government shall take all measures necessary to facilitate the entry into the Argentine territory, the sojourn on that territory and the exit there from of all persons mentioned in the preceding paragraph. Visas, where required, shall be granted without wait or delay, and without fee, on production of a certificate that the applicant is a person described in the preceding paragraph. In addition, the Argentine Government will facilitate for such persons travel within the territory of the Argentine Republic.


ARTICLE  20. COOPERATION

The Secretariat shall cooperate fully at all times with the appropriate authorities in order to prevent any abuse of the privileges, immunities and facilities provided for in this Agreement.  The Government reserves its sovereign right to take reasonable measures to preserve security.  Nothing in this Agreement prevents the application of laws necessary for health and quarantine or, in respect to the Secretariat and its officials, laws relating to public order. 


ARTICLE 21. NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS. IDENTITY CARDS

[1 The Secretariat shall notify the Government when a staff member takes up or relinquishes his or her post or when an expert starts or finishes a project or mission.

2. The Secretariat shall twice a year send to the Government a list of all experts and staff members, members of the family, which form a part of their household accompanying them in the Argentine Republic. In each case the Secretariat shall indicate whether such persons are Argentine citizens or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic.

3. The Government shall issue to all staff members and experts as soon as practicable after notification of their appointment, a card bearing the photograph of the holder and identifying him/her as a staff member or expert as the case may be. This card shall be accepted by the appropriate authorities as evidence of identity and appointment.  The Secretariat shall return the card to the Government when the staff member or expert relinquishes his/her duties.  The spouse and dependent children under the age of eighteen years of staff members shall also be issued with an identity card, which shall be returned to the Government when the staff member relinquishes his/her duties.]


[1. The ATCM shall notify the Government of the appointment of an Executive Secretary and the date when he or she is to take up or relinquish the post.

2. The Secretariat shall notify the Government when a staff member or takes up or relinquishes his or her post or when an expert starts or finishes a project or mission.

3. The Secretariat shall twice a year send to the Government a list of all experts and staff members, the members of their families forming a part of the household accompanying them in the Argentine Republic. In each case the Secretariat shall indicate whether such persons are Argentine citizens or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic.

4. The Government shall issue to all staff members and experts as soon as practicable after notification of their appointment, a card bearing the photograph of the holder and identifying him/her as a staff member or expert as the case may be. This card shall be accepted by the appropriate authorities as evidence of identity and appointment.  The Secretariat shall return the card to the Government when the staff member or expert relinquishes his/her duties.  The members of their families forming a part of the household shall also be issued with an identity card, which shall be returned to the Government when the staff member relinquishes his/her duties.]


ARTICLE 22.  CONSULTATION

The Government and the Secretariat as an organ of the ATCM shall consult at the request of either of them concerning matters arising under this Agreement. If any such matter is not promptly resolved, the Secretariat shall refer it to the ATCM.


ARTICLE 23. AMENDMENT

This Agreement may be amended by agreement between the Government and the ATCM.

ARTICLE 24. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES2 

[Any dispute between the Government and the Secretariat concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement or any question affecting the relations between the Government and the Secretariat which is not settled by consultation or negotiation or by some other mutually acceptable method shall be referred to an arbitral tribunal according to the following rules: 
1.	The arbitral tribunal shall be composed of three arbitrators who shall be appointed as follows:
a)	The Party commencing proceedings shall communicate the name of an arbitrator to the other Party, which, in turn, within a period of forty days following such notification, shall communicate the name of the second arbitrator. The Parties shall, within a period of sixty days following the appointment of the second arbitrator, who shall not be a national of either Party and shall not be of the same nationality as either of the first two arbitrators. The third arbitrator shall preside over the tribunal;
b)	If the second arbitrator has not been appointed within the prescribed period, or if the Parties have not reached agreement within the prescribed period on the appointment of the third arbitrator, that arbitrator shall be appointed, at the request of either Party, by the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, from among persons of international standing not having the nationality of a State which is a Party to this Agreement.
2.	The arbitral tribunal shall decide where its headquarters will be located and shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
3.	The award of the tribunal shall be made by a majority of its members, who may not abstain from voting.
4.	Any Contracting Party, which is not a Party to the dispute may intervene in the proceedings with the consent of the arbitral tribunal.
5.	The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and binding on all Parties to the dispute and on any Party, which intervenes in the proceedings and shall be complied with without delay. The arbitral tribunal shall interpret the award at the request of one of the Parties to the dispute or of any intervening Party.
6.	Unless the arbitral tribunal determines otherwise because of the particular circumstances of the case, the expenses of the tribunal, including the remuneration of its members, shall be borne by the Parties to the dispute in equal shares.]



[1. Any dispute between the ATCM and the Argentine Republic concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement, which is not settled by consultations and negotiation or some other mutually acceptable method, shall be referred for final decision to a tribunal of three Arbitrators (“The Tribunal”), at the request of either the ATCM or the Government. One of these Arbitrators shall be chosen by the Executive Secretary on behalf of the ATCM, one shall be chosen by the Government and the third, who shall be the Chairman of the Tribunal, shall be chosen by the first two Arbitrators. In the event of disagreement between the first two Arbitrators on the choice of Chairman, the latter shall be appointed by the President of the International Court of Justice at the request of either of the first two Arbitrators.

2. If the Government or the ATCM fails to appoint an Arbitrator for the Tribunal in respect of the dispute and has not taken steps to do so within two months following a request from the other party, the other party may request the President of the International Court of Justice to make an appointment.

3. The Tribunal shall determine its own Rules of Procedure.

4. The Tribunal shall reach its decision by a majority of votes. Such a decision shall be final and binding on the ATCM and the Government. In the event of a dispute concerning the import or scope of the decision, it shall be incumbent upon the Tribunal to interpret it at the request of either the Government or the ATCM”.

5. This Article shall not apply to disputes between a State Party and the Government with respect to privileges and immunities of a Delegate of that State Party. Such disputes shall be governed by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, signed on April 18, 1961, and where applicable, its Optional Protocol concerning Compulsory Settlement of Disputes.]


ARTICLE 25. ENTRY INTO FORCE AND TERMINATION. 

This Agreement shall enter into force on the date when the Government notifies to the depositary Government of the Treaty that all constitutional requirements to that effect have been met.

This Agreement may be terminated by a joint decision of the Argentine Republic and the ATCM.  In the event of the Headquarters being moved from Argentina, this Agreement shall, after a period reasonable required for such transfer and the disposal of the property of the Secretariat in Argentina, cease to be in force.  In either event, the date of which the Agreement terminates shall be confirmed by an exchange of notes between the Government and the Secretariat.

DONE in Buenos Aires, on ...................... in all working languages of the ATCM being all of them equally authentic.


ANNEX 4
Working Paper XXV ATCM/WP 035
Agenda Item: ATCM 4b
Australia
Draft Staff Regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

To assist Parties in their consideration of the issue of staff regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Australia presented an informal paper at the consultations in Buenos Aires in June 2002. The paper contained draft regulations based on those currently used for the CCAMLR Secretariat, with suggested modifications to make them suitable for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

Following consideration of the paper at that meeting Australia accepted a request to receive Parties comments on the paper and to prepare a new version of the paper incorporating those comments. The revised paper is attached as an annex.

The additions made by Australia to the CCAMLR staff regulations in the informal paper presented at the meeting in Buenos Aires are shown as under-lined text in the annex. Deletions to the CCAMLR staff regulations are shown in the boxes to the right. Comments that have been received from Consultative Parties, either at the informal meeting or subsequent to the meeting, are shown as footnotes.

It should be noted that the attached document has been compiled to assist consideration of this issue at ATCM XXV. It does not represent agreed text or final views of the Parties making comment. In this regard New Zealand does not consider the CCAMLR regulations offer a suitable model, but the comments provided in the attached document are consistent with the approach it will be taking, while not being a comprehensive representation of its position.

PLEASE FIND ATTACHED THE PAPER

Working Paper XXV ATCM/WP 048 (rev 1)
Agenda Item ATCM 4b
AUSTRALIA


DRAFT FINANCIAL REGULATIONS FOR THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT

To assist Parties in their consideration of the issue of financial regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Australia presented an informal paper at the consultations in Buenos Aires in June 2002.  The paper contained draft regulations based on those currently used for the CCAMLR Secretariat, with suggested modifications to make them suitable for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

The additions made by Australia to the CCAMLR financial regulations in the informal paper presented at the meeting in Buenos Aires are shown as under-lined text in the annex.  Deletions to the CCAMLR staff regulations are shown in the boxes to the right.  

It should be noted that the attached document has been compiled to assist consideration of this issue at ATCM XXV.  It does not represent the final views of Australia.



