XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-036
Agenda Item: ATCM 13
ROMANIA
Original: English





                                   X XV ATCM – Warsaw, 
                                    September, 10-20, 2002

                                   




                                 ROMANIAN  SCIENTIFIC ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES
                                                                
                                                        ANTARCTIC  TREATY

            COOPERATION AND EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION IN ACCORDANCE 
                                     WITH ARTICLES III and  VII, PARAGRAPH 5 &
                                            RECOMMENDATIONS  VIII-6 & XIII-3                                    









                                                                                           Submitted by 
                                                                                           ROMANIA





                                     Inquiries about the Romanian Antarctic Program 
                                                        can be addressed to:
                                       National  Romanian Antarctic Program (NRAP)
                                                Ministry of Education and Research
                                                C.P. 42-29, Bucharest-4, Romania
                                                       Tel/Fax: +401 337 2986 
                                        Email address: negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com
        


                 Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic and of the Article 6 of the Protocol, Romania make efforts to promote such collaborations, willing to become a Consultative Party. In this respect, we mention some of our scientific cooperation works.   

               1. Pollution

     A joint research by Romania and Belgium on the levels of organochlorine pollutants in soils from the East Antarctic soils
 Romanian Polar Research Institute and the Toxicological Centre, University of Antwerp.
               Concentrations of hexachlorobenzene (HCB), -, - and -HCH hexachlorocyclohexane isomers, 6 o, p’- and p, p'- isomers of DDT and 28 PCB congeners were measured in eleven soil samples and one lichen collected on the Eastern coast of Antarctica from 5 Russian stations. For samples with low concentrations of PCBs (range 0. 20 – 0.41 ng /g dry weight) and pesticides (0.86 - 4.69 ng /g and 0.11 - 1.22 ng /g dry weight for HCHs and DDTs, respectively), atmospheric long-range transport from Africa, South America or Australia was suggested as the sole source of contamination. The profile of PCB congeners was dominated by the volatile tri-, tetra- and penta-PCBs congeners, thus supporting this hypothesis. For samples with high concentrations of PCBs (range 90.26 – 157.45 ng/g) and high concentrations of pesticides, the presence of high molecular weight PCB congeners such as: 153, 180, 187, 170 etc, strongly suggest a local source (biotic) of PCBs rather than atmospheric transport. It is likely that on a local scale, biotic focussing of pollutants, due to bird activities (nesting and excrements) can cause high contamination levels and become more significant than contaminant input via abiotic pathways. 
 T.G. Negoita, A. Covaci, A. Gheorghe, P. Schepens, Distribution of organochlorine pollutants in soils from the East Antarctic coast. This paper was presented within the 22nd International Symposium on Halogenated Environmental Organic Pollutants and Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) - "Dioxin 2002", August 11-16, 2002, Barcelona, Spain. 
          
 2. Biochemistry

A joint research by Romania and Russian Federation on the biomass production 
On microorganism strains selected from East Antarctic soils

 Romanian Polar Research Institute, “Lower Danube”University, Galati, Romania and    Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St. Petersburg

Response surface methodology was used to propose a structured model for mathematical description of batch culture kinetic data for a selected yeast strain. The model takes into account the substrate consumption and the microbial growth for the biomass formation. 
The model considers the growth kinetics and biomass formation in relation to two independent variables (xylose and complex manure as carbon and nitrogen sources in the fermentation medium). Regression analysis and correlative coefficients of data obtained during period of growth demonstrate that the kinetics of biomass formation depends on effect of the independent variables, their interactions and another substance present in medium that could be determined in subsequent experiment.

              G. Bahrim, T.G. Negoita and V. Kuznetsov, Mathematical modelling of growth and    biomass production in batch culture by a selected Candida strain isolated from East Antarctic soil. This paper was accepted to be published in the Annals of the Sibiu University, Romania, 2002. 

  A joint research by Romania and Russian Federation on the potential of some streptomyces strains isolated from Antarctic soils to produce tyrosinase

  Romanian Polar Research Institute, “Lower Danube”University, Galati, Romania and       Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St. Petersburg


Filamentous bacteria that belong to the Streptomyces genus are characterised by a high potential of producing enzymes, which explains the part that these bacteria play into the natural circuit of biogenic elements, organic matter breakdown and ecological balance. The streptomycetes that are responsible for the dark colour of soil are melanoidinic pigments producers. These pigments that are synthesised due to tyrosinase, when proteins or their hydrolysis compounds are present in the soil, protect the cells against extrinsic factors as UV radiations, dry weather, extreme temperatures.
Screening tests applied to 13 strains of Streptomyces sp., isolated from different samples of soils withdrawn from East Antarctica, put into evidence that 73 % of the strains have a good potential for producing tyrosinase. Analysis based on quantitative criteria that estimated the exogenous tyrosinase activity, released in the culture medium after 72 h of submerged cultivation on liquid Gauze medium containing 1g×dm -3 tyrosine, put into evidence two strains with tyrosinase activity twice and, respectively, 1.19 times greater than the strain Streptomyces MIUG 4.88, which was used as witness. Also 3 other strains were remarked for their ability to produce as much tyrosinase as Streptomyces sp. MIUG 4.88.

              G. Bahrim, T.G. Negoita and V. Kuznetsov, Preliminary screening to put into evidence the potential to produce tyrosinase of some streptomyces sp.strains isolated from Antarctic soils.This paper will be presented within the  Workshop on Changes of the Polar Ecosystem, October 02-05, 2002, Czech Republic. 


