 
1
XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-037 
Agenda Item: CEP 4 
ROMANIA 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
                                   X XV ATCM – Warsaw,  
                                    September, 10-20, 2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF  ROMANIA ON THE RATIFICATION  
OF THE PROTOCOL OF MADRID 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                      Submitted by  
                                                                      ROMANIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     Inquiries about the Romanian Antarctic Program  
                                                        can be addressed to: 
 
                                       National  Romanian Antarctic Program (NRAP) 
                                                Ministry of Education and Research 
                                                C.P. 42-29, Bucharest-4, Romania 
                                                       Tel/Fax: +401 337 2986  
        
 
2
 
 
 
 
REPORT  OF  ROMANIA  ON THE RATIFICATION  
OF THE PROTOCOL OF MADRID 
 
                  Romania, by the Decree no. 255/1971, adhered to the Antarctic Treaty signed in 
Washington on December 1st 1959. The Protocol on Environmental Protection and its annexes I-V 
that have been adopted in Madrid on October 4th, 1991 was signed by Romania that very day. 
                  The main objective of the Protocol consists in the protection of the Antarctic 
environment and of the ecosystems interrelated and associated. Therefore, Antarctica is designated 
natural reservation, destined for science and peace.  
                        The Protocol of Madrid supplements the Antarctic Treaty without modifying or 
amending it and does not prejudice the rights and commitments of the member states deriving from 
other international instruments in force within the Antarctic Treaty system. 
 
                  From the scientific point of view, our country has an old tradition in Antarctic research, 
as the Romanian scientist Emil Racovita was the very first biologist in the world that studied life in 
this continent.  
                 Romania participation in Antarctica consisted, up to now, in the following activities:  
           - participation in scientific expeditions along with the teams of the states members of the 
Antarctic Treaty;  
- research projects jointly developed with states members of the Antarctic Treaty in the 
field of environmental protection in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. 
 
                 In this respect, Romania got involved in international actions of protection of the 
environment and of the nature in Antarctica. Thus, Romania actively participated in the elaboration 
of Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (leading group-Argentina), Lima 
1999, Guidelines for Antarctic Shipping and Related Activities (Meeting of Experts-Opening 
address), London, 2000, as well as in the Hague, by means of the analysis of Antarctic Environment 
and Tourism, Two Components of the Modern Civilization.  
 
                Considering the above mentioned reasons, the Ministry of External Affaires, the Ministry 
of Education and Research, the Ministy of Water and Environmental Protection, the Ministry of  
Public Finances and the Ministry of Justice, proposed a Law Draft to issued by the Romanian 
Government, that is the following:  
 
           DECREE No.556/June 19th, 2002, for the submission for ratification by the 
Romanian Parliament of the “Protocol on Environmental Protection” of the Antarctic 
Treaty, adopted in Madrid on October 4th, 1991  
 
           “On the grounds of the provisions under Articles 91 (1) and 99 of the Romanian 
Constitution, as well as Articles 1 and 4 of the Law no.4/1991 on Treaty Signing and 
Ratification, 
             Following the proposal of the Romanian Government, in accordance with the Decision 
no. E182 of May 30, 2002, 
             The President of Romania decides: 
             Single Article: There is submitted for ratification by the Romanian Parliament the 
“Protocol on Environmental Protection” of the Antarctic Treaty, adopted in Madrid on October 
4th, 1991, and there is ordered the publication of this Decree in Monitorul Oficial al Romaniei 
(Romanian Official Gazette), Part I. 
             PRESIDENT OF ROMANIA 
             ION ILIESCU   
 
3
            On the grounds of Article 99(2) of the Romanian Constitution, countersigns this Decree:       
            PRIM-MINISTER  
            ADRIAN NASTASE 
            Published in the Romanian Official Gazette no. 438 of June 24, 2002.”             
                        The Romanian Parliament Legislative Council approved this Law Draft on the 
ratification of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, that is already  included on the 
Romanian Parliament agenda. 
 
                        Taking into consideration the progress recorded  by Romania in the Protocol ratification, 
we kindly ask the CEP member states to analyse, within its Fifth Meeting in Poland, Romania 
acceptance as a Member State in the Committee for Environmental Protection.                
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
