 
1
The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 
The Antarctica Project 
ASOC Secretariat 
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W. 
Washington, DC 20009 USA 
Tel +1 202 234-2480 
Fax +1 202 387 4823 
antarctica@igc.org 
www.asoc.org 
 
 
XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP… 
CEP Agenda Item: 4a 
ASOC 
Original: English 
 
 
REPORTS UNDER ARTICLE 17 AND THE IMPLEMENTATION 
OF THE MADRID PROTOCOL 
 
Information Paper submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 Article 17 of the Protocol establishes annual reporting obligations on the steps taken by Parties 
to implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: 
 
1. Each Party shall report annually on the steps taken to implement this 
Protocol. Such reports shall include notifications made in accordance with Article 13 
(3), contingency plans established in accordance with Article 15 and any other 
notifications and information called for pursuant to this Protocol for which there is no 
other provision concerning the circulation and exchange of information.  
 
2. Reports made in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall be circulated to all 
Parties and to the Committee, considered at the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting, and made publicly available. 
 
Since the entry into force of the Protocol on 14 January 1998 only a fraction of the countries that 
have ratified the Protocol have fulfilled the requirements established by Art. 17. However, the 
number of reports by Parties has increased from 5 at ATCM XII/CEP I (1998) (17% of CPs) to 
twenty (69% of CPs) at ATCM XXIII/CEP IV (2001).  
 
Some of the reports have been comprehensive while others have been incomplete or of a more 
general nature, or indeed have reported on steps taken to implement the Protocol without 
reference to Art. 17. It is expected that as the practice becomes more common among Parties, a 
more or less standard format for reports pursuant to Art. 17 of the Protocol will be developed. 
 
2
Online reporting is now accepted. Clearly, the reports should contain all the information required 
by the Protocol regardless of their format, and regardless of whether they are submitted to the 
CEP meetings or reported online they should be comprehensive and readily available.  
 
This paper follows ASOC’s paper An Evaluation of Progress Towards Implementation of the 
Madrid Protocol (XII SATCM/IP22). In this paper, compliance with Protocol requirements is 
exclusively based on an analysis of reports under Art. 17 submitted at CEP II-IV, unlike the 
original paper, which included other sources of information. The present analysis has some 
advantages and disadvantages, as explained below. All reports submitted to CEP I-IV and 
information posted on Parties’ web sites are included in this analysis. ASOC would appreciate 
omissions being brought to our attention to allow a more accurate reflection of Protocol 
implementation. 4 spreadsheets, summarizing the Article 17 reporting at CEP I-IV are annexed 
to this paper. More detailed analysis of individual reports will be posted to our website 
(www.asoc.org). 
 
In the 2 years since ASOC last reported at XXII SATCM, some significant progress has been 
made towards further implementation of the Protocol, but as the data below indicate, many states 
appear to still be lagging in implementation. 
 
 
2. Art. 17 Reports Analysis 
 
Using reports under Art. 17 as a proxy indicator of compliance with Protocol requirements has 
advantages and disadvantages. A primary advantage is that the information is indisputable for the 
Party concerned, as the reports present a Party’s version of events. A second advantage is that the 
information is presented in a systematic format. These reports, however, cover only those aspects 
of the implementation of the Protocol for which there are reporting requirements. Another 
disadvantage is that reporting some actions in general terms may give the impression that some 
action is being taken while, in fact, there may be few if any changes actually being made on the 
ground. 
 
ASOC used the following reporting obligations established by the Protocol and its Annexes to 
evaluate reports under Art. 17: 
 
1. The Protocol 
a. Legal and administrative actions 
b. Contingency Plans 
2. Annex I: EIAs 
a. EIA Procedures 
b. List of IEEs and CEEs 
c. Significant information obtained or actions taken 
3. Annex II: Flora and Fauna  
a. Records and statistics concerning flora and fauna taken 
b. Information on status of native flora and fauna. Specific needs for protection 
c. Number and nature of permits issued regarding flora and fauna 
4. Annex III: Waste Management 
 
3
a. Notification of Waste Management Plans prepared 
b. Report on implementation of Waste Management Plans 
c. Inventory of Past Activities 
5. Annex IV: Prevention of Marine Pollution 
a. Marine Waste Management plan prepared 
b. Implementation of Marine Waste Management Plan 
6. Annex V: Protected Areas 
a. Number and nature of permits issued regarding protected areas 
b. Summary of activities in protected areas 
c. Notification of change or damage to protected areas. 
 
 
3. Implementation Status 
 
In XII SATCM/IP22 ASOC identified some aspects of the Protocol that were effectively being 
implemented, other aspects in which the Protocol was being partially implemented, and some 
particular areas of concern. Some of these will be revisited here. While the use of Art. 17 reports 
does not allow all of these problems to be addressed, several, notably the passage of domestic 
legislation and regulations, the use of EIAs, the development and implementation of waste 
management plans and the implementation of marine waste management plans, are all addressed.  
 
The Protocol 
 
The first section of Art. 17 reports cover the implementation of the Protocol as demonstrated by 
domestic laws and regulations. 
 
CEP I (5 reports total, 17% of Parties. An Additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 10 Parties (100% of reports, including additional information) reported on legal 
implementation 
CEP II (4 reports total, 14% of Parties. An additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 4 Parties (100% of the reports) reported on legal implementation 
o 
2 of these contained specific information on regulations 
o 
5 additional parties reported on legal implementation in non-Art. 17 form 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 10 Parties (77% of the reports) included information on legal implementation 
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties): 
• 17 Parties (85% of the reports) reported on the status of legal implementation 
• 3 Parties did not mention legal status 
 
ASOC is encouraged that the number of Parties reporting on this issue is increasing, but remains 
concerned that, without adequate reporting, it is difficult to assess the legal status of the Protocol 
for certain Parties. 
 
 
4
Oil Spill Contingency Plans 
 
CEP I (5 reports total, 17% of Parties. An Additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 2 Parties (40% of reports) reported having Oil Spill Contingency Plans 
• 1 additional Party included this information in another, non-Art. 17 report 
CEP II (4 reports total, 14% of Parties. An additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form): 
• All reporting Parties (100% of the reports) reported on the development of 
contingency plans 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• All 13 reports (100% of the reports) included information on contingency plans 
o 
1 report included information about a simulated spill exercise 
o 
1 report included information only on marine plans, no mention of a land-
based contingency plan 
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties): 
• 7 Parties (35% of the reports) reported details of contingency plans 
• 7 more Parties mentioned the plans, but included no details 
• 3 Parties reported having a plan under development 
• 1 Party reported that it had not yet begun to develop a plan 
 
ASOC finds the level of contingency planning reported in the past to be seriously inadequate. As 
of CEP IV, only 14 Parties had a plan in place, with 3 under development. It can be concluded 
that the contingency plan requirement is not being effectively implemented. 
 
Annex I: EIA’s 
 
In our previous paper, some aspects of Annex I were identified as being partially implemented. 
These included Initial Environmental Evaluation (Annex I, Art. 2), Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation (Annex I, Art. 3), Monitoring (Annex I, Art. 5) and Circulation of 
Information (Annex I, Art. 6). Overall, EIA was identified as one of the areas that was not being 
fully implemented, as were cumulative impacts. 
 
CEP I (5 reports total, 17% of Parties. An Additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 3 Parties (60% of reports) reported information on EIA procedures 
• 1 additional Party included this information in another, non-Art. 17 report 
CEP II (4 reports total, 14% of Parties. An additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 2 parties (20% of the reports) reported on conducting IEEs for their operations 
o 
None of these reported on non-governmental IEEs 
• 3 parties reported on the obligation to produce an IEE but had not done so 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 10 Parties (77% of the reports) reported on EIAs 
o 
3 Parties had an EIA 
o 
7 had IEEs 
 
5
• 9 Parties reported on procedure for NGO IEEs 
o 
Only 1 had public comment period 
 
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties):  
• 12 (60% of the reports) Parties reported on procedures for IEEs 
• 4 Parties reported on IEE procedures, but gave no details 
• 4 Parties did not report any information on EIAs 
 
As the IEE/EIA process is the keystone of the Protocol, ASOC is dismayed to find that this 
requirement is only partially implemented across the system. 
 
Concerning the number of EIAs produced, while only 1 Party reported the number of IEEs 
produced at CEP I; 2 Parties reported at CEP II, the number grew to 10 at CEP III and 18 at CEP 
IV. Only 2 Parties filing a report at CEP IV failed to note the number of IEEs and to at least 
provide a location where the data could be found.  
 
Reporting on significant actions taken or information gained has been seriously neglected. 
Although the majority of Parties reporting acknowledge this obligation, only 3, covering all 4 
CEPs, reported ‘no information to report’.  
 
Annex II: Flora and Fauna 
 
In our previous paper, Protection of Native Flora and Fauna (Annex II, Art. 3) was identified as 
being partially implemented, while the introduction of Non-Native Species (Annex II, Art. 4) and 
Exchange of Information (Annex II, Art. 6) were identified as being only partially implemented. 
 
Reporting on flora and fauna taken has increased dramatically from 1 Party at CEP I, no Parties 
at CEP II and,  
 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 6 Parties (46% of the reports) reported on flora and fauna taken 
• 7 did not report on this issue  
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties):  
• 16 Parties (80% of the reports) reported statistics 
• Only 4 did not mention flora and fauna taken 
 
Information concerning the status of flora and fauna, and the need for protection was harder to 
come by. No Parties reported this information to CEP I, only 1 Party reported to CEP II, 4 to 
CEP III, and 3 to CEP IV. Only 1 of these reports contained information, the others reported ‘no 
information.’  
 
3 Parties reported on the number and nature of permits for the taking of flora and fauna at CEP I, 
while no Parties reported this to CEP II.  
 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 6 Parties (46% of the reports) reported this information 
• 7 Parties did not report statistics  
 
6
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties): 
• 17 Parties (85% of the reports) included lists of permits issued regarding flora 
and fauna  
o 
1 Party did not include any information  
o 
2 Parties reported on permits being issued but did not include any specific 
information on these permits  
 
Overall, the meeting of reporting requirements appears to have improved. 
 
Annex III: Waste Management 
 
The aspects of Annex III that were identified as being effectively implemented in our previous 
paper were waste disposal by removal from the Antarctic Treaty Area (Annex III, Art. 2); other 
waste disposal on land (Annex III, Art. 4); storage of waste (Annex III, Art. 6), prohibited 
products (Annex III, Art. 7) and management practices (Annex III, Art. 10). Aspects in which the 
Protocol was being partially implemented were waste disposal by incineration (Annex III, Art. 3), 
disposal of waste in the sea (Annex III, Art. 5), waste management and planning (Annex III, Art. 
8) and circulation and review of waste management plans (Annex III, Art. 9) 
 
CEP I (5 reports total, 17% of Parties. An Additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 1 Party (20% of reports) included information on a waste management plan 
• 1 additional Party included information on waste management in non-Art. 17 
form 
CEP II (4 reports total, 14% of Parties. An additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 4 Parties (75% of the reports) reported on waste management plans 
• 1 Party reported in non-Art. 17 format on waste management plans 
• 1 Party did not mention its waste management plan 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 6 Parties (46% of the reports) reported on their waste management plans 
• 6 Parties did not report on waste management plans 
• 1 Party reported on the pending development of this plan 
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties): 
• 16 Parties (80% of the reports) included information on their waste management 
plans 
o 
1 Party reported that they have a plan but did not provide specifics 
o 
1 Party reported that the plan was in progress  
• 2 Parties did not report information 
 
A slow developing trend in reporting concerns the past waste management activities of the 
Parties.  
 
CEP I (5 reports total, 17% of Parties. An Additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
 
7
• 1 Party (20% of reports) included information on implementation of a waste 
management plan 
• 1 additional party included information on waste management in non-Art. 17 
form 
CEP II (4 reports total, 14% of Parties. An additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 3 Parties (75% of reports) reported on waste management activities 
• 2 additional Parties reported on waste management in non-Art. 17 form 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 1 Party (7% of the reports) reported that their waste management history was 
complete 
• 5 reported working on the plan  
• 3 acknowledged the requirement but had not done anything 
• 4 did not report  
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties): 
• 4 Parties (20% of the reports) reported completing the history 
• 11 Parties did not address this point at all  
• 3 Parties reported that an inventory had not been drawn up at this time 
• 2 Parties reported that the inventory was in the works  
 
Reporting on the implementation of Annex III is very general and thus does not allow 
confirmation of ASOC’s assessment of waste management activities.1 It would appear that some 
aspects of Annex III are not being adequately implemented, at least by some Parties. 
 
Annex IV: Prevention of Marine Pollution 
 
Annex IV is the least reported on portion of the Protocol. Reporting obligations under Annex IV 
include Art. 7 (Cases of emergency) and Art. 11 (Sovereign immunity). The latter exempts ships 
used on government non-commercial service from implementing Annex IV. Art. 11 of Annex IV 
also requires taking appropriate measures to conduct operations in a manner consistent with the 
Annex, and to inform other Parties as to how this provision is implemented. However in 4 CEPs, 
only 3 reports, (2 at CEP I, 1 at CEP III,) mention Annex IV. No other report even mentions the 
requirement. 
 
Annex V: Protected Areas 
 
The aspects of Annex V that were identified as being partially implemented in our previous 
paper were development of management plans (Annex V, Art. 5), designation procedures 
(Annex V, Art. 6), permits (Annex V, Art. 7), information and publicity (Annex V, Art. 9) and 
exchange of information (Annex V, Art. 10). Cumulative impacts, which are mentioned in 
Annex V, were identified as an area of concern. 
 
                                                 
1 A joint inspection by the United Kingdom and Germany carried out in 1999, and separate inspections by Norway 
and USA carried out in 2001 report on severe deficiencies on the implementation of Annex III at some research 
stations. 
 
8
CEP I (5 reports total, 17% of Parties. An Additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 2 Parties (40% of reports) included information on the number and nature of 
permits issued to enter protected areas 
CEP II (4 reports total, 14% of Parties. An additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
 
• 4 Parties (100% of the reports) reported on the number and nature of permits to 
enter protected areas 
o 
Only 1 gave specific information  
o 
1 additional party reported this information in non-Art. 17 format  
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 9 Parties (69% of the reports) reported on permits 
o 
4 with specific information  
• 4 did not report  
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties): 
• 15 Parties (75% of the reports) reported on permits 
o 
13 with specific information 
• 5 Parties did not report on permits 
 
Concerning activities in Protected Areas, 
 
CEP I (5 reports total, 17% of Parties. An Additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 1 Party (20% of reports) included information on implementation of a waste 
management plan 
CEP II (4 reports total, 14% of Parties. An additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 3 Parties (75% of reports) reported a summary of activities in Protected Areas 
o 
2 of these reports gave only very general information 
• 1 Party did include this information in its report 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 8 Parties (61% of reports) reported on activities in Protected Areas 
• 5 Parties did not include this information 
• CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties): 15 Parties (75% of reports) reported 
on activities in Protected Areas 
o 
2 of these reports did not include specific information 
• 5 Parties did not include this information 
 
Reporting on the implementation of Annex V, 
CEP I (5 reports total, 17% of Parties. An Additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
• 1 Party (20% of reports) included information on implementation of a waste 
management plan 
CEP II (4 reports total, 14% of Parties. An additional 6 Parties (21%) submitted 
information in non-Art. 17 form.): 
 
9
• 1 Party (25%) reported on implementation of Annex V 
CEP III (13 reports total, 46% of Parties): 
• 3 Parties (23%) reported on implementation of Annex V 
• 10 Parties did not include this information 
CEP IV (20 reports total, 69% of Parties): 
• 10 Parties (50% of reports) included information on implementation of Annex V 
• 10 Parties did not include this information 
 
The general nature of reporting on the implementation of Annex V in reports under Art. 17 does 
not allow the confirmation of earlier assessments. However, with respect to the actual reporting 
obligations, implementation is far from complete. ASOC hopes that the entry into force of Annex 
V will motivate all Parties to implement this Annex, and to include information on 
implementation in future reports under Art. 17. 
  
4. Conclusions 
 
In the 2 years since ASOC reported at XII SATCM, some significant progress has been made 
towards reporting under Art. 17, and generally towards further implementation of the Protocol. 
Many states are, however, still lagging in different aspects of implementation. While the growth 
in the number of Parties complying with their reporting requirements is heartening, ASOC notes 
that some Parties appear to have not yet tabled Art. 17 reports. These are: France, Republic of 
Korea, and Poland. 
 
From CEP II, with only 4 formal reports, to CEP IV, with a total of 20 Parties reporting, the 
implementation of the Protocol parallels the number of Parties reporting. The growth of waste 
management plans and IEE regulations is encouraging, although both are not yet being reported 
on by all Parties. The requirement that is least complied with is reporting on Annex IV 
Prevention of Marine Pollution, with only 1 of the reports mentioning the Annex at all.  
 
Reports under Art. 17 represent a general indication of progress towards the implementation of 
the Madrid Protocol. It is important to note that often the reports will simply note the 
requirement and mention that the Party has not yet completed that activity. While its mention in 
the report indicates awareness of the obligation, it is not enough to report that an action has not 
been taken. When this occurs, Parties should make a serious effort to report on the time schedule 
for implementation of that requirement.  
 
Additionally, several Parties have only reported once. The requirement for reporting is annual, 
even if there is no additional information to report.  
 
Finally, it must be noted that reporting obligations under Art. 17 – important as they are for 
information exchange and transparency purposes – complement but are not a substitute for 
effective implementation of the Protocol on the ground by all Parties to the Protocol. 
