 
1
                              
 
 
XXV ATCM—CEP V 
Warsaw, Poland, 10/20 September 2002-08-06 
INFORMATION PAPER (Item 5) 
Submitted by ITALY 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Monitoring in the Italian Antarctic Terra Nova Bay Station after the entry 
into force of the Madrid Protocol in 1998. 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Italy signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1981 and the Italian Antarctic Research Programme  (PNRA) 
was started in 1985, with the first expedition in the austral summer 1985/86. 
Italy then became a Consultative Party to the Treaty in 1987. 
The actual site of the base was selected during that first expedition and its construction began 
during the second campaign in 1986/87. The base is called Terra Nova Station(BTN). 
Located on the coast of Terra Nova Bay, on a North-South oriented peninsula (Northern Foothills, 
Victoria Land, in the Ross Sea), Terra Nova Station has been designed as the permanent Italian 
Scientific Base in Antarctica. Until now, it was decided to implement only summer activities, but, 
with minor modifications, the station could be used in winter. 
Terra Nova Station is a rather large station where major and diversified scientific programmes 
supported by a complex logistic are carried out. It can accommodate about 80 persons. 
It was built from the beginning in such a way as to keep the environmental impact to a minimum. 
An environmental monitoring programme was implemented from the first year of operation to keep 
under control any negative impact on the Antarctic environment due to scientific and logistic 
activities. 
Sewage treatment plant, incinerator and electric generators can be considered as contamination 
point source and so their effluents are directly or indirectly monitored. 
The monitoring programme for BTN has been continuously improved and implemented, according 
to the "Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica" (SCAR, 
1996) and "Standard Techniques for Monitoring in Antarctica" (Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs, 2000) documents and more recently to “Practical Guidelines for Environmental 
Monitoring Programs in Antarctica ( Antarctic Environmental Officer Network, AEON, 2001-
2002). 
A significant data base of the results obtained in the analyses of samples from different 
environmental compartments (air, water, sediments, biota) has been collected. 
 
Article 3 of the Protocol sets out environmental principles for Antarctic activities, providing general 
guidance for human activities in the Antarctic Treaty area and makes specific reference to 
monitoring requirements. 
 
The station outputs are : emission, fuel spills, liquid wastes, solid wastes, hazardous substances, 
introduced organisms and the environmental values possibly affected are : flora , fauna, fresh water, 
sea water, soil, air. 
 
2
The monitoring plan was carried out with respect to the following indicators: 
 
- 
Liquid waste disposal from the station (sewage and grey water) 
- 
Fuel handling, storage and use 
- 
Aircraft and vehicle operations 
- 
Air quality 
- 
Contamination of snow, ice and soil 
- 
Biological indicators ( in areas where normally exist flora and fauna and in marine environment) 
- 
Solid waste 
- 
Hazardous chemicals, forbidden materials and organisms 
- 
Effects of field activities 
- 
Effect on protected areas and historic sites 
 
 
A preliminary data base on the station activities (logistic and scientific) was used in defining the 
monitoring program and the related sampling plan, for the main environmental compartments (air, 
water,, sediments, biota). 
A brief summary of the monitoring plan is reported in table 1 
 
 
Table 1.  Analysed Parameters, Matrices and Methodology utilised in the environmental monitoring 
program at Italian scientific station in Antarctica 
 
Analysed Parameters 
Matrices 
Methodology 
DO,  COD,  BOD5, Al, 
NH4/NO3/NO2 , PO4 , 
Surfactants, Faecal Coliforms 
 
Waste water and for some 
parameters, sea water in the 
proximity of sewage 
treatment plant 
Standard Control Analyses 
PAH’s 
Atmospheric particulates, 
sediments, soils, biota 
Accelerate Solvent Extraction, 
extract fractionation and 
purification, GC/MS analyses 
Heavy Metals 
Atmospheric particulate, 
sediments, sea water, soils, 
snow , biota 
Acid digestion, or APDC/CHCL3 
extraction for liquid samples, 
ICP/MS analyses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the basis of the monitoring plan, the following activities were performed in the years 1998/99- 
2001/02. 
 
1998/99 
The monitoring of the atmosphere and the sewage treatment plant took place. 
Concentration levels of PAHs (Policyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons) and heavy metals 
in the particulate matter was determined. The chemical-physical water treatment 
plant was monitored during all the campaign.  
Sea water  (in presence of pack ice and without pack ice) , sediments, and biota 
(laternula elliptica ) were sampled . Analyses for PAHs and metals were done in 
Italy. 
 
3
 
1999/00 
The monitoring of atmosphere, and sewage treatment plant at TNB were continued 
as previously. Nutrients (phosphates, nitrites, nitrates) was quantitatively 
determined.. High NH4 (ammonium) concentrations were observed. 
 
Inventory of the biological and chemical reagents presents in the Terra Nova Bay 
Station laboratories was done. 
Detailed instructions on formality of visits and sampling in remote areas were issued. 
 
2000/01 
Updating of the inventory of activities and possible sources of contamination were 
performed. Information obtained were used in the updating of monitoring program 
and related sampling plan for the main environmental compartments (air, water, 
ground, sediments, biota).  
 
Monitoring program was implemented with controls  of contaminants in soil and 
snow in areas at risk of fuel spillage. 
 
2001/02 
Control of the spill fuel was followed in one real case. New analytical methodology 
were used to determine total nutrient concentrations. 
High NH4 concentrations in effluent from sewage  plant was confirmed. A number of 
possible solutions to eliminate the ammonium problem were discussed . 
 
A new type of air sampler was used in remote area to determine very low heavy 
metal concentrations in particulate matter.  
 
 
 Sampling sites 
 
From 1991-92 campaign high volume samplers were used.. Both logistic conditions and the 
morphology of the area were considered in the selection of the sampling sites. Four high volume air 
samplers were installed in order to monitor the four cardinal points . These four sites are described 
as : North Base ( about 100 m NE of the main camp and 10 m a.s.l.), East Base ( about 100 m E of 
the main camp and 10 m   a.s.l.); South Base (about 120 m S of the main camp and ,15 m a.s.l.) and 
West Base ( about 200 m W of the main camp and 30 m a.s.l.). 
From 1994+95 it was decided to have a reference site at Campo Icaro, located at about 2500 m SSE 
from the main camp and about 30 m. a.s.l; 
In Fig. 1 is showed the TNB station plan in which are indicated the sampling sites of the high 
volume air samplers. 
On the same  map are reported the sampling points for sea water, sediment and soil 
 
Methodology 
 
Analysed Parameters, Matrices and Methodology used in the environmental monitoring program at 
Italian Scientific Station in Antarctica are reported in table 1. 
Air sampling (atmospheric particulate matter, <10 µm aerodynamic diameter) was performed by 
using Sierra-Andersen Mod 1200 high volume air samplers, located at the four cardinal points in the 
area of the Base plus another similar sampler, as reference, in a relatively undisturbed area (Campo 
Icaro). Quartz fiber filters (20x25 cm) were used as the best compromise for both PAHs and metals 
sampling. 
Samplers operated continuously, the filters were changed every 72 hours and the air flow was about 
1100 l/min. 
A portion of each filter (disc, ?  = 47 mm) was digested in closed teflon vessel with 5-10 ml of 
ARISTAR BDH HNO3 (1:2) using a microwave digestion oven, model MDS-81 D, and was 
analysed by ICP/MS for the determination of the "heavy metals" concentrations. The control of the 
 
4
uniform deposition of particulate matter on the quartz microfibre filters was preliminarily carried 
out. 
PAHs concentration levels were determined by Accelerated Solvent Extraction (ASE 200 – Dionex) 
of an other portion of each filter (half) with dichloromethane, silica gel cleanup (3 g in a 0.6 x 20 
cm column), fractionation with 10 ml of hexane (aliphatic hydrocarbons) and, successively, with 20 
ml of hexane:dichloromethane 2:1 (PAHs); the extract was analysed by GC/MS.  
 
Results. 
 
As example are reported some data in relation to PAH and heavy metals in atmospheric particulate 
matter during the last Antarctic campaign. 
 
Concentration levels of the selected "heavy metals" in the samples of atmospheric particulate matter 
collected during the XVI Italian Antarctic Expedition (2000-2001) are reported in Table 2. 
Filters collected from the air sampler at the different cardinal points for the same sampling time 
were extracted together in the microwave digestion oven so data obtained represent the average 
values for the monitored area. 
 
Table 2 Concentration levels of metals in the atmospheric particulate matter, expressed as ng/m3. 
 
 
 
Pb 
Cd 
Cr 
Ni 
Cu 
Zn 
V 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Base Area 
Max. 
2 
0.57 
2,9 
1,9 
49 
54 
2 
 
Min. 
0,2 
<0.01 
0,6 
0,1 
3 
2 
0,02 
 
Average 
0,8 
0.06 
1,7 
0,5 
16 
9 
0,40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Icaro Camp 
Max. 
0,53 
0,05 
5,0 
1,1 
32 
8,9 
4,5 
 
Min. 
0,01 
<0,01 
0,6 
0,3 
0,4 
2,1 
0,6 
 
Average 
0,17 
<0,01 
2,3 
0,5 
10,4 
4,6 
1,5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The average values for Pb and Cd, in the area of the Base, are comparable with the levels in the 
atmospheric particulate collected from other remote sites in Antarctica. Cr, Zn, Ni, V show 
concentrations slightly higher than those reported in other remote areas while only Cu shows 
relatively higher levels. Data are generally comparable with those of the previous years and confirm 
the absence of significant contamination produced by the activities in the scientific base also 
considering data from the relatively undisturbed sampling station (Icaro Camp). 
A rough estimate, for metals, based on the emission factors from different sources, suggests that the 
human activities in the Italian Base are such as to potentially alter very slightly their concentrations 
in air (atmospheric particulate) only in a very small area and for a short period of time. A partial 
contribution could derive from incinerator, working in average three time for a week and interesting 
a limited area around the station. A larger contribution could be expected from the two electric 
power generators, operating during the whole campaign. A direct impact in the base area could be 
due to take-off, landing and refuelling of helicopters, but considering route and average distance 
quite a large area could be affected. 
Again, potential sources of PAHs in the Station are power plants, waste incinerator, vehicles 
(excavators, caterpillars), helicopters, fuel spillage, etc..  
In Figure 1, as an example, the average levels of the PAHs, determined during three expeditions, are 
reported. 
 
5
Literature data on PAHs levels in atmospheric particulate show concentrations range, generally, 
from 10 to 500 pg/ m3 for the single compounds. The obtained data show levels for the individual 
PAHs for 95% in the range 1-50 pg/ m3 and are comparable to the low values reported in literature 
for remote sites, confirming the absence of significant contamination produced up to now by the 
activities of the Italian base and the Antarctic environment as uncontaminated area. 
 
  
 
 
Fig. 1  Concentration levels of PAHs in the atmospheric particulate matter, expressed as pg/mc. 
PHE: phenanthrene, FA: fluoranthene, BNT: benzonaftotiophene, BaA: benzo(a)anthracene, 
BpF+BjF+BkF:benzo(b)-(j)-(k)-fluoranthene,BaP:benzo(a)pirene, DbahA: dibenzo(a,h)anthranene,: 
TOT: total PAH 
 
Conclusion 
 
The monitoring program for the Italian Scientific Base in Antarctica, started in the late eighties, has 
been continuously optimised and implemented, according, in the last six years, to the "Monitoring 
of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica" (SCAR, 1996) and "Standard 
Techniques for Monitoring in Antarctica" (Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs, 
2000) documents. 
A significant data base of the results obtained in the analyses of samples from different 
environmental compartments (air, water, sediments, biota) is now available. 
The analysis of these data permits, as a general consideration, to evidence the absence of any 
significant contamination. Moreover, up to now, a significant improvement in the efficiency of the 
wastewater treatment plant and the optimisation of the operational parameters of incinerator and 
power plants was obtained on the basis of data produced by the monitoring program in the Base. 
This suggests the need to continue the monitoring activities in order to keep under control any 
negative impact on the Antarctic environment, surrounding the Italian Scientific Base. 
 
The main parameters that will be considered in the future monitoring plan are 
 
a) hydrocarbons (mainly from fuel transport and consumption) 
PHE
FA
BNT
BaA
BbF+BjF+BkF
BaP
DBahA
TOT
2000/01
0,0
50,0
100,0
150,0
200,0
pg/mc
2000/01
98/99
97/98
 
6
b) PAH (mainly from combustion sources) 
c) surfactants and related compounds (from sewage) 
d) Al, Nutrients , Faecal Coliform (from waste water in proximity of treatment plant) 
e) metals and their compounds (from combustion sources and various Base activities) 
 
Environmental risk assessment from possible accidents. 
 
The monitoring  will be developed in close collaboration with all scientists working during the 
scientific expeditions. 
 
Obtained data from potential pollution sources. will give the basis for the analysis of possible 
accidents and their risk for the Antarctic environment. Environmental risk evaluation from possible 
accidents will be carried out, based upon results of activities  and Base area characteristics.  
Information and experiences from other countries National Research Projects in Antarctica will be 
collected and collaborations will be developed in order to foresee the necessary operations and 
structures to cope with relevant environmental accidents (e.g. major oil spills). 
All relevant data from activities considered will be collected in readily accessible databases in order 
to facilitate analyses, updates and applicability to Italian  Antarctic activities. 
 
As far as the Madrid Protocol prescriptions are concerned,.our activities aim at: 
 
 Providing  the necessary knowledge and support to implement environmental protection measures 
and minimise impacts from the Italian scientific activities; 
 
 providing valuable environmental and technological data, useful for the development of both 
national and international research projects in Antarctica; 
 
 building up the Italian environmental protection program in cooperation with the research 
programs of other countries, in order to set up a common strategy for environmental protection. 
 
