XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-098
Agenda Item: ATCM 4b
BULGARIA
Original language: English


REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA


INFORMATION PAPER


PERMANENT SECRETARIAT TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 


The Antarctic Treaty provides for non-institutionalized arrangements for administration of the Antarctic region through holding the Meetings referred to in Article 9 of the Treaty with the aim to exchange information, consultations and draft recommendations to the governments of the states, parties to the Treaty. None of Treaty’s provisions provide for the establishment of an international organization. 

There is a political decision made by the parties to the Antarctic Treaty to set-up a Secretariat. It could be established not as a Secretariat of an international organization within the meaning of the international law but within the framework of the effective arrangements under the Treaty. In case, however, that the parties to the Treaty wish to set up an international organization, based on the Consultative Meeting referred to in Article 9 of the Treaty, they should review the Treaty and in particular one of its basic principles, namely the principle of non-institutionalized arrangements for administration of the Antarctic region. In the first case a new legal subject of the internal law is created, and in the second case an international organization as a subject of the international law is created. 

As a rule, the international organizations are established by international treaty. Exceptions are made in the cases of an international organization established not on the basis of an international treaty but on other agreement reached between the states as for example the North Council, which is based on internal provisions adopted (in 1952) by the Parliaments of Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Sweden (as well as Finland in 1956). On the other hand, however, the terminology used should not mislead us, as for example ASEAN and OPEC have been founded by joint “international declarations” of representatives of the founders-states and such declarations are nothing but international treaties. The rare exceptions confirm the rule that an international organization should be established on a treaty basis. An example: the Conferention for security and cooperation in Europe was transformed into the Organization for security and cooperation in Europe as from January 1, 1995.

The hypothesis for the unilateral recognition by Argentina, through unilateral declaration, of the ATCM as a legal subject of its internal law, is unacceptable because to argue the fact that it has no international legal effect is not correct. If the parties to the Treaty agree that Argentina makes such a declaration, the latter, as a unilateral act in international law, will bind the other parties to the Treaty. In that case, the parties to the Treaty in fact accept that the ATCM will have a registered office, managing body, executive body, statutes, bank account, etc. However, a diplomatic conference as ATCM is not in a position to ensure the representation of each state with the elements inherent to a subject of the internal law and, in particular, in the decision-making mechanism. If we assume that ATCM is a subject of the law of Argentina, then who will represent it, manage, finance and control. In particular to what kind of practical benefits could lead this hypothesis? If the idea is the Secretariat to assist technically and administratively ATCM and considering that its headquarters is located in Buenos Aires, it is sufficient that the Secretariat has terms of competence according to the law of Argentina. Thus, it will be qualified to act within the domestic legal order of Argentina. 

 Let us now consider the hypothesis under which the parties to the Treaty do not wish to review the system- a new international organization whether ATCM or the Secretariat is not established. In that case the setting-up of the Secretariat should result from the will of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and since ATCM is not an international organization to form an independent legal will, its will be the aggregate of the wills of the states, parties to the Treaty, expressed by the authorized for that purpose representatives of the states. It could be assumed that the ATCM itself will be authorized in the same way to set up the Secretariat but such authorization will be only ad hoc, only for the establishment of the Secretariat. It is recommendable that the operative part of the treaty, which ATCM will sign with Argentina and which will regulate Secretariat’s legal status, defines expressly its subject-matter and goals so that it is made clear that there is no new subject of the international law and only a subject of the internal law of Argentina with the purpose to fulfill its functions.

It is understood that a differentiation should be made between the act by which the Secretariat will be established by the states parties to the treaty and the act regulating its status. Since it is not necessary to set up a new international organization to allow the functioning of the Secretariat, the act by which it will be established, should be an ATCM measure and not an international treaty. Only the ATCM measures are the legally binding acts of ATCM. The question concerning the establishment of the Secretariat is not of purely administrative and procedural nature, a matter is being solved in principle and substance, which requires the undertaking of financial commitments by the states. The Bulgarian party could assume as a compromise that ATCM measure to establish the Secretariat is, in essence, an international treaty, to construe it as an international treaty so that the Bulgarian party could meet the requirements of its internal law to make this Treaty binding and undertake the respective financial commitments. The situation is similar in a number of states whose internal law requires that the undertaking of financial commitments should be approved/allowed by the Parliament and other competent authorities.

In conclusion, the question whether the parties to the Antarctic Treaty want to establish an international organization is still open. If the answer is yes, it means that an international treaty as a foundation act is to be concluded. This may also be done in the form of amendment of the effective Antarctic Treaty, which, in essence, means a conclusion of an international treaty. In that case the indisputably established organization will be subject of the international law and the foundation Treaty will lay down its structure, bodies, manner of decision making and in particular, the purpose of its establishment, functions, terms of competence. It should also be necessary that the states have permanent representatives/representations with this international organization. 

Is it, however, necessary to amend the currently effective non-institutionalized mechanism of administration of the Antarctic? Considering the fact that it has yielded good results so far, the answer is “no”. Moreover that the present mechanism is simpler and cheaper than that of an international organization. 

 
