XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-027
Agenda Item:....
COMNAP
Original: English


________________________________________________________________
ATCM XXV
Warsaw  Poland
10-20 September 2002



Information Paper on
The Interaction Between National Operators, 
Tourists and Tourism Operators




INTRODUCTION

    1. COMNAP noted that ATCM XXIV in St Petersburg foreshadowed that a detailed discussion would take place on tourism issues at ATCM XXV in Warsaw.  Accordingly COMNAP has prepared this brief paper that describes the interactions that take place between national operators, tourists and tourist operators.  

    2. The report is based on a questionnaire to the managers of national Antarctic programs. The purpose was to obtain statistical data about the nature and frequency of contacts with tourist activities. The survey is limited to information from the Austral summer season 2001/02. COMNAP has decided, however, to continue with similar surveys in future seasons, noting the importance of getting data for a longer period of time and hence also to capture rare events such as emergency rescue operations.

    3. There are aspects of the tourist/science interface, which are not touched upon in this questionnaire, such as the presence of people in environmentally sensitive areas and the possible impact on research or the cumulative impacts of visits to specific sites. Nor are the potential risks of accidents (such as oil spills) being assessed. It is likely that such issues, which to a large extent are related to environmental questions and hence also to the scientific values of Antarctica, have a greater strategic relevance for the future of tourism and national research operations in Antarctica.

    4.     It is noted that contacts on the practical level, as demonstrated in the survey, between the national operators and the portion of the tourist industry represented by IAATO, function in a very satisfactory way, largely because COMNAP and IAATO make a great deal of effort to coordinate and exchange information with each other as they prepare and plan for their Antarctica operations.    

TIME FRAME

    5. Data collected refer to one summer season only (2001/02). Although activities may vary between seasons, this choice is made to simplify the response and for the discussion below the 2001/02 might be considered a typical season.

RESPONSE RATE

    6. Twenty-four national operators have responded (which includes all nations that provide their own logistics and one nation with no national programme in Antarctica). 
CONTACTS WITH TOURISM IN GENERAL

    7. All operators, except two, have reported some contacts with tourists during the 2001/02 season. This figure includes visits to stations, shared transports and radio communication (for weather reports etc.).

VISITS TO STATIONS

    8. Thirteen nations had visits at their research stations at least once during the season. Since some nations run several stations the total number of stations visited by tourists were 21. 
Ten nations reported no visits.

FREQUENCY OF VISITS

    9. The number of visits at one station varied considerably. Four stations were visited only once while three stations had 20 visits or more during the season.  All of these were in the Peninsula area. The stations outside this area (with the exception of South Pole) had less than 5 visits. The average was 7.3 visits per station.  In total some 9,300 tourists visited research stations in Antarctica during the 2001/02 season. This gives an average of approx 67 persons/visit typically varying between 30 and 100 (and a couple of exceptions with only 2-3 visitors).

TIME SPENT AT STATIONS

    10. The statistics show a very uniform pattern. The length of a typical visit is three hours with small variations (+ or – 1 hr).

TRANSPORT

    11. Sixteen out of 23 nations have used ships or airplanes operated for the tourist industry to bring people or goods to or from Antarctica.  In most cases it has been on a small scale where a science party has been picked up from a specific site. In all cases it seems as if this collaboration has been restricted to one or two occasions during the season and in several of the events it seems as if the arrangements have been ad hoc and based on flexible decision making taking advantage of the situation on the spot.

    12. For the flights from Cape Town to Queen Maud Land there has been a closer combination of tourist and national operator logistics to take advantage of the economies of scale.

EMERGENCIES

    13.  Fortunately there were no major emergencies during the 2001/02 season.  Two national operators have been involved in medical support for tourists; typically for x-raying and treating minor injuries. A national operator has supported two medivacs by air from the Peninsula.  A special case is the evacuation of stranded private expedition members from South Pole, which happened once this year.  On one occasion a tourist vessel was used to evacuate an expedition member to South America for dental treatment.

OTHER CONTACTS 

    14. Radio communication with weather reports etc. is routine between tourist ships and stations. Roughly half of the national operators have reported such contacts. In addition exchange of information regarding aircraft movements is maintained by a small number of stations with runways and flight operations. In a couple of cases runways are also used for ferry flights to and from tourist bases in Antarctica.


HIGH RISK ADVENTURE TOURISM

    15. It is noted that adventure tourism often involves activities with high safety but low environmental risks and hence may not be regulated within the environmental legal framework supporting the Treaty.  Thus, parties do not usually have the legal powers to require adventurers to undertake contingency planning or carry insurance to reimburse search and rescue costs.  As a consequence, national operators may not be able to recover the high costs associated with rescue and repatriation operations.  Models of how this problem is dealt with in other parts of the world (e.g. expeditions to Greenland with rules for insurance and bonds) are of interest although, of course, state jurisdiction exists in this particular case.


ANTARCTIC ACCESSIBILITY BY AIR TRANSPORT

    16. The development of new and improved air links to Antarctica may open up opportunities that will attract more visitors to the continent.  It is noted that national operators are not in a position to decide who is flying to Antarctica or why and where to land (unless permission is requested to use airstrips/runways maintained by national programs).  COMNAP notes that national operators could develop universal requirements that air transport operators must meet to qualify as contractors to national programs.


GENERAL REMARKS

    17. The contacts between tourists and national operators in Antarctica are very biased geographically (and with South Pole being a special case).  The dominating issue in the interface between tourism and national operators is the scheduling and preparation for visits at research stations. Some stations have no or very little contacts with tourist activities while others do receive a great number of visitors. At those stations visitor centres and personnel assigned to meet the tourists and to give information about research seem to have been a successful approach.

    18. Obviously unforeseen events such as medical evacuations or people getting stranded creates problem for all parties involved. Again certain national operators are much more affected than others.  Collaboration between national operators and tour companies related to transportation does occur, although usually on a small scale, and such arrangements seem to have been of value.

