XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-013 
Agenda Item: ....... 
Germany 
Original : English 
 
 
 
Information Paper 
Submitted by Germany 
 
Research Report “Survey and Management Plans for two Tourist Sites in the Antarctic 
– Scientific Basis and Indicators for the Development of Management Plans  
for Frequently Used Visitor Sites in the Antarctic” 
 
 
1. Introduction 
This information paper provides a summary of a recent research report which 
– 
describes and analyses the scientific basis and quality criteria for the development of 
management plans for frequently used visitor sites in the Antarctic,  
– 
applies those criteria to two frequently used landing sites, Hannah Point and Penguin Is-
land, and  
– 
gives an estimation whether these areas should be designated as “Antarctic Specially 
Managed Areas” (ASMAs). 
The research project was carried out by Dr. Hans-Ulrich Peter et al., Institute of Ecology, 
University of Jena, Germany, for the German Federal Environmental Agency, Berlin, between 
1999 and 2002. 
 
This summary is submitted for general information.  
 
 
2. Summary of the Research Report 
The increasing ship-based tourism and other visitor activities in the Antarctic, especially in 
the area of the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula, fall into the breeding and 
moulting period of birds and seals. Tourism is conducted particularly in areas of high species 
diversity and abundance of fauna and flora, lasting mainly from mid December to mid Febru-
ary. This coincidence leads to the question how these areas could be protected from adverse 
impacts resulting from tourist activities. One possibility would be to designate them as Ant-
arctic Specially Protected Areas or as Antarctic Specially Managed Areas. At present, how-
ever, there are insufficient scientific data and environmental indicators for the development of 
substantial management plans for frequently used tourist-landing sites. 
 
In the present study, environmental indicators and quality criteria for Antarctic Specially 
Managed Areas were investigated. These indicators were tested on the two frequently used 
landing sites Hannah Point and Penguin Island, South Shetland Islands, during a period of 
two field seasons.  
 
 
2
The report first gives an introduction to various human activities such as science and tourism 
in the Antarctic. This includes logistic support of national programmes and stations by ships, 
planes and helicopters. The impact of all these activities on the local ecosystem is described, 
including negative effects of stations and scientists. The analysis of different types of tourism 
shows that ship-based tours are most relevant, followed by over-flights of small to medium 
sized planes. In future, traditional cruising tours with short, guided landings will be only one 
option, as more active tours including kayaking, climbing, diving, marathon running etc. will 
be organised as well. 
 
Chapter 3 of the report lists different parameters for recognising impacts on the Antarctic 
environment by visitors, and presents a framework for an assessment of a tourist area:  
– 
Firstly, the protection potential of an area will have to be analysed. If the area contains 
values worth protecting and managing, further investigations should be carried out. The 
checklist includes the intrinsic, environmental (ecological), scientific, historical, wilder-
ness, aesthetic and tourist values.  
– 
In the next step, certain components or attributes of areas (e.g. ecosystems, species as-
semblages and habitats, abiotic features, landscapes, history, wilderness) should be de-
fined as requiring protection.  
– 
A detailed checklist of quality criteria follows in order to evaluate further whether an 
area deserves protection and management. Criteria are representativeness, ecological im-
portance, diversity, special features, stability, the degree of interference and the impor-
tance of scientific work in the area.  
– 
An environmental risk assessment plan based on several parameters such as the inten-
sity of an impact and its temporal and spatial scale could be the final process in the as-
sessment framework. It should clearly demonstrate all human activities and impacts, natu-
ral processes, variability and viability, as well as the urgency for protection and manage-
ment and the scientific uncertainty.  
 
Using tourism as an example, all the different environmental categories and potential risks 
including cumulative effects are discussed for ship, helicopter and landing activities. 
 
The establishment of environmental quality values (see Article 3 of the Environmental Pro-
tocol to the Antarctic Treaty) sets specific objectives. Chapter 4 of the report defines these 
intrinsic, ecological, scientific, aesthetic, tourism-related and historic values, as well as wil-
derness.  
 
Chapter 5 of the report deals with environmental indicators relevant for the study of visitor 
activities:  
 
– 
One of the most important of these indicators is the number of breeding seabirds in the 
area of interest. The breeding success of birds is an effective indicator of human impact 
on an area. However, it is only useful if a census can be carried out in a given area at the 
beginning and the end of the breeding season.  
 
– 
Behavioural changes of birds are considered as very important indicators (e.g. escape 
behaviour, fly-off distance). Additional physiological data such as heart rate can further 
indicate stress responses of birds to human presence. In order to find out heart rate 
changes, the research team conducted specific studies on two bird species within this pro-
ject.  
 
– 
Counts as well as behavioural and physiological changes of seals are discussed thereafter.  
 
3
 
– 
The impact on the vegetation could be measured using the species diversity and spatial 
occurrence of lichens, mosses and flowering plants as indicators. However, limits are set 
by difficulties in individual species identification, and by slow growth of the vegetation.  
 
– 
Other potential impacts on the environment include damage to important geological, 
geomorphologic and human footprint features.  
 
– 
Finally, the visitor activities themselves (i.e. numbers, temporal and spatial distribution of 
landing tourists) are essential indicators for an area assessment.  
 
Chapter 6 of the report contains the results of previous studies from the literature and own 
investigations on Hannah Point and Penguin Island where the indicators listed in Chapter 
5 were tested in practice. The results show no clear relationship between changes in breeding 
numbers and tourist activities. 
 
The behaviour of Skuas (Catharacta spec.) is only insignificantly changed and partly modi-
fied by habituation. Southern Giant Petrels (Macronectes giganteus) react with great sensitiv-
ity to human disturbance. A fly-off from the nest due to disturbance by visitors considerably 
increases the predation risk on eggs and small chicks.  
 
The heart rate of an animal represents a clear stress response, and while individually differ-
ent and changed by habituation, is an objective indicator. For the first time heart rate studies 
were conducted on flying birds in the Antarctic. These studies were carried out in areas with 
different human disturbance levels. Southern Giant Petrels and Skuas were chosen as impor-
tant indicator species. The researchers used a non-invasive method to study the heart rate. The 
breeding birds tolerate visitors within a minimum distance of 50 m. They react to closer ap-
proaches with an increase in heart rate above that caused by natural disturbance, e.g. by 
predators and con-specifics. 
 
Counts of seals were carried out in both study areas.  
 
The vegetation mapping in both areas shows a mosaic of different sub-formations (from 
dominant Deschampsia patches to moss and lichen cushions). Earlier trampling experiments 
in the Antarctic showed the sensitivity of the vegetation. Visitors can walk on only areas 
where terrestrial green algae Prasiola crispa grow, as this species recovers quickly. All other 
vegetation patches should be avoided. 
  
Furthermore, an analysis of the most intensively used visitor zones in the areas studied indi-
cated the importance of geological features. Tourists frequently climb the Deacon Peak on 
Penguin Island and walk along the beach of Walker’s Bay on Hannah Point visiting the rock 
and fossil collection.  
 
Finally, the chapter lists all indicators pertaining to scientific research in the study, including 
the measurement of these indicators, time consumption, their impact on fauna and flora, their 
effectiveness and practicability.   
 
In Chapter 7, measures of protection are suggested. These are based on the environmental 
quality objectives presented in Chapter 4 and aim at avoiding or minimising adverse effects 
on tourist areas. In this context, the report proposes to modify existing rules and recommenda-
 
4
tions on minimum distances to breeding birds and seals, and formulates regulations for the use 
of landing sites, maximum numbers of tourists per landing, etc. 
 
For the landing sites at Hannah Point and Penguin Island, concrete suggestions are made to 
avoid adverse effects of tourism on the numbers of breeding birds and seals, and to minimise 
disturbance resulting in behavioural changes of animals in these areas:  
 
– 
It is especially important to control the minimum distances to the breeding and resting 
animals and to prohibit the trampling of vegetation. If minimum distances to penguins 
cannot be kept on Hannah Point, especially during chick creching, only the main landing 
zone and the beach on Walkers Bay should be used. Limited access also reduces the visi-
tor number to 50 at any given time on this landing site.  
 
– 
The alternative landing beach on the western side of Penguin Island should not be used. 
Instead, the main landing site in the north of the island can be accessed with a path (still 
to be marked) leading towards Deacon Peak. If the construction of the Czech Station on 
Turret Point, KGI, will take place possible use conflicts have to be assessed and avoided.   
 
Chapter 8 of the report discusses the possibility and necessity of the designation of Hannah 
Point and Penguin Island as ‘Antarctic Specially Managed Areas’ (ASMAs): 
 
– 
Hannah Point represents a typical fauna and flora of the region. Due to the breeding of 
Macaroni Penguins (Eudyptes chrysolophus) and 11 other seabird species, as well as 5 
seal species, this peninsula is very diverse. This easy access to wildlife resulted in exten-
sive use by tourist companies. Hannah Point further offers interesting geology, rock and 
fossil collections and larger vegetation patches of scientific interest.  
On Hannah Point there is large species diversity, which is particularly worth protecting. 
Although only small numbers of Macaroni Penguins breed here, they are classed as a vul-
nerable species (IUCN criteria) and need protection. Also the Southern Giant Petrel is a 
vulnerable species and breeds on Hannah Point in considerable numbers. Additionally, a 
collection of rocks and fossils on the beach northeast of the main landing site represents 
the diverse geological characteristics of the area (see table 1).  
– 
The young volcanic craters of Penguin Island present a less typical picture to tourists 
visiting the Antarctic Peninsula region. This island also consists of a high species diver-
sity including 11 breeding bird and 3 seal species. Especially, the large colonies of South-
ern Giant Petrels and the geological history of the island are relevant from a scien-
tificview. Penguin Island shows no signs of human habitation and offers a splendid view 
from the top of Deacon Peak over the glaciers of King George Island. Since the main 
penguin colonies lie out of sight and many single nests or small groups of other species 
are widely spread, there is no easy access to wildlife for tourists.  
Also Penguin Island consists of a rich species assemblage and has large breeding colonies 
of Southern Giant Petrels (vulnerable species under IUCN criteria). Also its wilderness 
should stay unspoiled by human signs (table 1). 
 
5
 
Tab. 1: List of protection categories relevant for the classification of Hannah Point and Pen-
guin Island 
 
Protection Categories 
Hannah Point 
Penguin Island 
Intrinsic Value 
0 
0 
Ecosystems 
0 
0 
Species assemblages 
1 
1 
Species 
1 
1 
Habitats  
0 
0 
Geological Features 
1 
0 
Landscapes  
0 
0 
Historic Features 
0 
0 
Wilderness 
1 
1 
Aesthetic 
0 
0 
Total 
4 
3 
   0 = does not merit protection  
1 = merits protection 
 
Considering the environmental risk assessment, the combination of quality criteria and impor-
tant values indicates that with the present visitor load on Hannah Point management activi-
ties should be implemented there. In contrast, there appears to be no necessity for immedi-
ate protection measures for Penguin Island. However, due to scientific uncertainty and 
growing tourist numbers, the area should be continuously monitored and if necessary, man-
agement activities should be implemented.  
 
Possible conflicts between different activities such as tourism and science, as well as negative 
effects for the environment, could be minimised or avoided by designing an area as an 
ASMA, a measure aiming at planning and co-ordinating activities within this area. According 
to Art. 5 (3) of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, the designa-
tion of an “Antarctic Specially Managed Area” (ASMA) requires the proposal of a manage-
ment plan. Although the report underlines that it is only immediately urgent to design Hannah 
Point as an ASMA, Penguin Island is also under risk due to possible cumulative effects of 
human activities and may need protection in the near future. Therefore, the report presents 
proposals for management plans for both areas. In addition to a general area description, these 
plans also include values to be protected, management objectives, activities and maps with 
zones in which tourist activities will be prohibited under special circumstances. 
 
Chapter 10 of the report describes further monitoring requirements for these areas. In addi-
tion, assessments of other tourist areas are suggested and if necessary, management plans 
should follow. Especially, areas of cumulative effects from different human activities such as 
scientific and logistic work near stations, tourism and aircraft use (e.g. Fildes Peninsula on 
King George Island, South Shetland Islands) will have to be assessed. Research of human 
impact on these sites should be intensified.  
