XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-026 
Agenda Item:.... 
COMNAP 
Original: English 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
ATCM XXV 
Warsaw  Poland 
10-20 September 2002 
 
 
 
 
Information Paper on 
An Analysis of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. 
Environmental impact assessment has continued to be an important focus of work for the Council of 
Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) over the last decade.  Recent initiatives within the 
Antarctic Treaty system and by COMNAP, as well as ongoing experience in the practical implementation of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, have advanced an understanding of the issue 
in the context of Antarctica.  Most recently, COMNAP tasked its Antarctic Environmental Officers Network 
(AEON) to undertake an analysis of existing initial environmental evaluations (IEEs) for three specified types 
of activities.  The aim of the analysis was to achieve a better understanding of how the environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) process is being used by national Antarctic programmes.   
 
2. 
During 2001 and early 2002, a Working Group comprising AEON members from seven national 
programs carried out the study.   A progress report on the work was presented to the fourth meeting of the 
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) in St Petersburg, Russia in September 2001 (ATCM 
XXIV/WP20).  The Working Group developed an analysis methodology and process, the IEEs to be considered 
were selected, and the review completed.  The results of the review were analysed and strengths, gaps, and 
trends identified by the COMNAP Environmental Coordinating Group.  Finally, overall conclusions and three 
recommendations aimed at further improving the IEE process were adopted by COMNAP for inclusion in this 
Information Paper. 
 
ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS 
 
3. 
A detailed methodology was developed for the review process.  In developing the methodology, 
relevant aspects of EIA practice elsewhere in the world were researched, in particular the development of 
techniques to review or assess the quality of EIA.  An important concept to emerge from this background work 
was that EIA analysis should focus on “problem-solving rather than fault-finding”.  
4. 
Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEES) were selected for the analysis in three types of activity, 
namely: 
• 
the construction of a station living facility;  
• 
bulk fuel storage; and  
• 
scientific ice core drilling.  
 
5. 
In the selection process, the Working Group attempted to select IEEs from a range of countries and for 
each type of activity only one IEE from each country was included.  Only IEEs prepared after 1991, and in 
English, were considered.  Each member of the Working Group using agreed criteria then reviewed each IEE. 
 
6. 
  The criteria selected related directly to the features or contents of each IEE including: description of 
activity; alternatives; outputs of activity; existing environment; impacts; evaluation of impacts; comparison of 
alternatives; corrective measures; monitoring programme; and process.  All of these aspects are covered in the 
ATCM Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (1999).  The EIA Guidelines are taken 
as guidance on best practice for all IEEs.  However, only aspects relating to the description of the activity, 
alternatives, and impacts are explicitly required to be documented at the IEE level of EIA under the 
Environmental Protocol.  
 
7. 
For each criterion, the reviewer gave a ranking related to the adequacy of the IEE according to whether 
it was complete with all relevant information provided, acceptable where the information provided is 
incomplete but omissions are not serious, or inadequate where major omissions are noted and additional 
information is necessary for decision making.  To supplement this approach, more detailed qualitative analysis 
was undertaken, in which the reviewers’ notes on content and further comments were considered in compiling 
the results. 
 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
8. 
Thirteen IEEs were used in the analysis from nine countries.  Overall, IEEs completed for bulk fuel 
storage facilities were rated as being the most complete by the reviewers, followed by scientific ice core 
drilling activities, and finally construction of a station living facility.  
 
9. 
The results of the review show clear differences as well as similarities in the EIA processes used for the 
different activities and IEEs analysed.  The results also show that different aspects of the EIA process are being 
done well while other aspects can still be improved. It seems advisable that in identifying and evaluating the 
impacts from an activity one should take an approach which allows a logical progression in identification and  
evaluation of impacts. Here a table or matrix format may greatly aid in a better understanding of how 
conclusions were reached.  
 
10. 
The EIA Guidelines were taken as a best practice for IEEs in the review, along with a few points from 
impact assessment reviews undertaken elsewhere in the world.  The formats set out in the EIA Guidelines are 
sufficiently detailed for CEEs, and it is accepted that not all IEEs need reach such a level of detail.  Of the three 
criteria that do relate directly to the requirements of the Protocol for IEE documents, the following observations 
can be made: 
• 
Those IEEs prepared from 1999 onwards all reached at least an ‘acceptable’ average total 
ranking, suggesting that a more consistent quality of documents is emerging with the EIA 
Guidelines and increasing body of experience; and 
• 
It is important to note the limitations of the review.  The 13 IEEs selected were from nine 
different countries and all IEEs were in English.  Consequently, the IEEs selected may not be 
totally representative of current IEE practice.  Furthermore, the rankings given for each aspect 
of the IEE documents were not weighted in any way because; being value judgements, the 
ranking show a considerable variance from reviewer to reviewer. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
11. 
The following recommendations are presented with the aim of aiding the IEE process in the future: 
 
• 
The CEP Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica which references all 
Protocol requirements provide an excellent benchmark for best practice in Antarctic EIA and 
authors should be further encouraged to consult the guidelines throughout the IEE process. 
With the evolution of technology and research thrusts it is advisable to review the EIA 
Guidelines periodically. 
• 
As the number of IEEs increases, authors when initiating an IEE process, should as an aid to 
their own work, make use of accepted methodologies laid out in IEEs completed for similar 
types of activities, particular in similar environments.  To aid this, Parties should be further 
encouraged to make IEE documents available through appropriate web-sites.  
• 
COMNAP is continues its work on the practical aspects of environmental impact assessments 
with the view to contributing to a second edition of the EIA Guidelines at some future date. 
This could include an analysis of applied methodologies and systematic approaches to impact 
evaluation. 
 
 
 
