XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP- …. 
Agenda Item: CEP 4c 
CZECH REPUBLIC 
Original : English 
 
 
 
REPORT  ON 
PROJECT  OF  THE  CZECH  RESEARCH  STATION 
IN ANTARCTICA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 2002 
 
 
 
 
Contents: 
 
A. Report 
B. Graphic Attachments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by the Czech Republic 
      
 
 
2
 
 
 
 
A.  Report 
 
 
Contents: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. 1   Identification  data of the construction  .…………………………….. p.   3 
 
A.  2  Introduction………………………………........………………….....  p.   4 
 
A. 2.1   Background of the station construction ….....….....….....…...........  p.   4 
 
A. 2.2   Research programme for the proposed station ...............................  p.   5 
 
A. 2.3   Building site ...................................................................................  p.   9 
 
A.  3   Technical structure of the station ......................................................  p.  12 
  
A.  3.1   Station structures ............................................................................  p.  12 
 
A. 3.2   Brief description of the structures ..................................................  p.  12 
 
              A.  3.3   Operational infrastructure of the station ..................................... ...  p.  17 
 
              A.  4   Basic data and information sources ..................................................   p.  21 
 
A. 5   Environmental impact of the construction .......................................   p.  22 
 
A. 5.1   Basic starting points of environmental care ...................................   p.  22 
 
A. 5.2   Wastes ...........................................................................................   p.  23 
 
              A.   5.3   Waste management plan ...............................................................   p.  26 
               
A.  6   Conclusions  ...……………………………………………………...   p.  27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
3
 
 
 
 
A. 1  Identification data of the construction 
 
 
Construction title: 
Czech Research station in Antarctica 
 
Construction site: 
Maritime Antarctic, northern coast of James Ross Island, 
Brandy Bay 
 
Investor: 
Masaryk University in Brno, Faculty of Science 
 
Kotlárská 2, CZ – 611 37 Brno, as commissioned by the 
 
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the  
Czech Republic 
 
Project manager: 
 
Prof. Dr. Pavel Prošek 
Dept. of Geography 
Faculty of Science 
Masaryk University Brno 
 
Chief Designer  
and Project Engineer: 
Ing. Alois Suchánek  
 
INVESTPROJEKT, Ltd. Zlín 
 
Bratrí Jaronku  4079, CZ – 760 01 Zlín, Czech Republic 
 
 
General contractor:                 PSG International, Ltd. Zlín, 
                                                Zarámí 4077, 760 40 Zlín, Czech Republic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
4
 
A. 2  Introduction 
 
 
This material has been prepared on the basis of comments on a previous version of this 
document presented by the Czech delegation at the XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting in St. Petersburg, Russian Federation on 9 – 20 July 2001 (see information Papers 
XXIV ATCM/IP24, XXIV ATCM/IP69 and XXIV ATCM/IP75). Concerns and reservations 
about the proposed location of the Czech station on King George Island were set out in the 
Final Report of the XXIV ATCM, Recommendations 48, 138 and 139 and in the Report of 
the Fourth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP IV), 
Recommendations 21 and 23 
 
Following a careful analysis of all the arguments presented at the XXIV ATCM, different 
potential locations for the Czech station were evaluated and changes in the proposed 
research programme were made and are presented in Sections A. 2.2, A. 2.3 and A. 5 of this 
document. 
 
The selection of a location suitable for the proposed station was reviewed in collaboration 
with the United Kingdom and Ukraine. Pursuant to Recommendations XV-17 of the XIV 
ATCM, which urged that the location of a new station should maximize scientific potential 
and avoid the excessive concentration of installations in Antarctica, James Ross Island has 
been proposed as the new site for the Czech research station.  
 
 
A. 2.1  Background of the station construction 
 
 
The importance of long-term, interdisciplinary Antarctic research has increased in recent 
years. Antarctica is a climate stabilizer for the planet, an area whose vegetation and fauna are 
perfectly acclimated to its extremely cold climate. It is a region with unique conditions for 
many types of observations, experiments and field investigations (astrophysics, geophysics, 
geology, meteorology, high atmosphere research, etc.). It is the continent where ozone 
depletion in the stratosphere was first recognized and has the highest levels of depletion of 
the ozone layer. At the same time, it is the only continent where people live together free of 
conflicts; where scientists, including many Czech researchers, are able to carry out 
fundamental research, the results of which are often applicable to other parts of the Earth. 
 
The idea of building an official Czech research station in Antarctica emerged as the result of 
several important events. First and foremost was the research activities of Czech scientists in 
the region of Antarctica, carried out from the first half of fifties through the end of sixties, 
almost entirely at Soviet and American Antarctic bases (fields of research included 
astrophysics, geophysics, meteorology and geology). After a roughly twenty-years-long 
break, systematic research was carried out on King George Island (South Shetlands). This 
was followed by activities in the nineties and in the years 2000-2002 at the Henryk 
      
 
 
5
Arctowski Station (Poland), the Machu Picchu Station, (Peru), in the Pieter J. Lenie 
refugium (USA), at the Engenheiro Wiltgen Station on Elephant Island (Brazil) and at the 
Vernadski Station (Ukraine). Based on our own experience from our research programmes 
during the nineties, a group of researchers from Czech scientific institutions decided to 
formulate a programme for the construction of the first official Czech Antarctic station. The 
existence of such a station is an important condition for the further successful development 
of Czech research activities in Antarctica. 
 
In addition to the professional experience of Czech scientists that has already been 
mentioned, obtained during a number of expeditions to Spitsbergen, to the Canadian Arctic, 
as well as to Antarctica, knowledge of the functioning of a number of polar stations, 
including technical and logistical aspects, that has been gained by these scientists, also 
speaks in favour of the construction of a separate Czech base. 
 
 
A. 2.2  Research programme for the proposed station 
 
 
The topics of proposed research programme are based on the present Czech scientific 
activities in Antarctica and will be focused on the dynamics of ecosystem processes in the 
ice-free coast of Antarctica. Terrestrial ecosystems in Antarctica offer unique possibilities 
for complex, multidisciplinary research on ecological processes taking place in the Earth’s 
biosphere and its subsystems. The relative simple biotic structure of Antarctic ecosystems 
(population, communities and trophic interrelations), the abiotic setting (glacially and 
periglacially modified rocky ground surfaces, a moraine substrate and a relatively arid 
climate) and the relatively straightforward quantification of the main controlling factors 
(solar radiation and energy, air temperature, ground temperature, water and nutrient 
availability) combine to allow the recognition of the mechanisms of primary succession, 
diversification and organisms’ adaptive processes more easily than in more complex 
systems. The structural and functional simplicity of Antarctic ecosystems, together with their 
totally undisturbed nature and strong defense mechanisms against invasive species and the 
exploitative activities of the mankind, make them ideal model regions for basic ecological 
research. Associated with this structural simplicity is the limited ability of the biotic 
elements to minimize the oscillation of abiotic factors. This means that these ecosystems 
may function as very sensitive indicators of changes in the environment, including the much 
discussed global changes in the climate. 
 
Within the context of this concept, a connection between these themes and the subtopics of 
the Southern Ocean CIRCLE Initiative (Southern Ocean Climate Interactions Resources and 
Carbon Links to Europe) project is envisaged, specifically in the following areas of research: 
i) climate variability and ii) ecosystem dynamics and resources. CIRCLE has been prepared 
as a project relating to the European FP6 Thematic Priority: Sustainable development, global 
change and ecosystems.  
 
 
      
 
 
6
Czech scientific institutions that are oriented towards more permanent scientific activities in 
Antarctica (see below) have systematically prepared themselves for these activities. This 
includes experience gained during their work at the stations of other nations, especially that 
of Poland, Peru, Brazil and Ukraine but also by acquiring the technological necessary for 
such research. In addition the standard equipment, primarily meteorological measuring 
systems and devices for monitoring physical processes in soil and fresh water, this includes 
automatic monitoring systems measuring the physical and chemical properties of the 
environment of flora and fauna in the coastal oases (especially climate, microclimate, 
hydrology, hydrochemistry and pedology). Technology for monitoring the impacts of the 
simulated conditions on living organisms both in situ as well as under laboratory conditions 
has also been acquired. 
 
Masaryk University in Brno, and in particular the Faculty of Science, has played and 
continues to play a leading role in research in the above mentioned areas. In a majority of 
cases, this research has been carried out with the support of grants or projects of the Ministry 
of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic. At the Faculty of Science, research 
into physical geographical and botanical aspects of Polar Regions has been carried out in an 
integrated and multidisciplinary manner. Among the departments to have participated in this 
research are the departments of geography, plant physiology and plant anatomy, zoology and 
ecology and analytic chemistry. Since 1999, these departments have been involved in a five-
year research programme, funded by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the 
Czech Republic, entitled “The Ecology of an Antarctic Coastal Vegetation Oasis.” 
 
There are a number of other institutions that continue to cooperate with this research. These 
include the Botanical Institute of the Academy of Science of the Czech Republic in 
Pruhonice (including its branch in Trebon), the Faculty of Biological of the South Bohemian 
University in Ceské Budejovice, the Czech Geological Survey, the Department of the 
Environment of the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering at the Czech Technical University in 
Prague and several other specialized institutions. 
 
It should be emphasized that the Czech Republic will warmly welcome presence and 
scientific activities of researchers from other countries. The project of the station is 
conceived as a prerequisite for high level research which must be linked to current 
international scientific programmes  carried out in Antarctica. 
  
A.2.2.1 Aims of the Research Programme 
The proposed programme follows on from the current research programme entitled “The 
Ecology of Antarctic Coastal Oases” (1999-2003) carried out by the Faculty of Science of 
Masaryk University in Brno that will be completed in 2003. This new programme will 
expand the current programme with new approaches to issues of biodiversity and processes 
in Antarctic ecosystems. Thanks to interdisciplinary cooperation, new detailed information 
about the structure and function of biotic elements and, more importantly, geographic 
(climatic, geologic, geomorphologic and glacial) and edaphic factors in the environment will 
be acquired. This will allow the quantification of important ecosystem processes (especially 
the flows of energy, mineral element cycling and adaptive trends). Three working groups 
      
 
 
7
will be participating in this research: (1) physico-geographic (climatologic, geomorphologic, 
hydrologic, glaciologic), (2) biological and (3) chemical. 
 
The programme is conceived as multidisciplinary and is motivated by a desire to acquire the 
most comprehensive knowledge of the functions and development of coastal Antarctic 
ecosystems from the points of view of both the inorganic setting and biotic structures. 
Within this research, the following fields will play a crucial role: 
- physical geography (the study of physical factors in the environment) 
- biology (the study of the structure and function of autotrophic elements in the ecosystem) 
- analytic chemistry and geochemistry (the study of environmental chemical factors in 
Antarctic ecosystems). 
 
The research areas are briefly characterized in the following sections. 
 
Geography 
Climatology 
In keeping with what has been presented above, research will, in addition to the standard 
research programme of the meteorological station, focus on a comprehensively conceived 
study of the microclimate and topoclimate of ice-free and glaciated areas. This will include 
(1) monitoring the quantity of energy present and the energy exchange regime (radiation and 
heat) between various types of ground surface, the subsoil and atmosphere with the 
following aim: recognizing the energy potential of the environment of soil microorganisms 
(soil climate) and plants (microclimate); (2) studying the intensity of infrared and ultraviolet 
radiation; and (3) monitoring and analyzing the influence of the physical relief on the local 
climate, which may help explain the causes of the spatial distribution of various biotopes and 
specify the concept of meso-scale air stream modification. 
 
Standard climatic data (both our own and from other sources) will be analyzed from the 
perspective of dynamic (circulation) causes. The aim is to follow climate change and 
oscillations in the climate in the region in question and its further impacts (the extent and 
dynamic development of sea ice, oscillations on the margins of continental ice shield), 
including changes in environmental conditions for ecosystems in ice-free areas. 
 
This analysis supplemented by limnological research (the analysis of lake sediments) and the 
results of proposed drilling into glaciers on James Ross Island, may also contribute the 
resolution of questions related to the specific variability of climate and its geomorphological, 
oceanographic and biological impacts in the northern part of the Antarctic Peninsula. 
 
Geomorphology 
The great speed of glacial and periglacial glacial geomorphological processes significantly 
limits conditions for the survival of polar ecosystems that exist as a “thin layer of life” 
between an atmosphere with a “refrigerated” climate and the permafrost with its ‘freezer” 
soil climate. Activities in this area will therefore focus on recognizing the processes of 
parent rock weathering, the transportation of weathering products and their subsequent 
      
 
 
8
sedimentation with a special emphasis on periglacial processes in the substrate (the influence 
of flowing water, the results of changes in its state and aeolian influences). These are not 
only sources of information for recognition the dynamics of different types and intensities of 
periglacial processes on deglaciated and glacial processes on ice-covered surfaces but also 
on the potential spread of vegetation communities but also and on primary sources of 
nutrients for the biota. 
 
The basis for much of the field research activities in the areas around the station will be 
mapping carried out with the assistance of modern geodetic and topographic technology. The 
output will be high-definition maps presented in both analogue and digital forms. 
 
 
Geology 
The geological setting of James Ross Island and the surroundings provides a large potential 
for further research which is based especially on current results of British, Argentine and US 
geologists. The main proposed topics are as follows: 
Ø volcanology, geochemistry and tectonic setting of extension-related alkali basalts in a 
position of back-arc basin, 
Ø sedimentology and palaeontology of Cretaceous sediments of the Gustav Group, 
Ø Quaternary geology focused on recently exposed glacial sediments, evolution and 
extent of glaciation in the Cenozoic with implications for palaeoclimate, 
Ø dynamics of soil formation under extreme climatic conditions and chemistry of 
water-rock interactions in weathering, 
Ø structural geology, petrology, and isotope geochemistry of the Peninsula batholith in 
the area of Trinity Peninsula, including low-grade Triassic metasedimentary country 
rocks. 
The  research will be carried out by the Czech Geological Survey and Charles University 
Prague in collaboratorion with foreign scientific institutions. 
 
 
Biology 
The biological group will focus on questions of population structure and the basic eco-
physiological functions of terrestrial vegetation in coastal Antarctic ecosystems. Biometric, 
gasometric, fluorometric and spectral methods of observing the physiological activities of 
autotrophic organisms will be applied in the field. Measurements will be carried out in 
permanent monitoring plots where mosses, lichens and algaes occur. In contrast with the 
earlier research programme oriented primarily on Antarctic lichens, greater emphasis will be 
placed on the study of the functions of specific Antarctic mosses and seaweeds. Field 
measurement of eco-physiological characteristics will carried out in combination with 
experiments in controlled laboratory conditions simulating the climate of Antarctic coastal 
oases. This will enable the analysis of the productive potential of the vegetation cover and 
the adaptation of individual elements to stress factors (ultraviolet radiation, low temperature, 
high wind speed and dehydration). This information, together with microclimate data, 
information on the soil climate and the characterization of the seasonal variation of the 
environment’s physical parameters, will be further used for the creation of a mathematical 
      
 
 
9
model of primary production and decomposition of organic materials. An important aspect 
of this research programme will also be the monitoring of the cycling of mineral elements in 
the terrestrial Antarctic ecosystem, especially nitrogen and phosphorus. An analysis of the 
proportion of stable isotopes in individual sections of the ecosystem will be carried out in 
order to better understand the sources, transportation and usage of nutrients. 
 
Surveys of the flora and fauna of selected areas of the Scotia Arc have shown that some 
species are separated according to an East (BAS). It will be important to survey of new sites 
t distinguish these divides and determine the importance of different factors (food 
availability, climate and geographical isolation) to the colonisation of recently de-glaciated 
terrestrial habitats also on James Ross Island. This study will also provide evidence as to 
whether or not continental and maritime species have a common ancestry and provide 
information on plate movement since the break-up of Gondwanaland. Biogeographical 
surveys of this type will consequently help to determine the origin of Antarctic species.  
 
An integral part of the spectrum of biological research will be monitoring the presence and 
abundance of flora and fauna and limnological research focused on the analysis of lake 
sediments. Booth will be focused on obtaining information on the dynamics of development 
in terrestrial and lake ecosystems as influenced by external environmental conditions. 
 
Chemistry 
The chemical group will focus on processes connected with the release and transportation of 
biologically significant chemical elements and the transformation of organic substances in 
the Antarctic coastal oasis ecosystem. Attention will also be placed on the dynamics of the 
element cycle within the ecosystem with the use of the chemical analysis of humus samples, 
the soil organomineral layer, mosses and lichens. Samples will be taken from plots located in 
polar oases with different levels of development in order to allow a description of the 
significance of the availability of these elements and the dynamics of their metamorphoses in 
polar oases with various topoclimates and developmental histories. Capillary zone 
electrophoresis and Maldi TOF MS mass spectrophotometry will be used for the separation 
and analysis of the components of the humus. The main emphasis will be placed on the 
determination of humid acids and oxyhumolites, their chemical structures and distribution in 
a vertical substrate profile. In order to ascertain the degree of similarity and dissimilarity of 
these elements in the Antarctic oases with those in other ecosystems, a comparative analysis 
of samples from other continents will be carried out. The results thus gained will be used to 
explain the soil formation processes in Antarctic coastal oases on the ice-free coast of 
Antarctica. 
 
 
A. 2.3   Building site  
 
 
As a result of two reconnaissance missions to the coast of the northern section of the 
Antarctic Peninsula that were carried out in February and March of 2002, the northern coast 
      
 
 
10
of James Ross Island was selected as the most optimal location for the construction of a 
Czech station. Specifically, the station should be located on either the western or southern 
shore of Brandy Bay (see attachment B0 11). According to information provided by BAS, 
the conditions for landing are relatively favourable. The presence of a relatively large 
vegetation oasis and lake in the vicinity will provide excellent opportunities for carrying out 
the biological part of the proposed research programme and a large ice-free zone will allow 
geomorphological, hydrological, pedological and geochemical research. 
 
The area of James Ross Island is a traditional focus of research activities by British and 
Argentine geologists. At a minimum, this will allow the co-ordination of the geological and 
geomorphological portions of the research themes. The relatively close proximity of the 
Argentine stations of Marambio and Esperanza will provide a good basis for the connection 
of the Czech and Argentine programmes and future co-operation. The philosophy behind the 
running on the Czech station is based on the openness of Czech facilities to researchers from 
other countries, especially Argentina and UK. 
 
The location, design and equipment of a Czech research station should meet the following 
goals: 
 - the station should be situated in an accessible location, enabling it to take full advantage 
of the seasons, i.e. a location that provides conditions for several-months of systematic 
scientific work in the period of the southern hemisphere’s summer; 
 - the station’s location, architectural concept and equipment must enable conducting 
scientific research activities that may be integrated with international scientific programmes 
and, in connection with this it must be open to international cooperation, mainly in such a 
manner that would enable interconnection of its activity with other bases in the selected area;  
 - the station should be constructed in a location that is easily accessible in summer from the 
point of view of logistics (the transportation of people and material and transportation in the 
case of emergencies, e.g. acute illness, etc.) by means of transportation from neighboring 
stations;  
- the station must allow for complex scientific research programmes in the disciplines of 
biology, geography, geology and chemistry, etc. Research should be multidisciplinary and 
focused on questions concerning the ecology of coastal Antarctic oases. The focus of this 
theme is motivated by the fact that until now, the internal connections of the subsystems of 
Antarctic coastal oases (minerals, moraines, soils, water, ice, snow and the atmosphere on 
the one hand and the biosphere on the other) have not been sufficiently studied. 
 
 
A. 2.3.1    General information 
 
Virtually all the structures of the station must be constructed on relatively stable subsoil (a 
non-weathered rocky substrate reinforced by a moraine or a coastal marine terrace) 
Their function and relationship to the main building conditions the location of all other 
structures. It has been assumed that the conditions for place of objects using cargo containers 
will be favourable and the existing subsoil will be acceptable with only some minor 
modifications. 
      
 
 
11
 
During the summer of 2002/03 an expedition will be sent will the following goals of 
examining the following conditions: 
- Assessing the ice conditions in the area around Prince Gustav Channel. 
- A detailed mapping of the sea bottom and coastal relief in the areas where ship landings 
are planned. 
- Offloading construction material and other equipment for the station and its 
transportation to the construction site. 
- Completing terrain recognisance and estimating the impact of construction and of 
station buildings on the surrounding environment (CEE). 
- The possibilities on ensuring a water supply for the station. 
The expedition will be on site only for the time necessary to complete these tasks. 
 
 
A. 2.3.2  Planned site extent and distribution of structures  
 
The building site of the proposed complex of structures will cover an area of approximately 
78 by 30 meters. The need for an area of this size is the distribution of the structures with 
reference both to their location on the terrain and operational safety. The goal is to separate 
the structures where there is a potential threat occur, e.g. by fire or other dangers, and a 
separation of those structures that are not operationally related to each other. The concept 
behind the building plan respects these requirements. 
 
As is clear from its technical parameters, the station is designed for summer operation only 
and its crew will consist of 10 to 15 individuals (2 – 3 of whom will be technicians). 
 
The centre of the station is the main operational and residential structure, which is conceived 
as a structure with a permanent foundation. This building will fulfil three basic functions: 
-  space and conditions for scientific research and other work; 
-  space for accommodations, essential personal and community services; 
-  a technical complex for the provision of heating and sanitation. 
 
The main building contains in all the equipment necessary for providing these functions. 
Cargo containers are proposed for the other structures. These containers will be based on 
conventional containers with a more refined and Other buildings are proposed in containers, 
designed using conventional containers with an improved and more careful exterior surface 
finish and which would arrive pre-assembled with technology and equipment for specialized 
functions. 
 
Cables will interconnect all the structures wherever it is functional. There will be marked 
paths between the structures, but these paths will not be artificially modified in any way. 
 
 
      
 
 
12
 A. 3   Technical structure of the station 
 
It is necessary to adjust the basic conditions for the preparation of the construction of the 
station to (as well as to the seasonal character) of the project, production, transport and 
erection on site. 
 
This corresponds with the basic division into construction units and service modules. This 
has been done for methodical reasons and for ensuring concept complexity.  They can be 
modified, 
if needed.  
 A. 3.1  Station structures  
 
             B0 
01  
Central building including accommodation facilities 
  
 
02  
Waste processing 
  
 
03  
Engine/generator storehouse 
  
 
04  
Power supply building 
  
 
05  
Diesel generators 
  
 
06   
Refrigerated storehouses 
                          06/1      Food store 
                          06/2      Fuel store 
                          06/3      Spare parts store 
                        07  
Water intake and service pipe 
  
 
08  
Waste water treatment 
  
 
09  
Watercraft garage 
 
 
10  
Takeoff ramp 
11 
 External cable distribution system 
 
A.3.2  Brief description of the structures 
(See Attachments B0 XX) 
 
 
B0  01 Central building including accommodation facilities 
This is the main building of the scientific station. The building is designed as single-story 
structure, fully assembled using the K-Control construction system, which is based on 
sandwiched panels, consisting of an inner insulation layer, made of a self-extinguishing 
polystyrene, covered on both sides with OSB wood-chip panels. For climatic reasons, the 
building is designed as a simple structure with a minimal height above the surrounding 
ground. The design was chosen with consideration of the thermal properties, the requirement 
of minimal heat loss and with respect to transport and construction issues. 
 
The floor and roof panels have a thickness of 320 mm, the external walls 265 mm. In the 
part of installation of the wall collector, the sandwich will be 170 mm thick. The object is 
statically considered as a semi-three-wing building with two internal longitudinal weight-
      
 
 
13
carrying walls. The object will act in a stable manner because of the box-like arrangement of 
the vertical and horizontal elements, which are firmly interconnected. 
The building has a rectangular ground plan with dimensions 10,530 by 26,530 millimetres. It 
is covered with a sloped roof with a slope of approximately 5%. 
The location in the terrain is based on the prevailing wind directions and with the aim of 
providing the maximal solar energy collecting area. This is achieved by orientating the 
longitudinal axis of the building in an east-west direction, with the taller front facing towards 
the north. Overall, the disposition conforms rather to the expected operations than to the 
cardinal direction. The east-west orientation is however preferred because it allows the 
maximization of solar radiation collecting areas. 
 
The building foundation has been proposed, given the location of the station in a wind-
exposed littoral area, low to the land and – following the recommendation of foreign experts 
-- upon a set of wooden piers. This will minimize the air draught under the floor.  
The building will be subsequently assembled upon a prepared foundation from prefabricated 
elements that are to be slightly modified on site. The openings in the panels for windows and 
doors will be prepared and pre-tested for assembly. The roof will consist of a sandwich with 
a thickness of 320 mm and will be covered by a rubber membrane mechanically anchored 
and glued to the base. The membrane comes prepared in strips on rolls with a diameter of 
approximately 5,700 mm. Drainage is directly onto the ground without the use of gutters. 
There are a number of different alternatives for the surface treatment of the outer walls. The 
preferred alternative is the providing the surfaces of outer walls with a coating of waterproof 
plywood, 6 mm thick, on a lath grill, which will serve to protect against corrosion by 
aerosols of sea salts blown by the wind. It will also protect against mechanical abrasion 
caused by hard-frozen snow in combination with fine sand. The minimum life expectancy of 
this building is approximately ten to fifteen years. Subsequently it would be revitalized. This 
outer surface would be provided just with a colour glaze-type acrylic paint. The advantage 
here is simple repair when the paint gradually wears off. All the proposed paints are water-
based and no carbohydrate thinners will be used. 
A hot air heating system will be installed. This air conditioning equipment provides the 
heating of air using heat recovered from hot air collectors, heat pumps and heat recovery 
from the warm air during ventilation. 
Sanitary fittings will be based on the standard installation of fixtures and fittings, made 
mainly of plastics, plastic pipelines will be insulated by cavity blocks. The internal sewage 
system will also be made out of plastics. All conduits will be placed on the land surface; to 
be controllable the sewage outlet from the object will be equipped with covered inspection 
shafts. 
  
The electrical system - lights, appliances, distribution systems - the internal electric 
power supply system for this building includes the distribution net for lightning, electric 
sockets and the main circuit breaker panel. The distributors for securing the operation of 
technological facilities are part of PS 101 (see part A.3.2). The station will have multiple 
sources of electrical energy.  
      
 
 
14
  
The laboratory equipment contains the classical furnishing of working benches as well as 
a table with a stainless steel working surface, a fume chamber, a table for scales and other 
accessory furniture. The instrumentation will be variable, according to needs and character 
of the scientific research being conducted. 
  
Other furniture will be standard. For the specification of the complete outfits, a project of 
the interiors has been worked up separately. 
Floor space of Building SO 01: 
280 m2 
Volume of structure: 
1,033 m3 
 
 
B0 02   Waste processing  
 
This structure is situated in a direct adjacent to the station’s main building. It is accessible 
through the technical entry on the eastern face and directly from the ramp. The structure 
consists of a modified 20-foot long cargo container (6,055 x 2,438 x 2,591 mm). 
 
A waste management system will be placed in this structure that is in accordance with the 
requirements for waste treatment and disposal and, eventually, for the adjustment of wastes 
prior to their transport from the area. All is consistent with the Madrid Protocol of the AT. 
Because of its location, the structure will also be used for the heating of non-potable water. 
The system of heating hot water is based on the use of solar warm-water collectors, with the 
primary circuit filled with an anti-freeze mixture.  
 
It is being proposed that an OG 120 SW incinerator produced by Teamtec Norway, which is 
to be used for solid waste disposal, will be positioned in this container. This equipment is 
already being used in this region. The container will be equipped with means for storing, 
manipulation with and preparation of wastes for incineration and storage of wastes intended 
for removal from Antarctica.  
 
Floor space: 
14.78 m2 
Volume of structure: 
38.30 m3 
  
B0  03 Engine/Generator storehouse  
 
This structure is consists of a modified 20-foot long cargo container. The object will serve as 
a storehouse for engines and generators during the winter break. Windmills, tools and spare 
parts for the set of engines/motors stored there. The structure will be connected to the 
electric distribution system, and contain lighting and sockets. A windmill will be constructed 
on the container’s roof. 
Floor space: 
14.78 m2 
Volume of structure: 
38.30 m3 
 
B0  04 Power supply building  
      
 
 
15
 
This structure is consists of a modified 20-foot long cargo container that will have been 
outfitted with the necessary equipment in the Czech Republic. It will serve for operation of 
the production and distribution of electricity. It will be provided with thermal insulation. A 
windmill will be constructed on the container’s roof. 
Floor space: 
14.78 m2 
Volume of structure: 
38.30 m3 
 
B0  05   Diesel generator 
 
This structure is consists of a modified 20-foot long cargo container that will have both a 
permanently mounted and mobile diesel generators for the production of electric power. The 
generators will be anchored to the floor of the container, accessory elements for the 
completion of the diesel central will be fitted in the container space. From within, the system 
is insulated with a sandwich layer of thermal and acoustic insulation for reduction of 
emissions into the ambient environment and to the accommodations. A windmill will be 
constructed on the container’s roof. 
Floor space: 
14.78 m2 
Volume of structure: 
38.30 m3 
 
B0  06  Refrigerated storehouses  
 
A series of storage structures complementing the collection of single-purpose cargo-
container structures.  
 
B0  06/1 Food store  
 
This structure will serve mainly for storage of preserved foodstuffs that must be kept in a 
cool place. Bulk packages of foodstuff are placed on shelves or loose in the container. 
During the primary transport, it will be used for transportation of durable dry foodstuffs with 
the rest of the space being used for the transportation of non-noxious materials. This is a 
standard container without thermal insulation and a windmill will be installed upon it. 
Floor space: 
14.78 m2 
Volume of structure: 
38.30 m3 
 
B0  06/2  Fuel store  
 
It will serve for storage of fuels: diesel oil and petrol. The container that will be used for the 
storage of fuels is to be modified to meet safety and ecological requirements for storage of 
oil products. The container has a double floor that creates 200-liter storage reservoirs. They 
are distributed throughout the container. Their upper side (the floor of the container itself) is 
made of perforated zinc-coated steel. On the floor area, steel barrels with a volume of 200 
litres will be place. This structure is located in the most remote part of the research station 
farthest away from the residential structure. Given the necessity for periodic fuel re-supply, it 
has been located as close as possible to the disembarkation point on the shoreline. A 
      
 
 
16
windmill will be constructed on the container’s roof. 
Floor space: 
14.78 m2 
Volume of structure: 
38.30 m3 
 
B0  06/3   Spare parts store  
 
This structure will serve for the storage of spare parts and material that will be used 
according to the needs of the station. Eventually it will also be used for the storage of treated 
and packaged waste materials intended for transport out, etc. The structure will be equipped 
with collapsed ready-to-assemble shelves prepared for assembly in case of need. It is 
assumed that the container will be utilized also for storage of packaging materials (wooden 
pallets, cardboard boxes, etc.) for a possible treatment as mixed waste for incineration. A 
windmill will be constructed on the container’s roof. 
Floor space: 
14.78 m2 
Volume of structure: 
38.30 m3 
 
B0  07  Water supply and distribution 
 
Water for normal hygienic needs as well as for cooking is supposed to be taken from natural 
resources. This is the way water is obtained at all other stations on King George Island. For 
drinking needs and meeting daily nutritional requirements for minerals, bottled water 
imported into Antarctica will be used. 
 
The water supply will be the local freshwater (glacial) stream that flows down from the front 
of the glacier located northeast of the station area. This stream flows around the proposed 
building site and enters the sea on the northwest coast, north dropping from an unnamed 
cliff. The base of the water supply system will be an accumulation basin with an area of 
approximately 3 m3. This basin will be created by deepening the streambed to a depth of 
approximately 80 cm.  Prior to the beginning of accumulation, a zeolite filter that has been 
placed in a perforated PE-vessel will be sunk into the deepest part of the basin. During the 
shutting down of the station for the winter, the pump will be dismounted, the basin emptied 
using sluice gates and the filter will be washed and stored. 
Water surface: 
3 m2     
Distribution length: 
c. 50 m 
  
B0  08  Waste water treatment 
 
The structure will house facilities for the basic treatment of sewage water from the station. 
Since the wastewater will be biological sewage only without any chemicals, disposal is 
rather easy. The disposal of wastewater will conform to the requirement of draining the 
sewage below sea level in order to secure immediate dilution and to avoid any impact on the 
station’s freshwater systems. The proposed route of the wastewater pipeline uses gravity to 
drain the untreated materials. Given the need to minimize the solid particle content, the re-
pumping and grinding of sewage will also be carried out.  
Total amount of domestic sewage will be 2.25 m3 /day 
      
 
 
17
Total length of the pipeline approximately will be 200 m 
 
B0  09   Watercraft garage  
 
The object is used for storage of watercraft. The station’s watercraft will be two inflatable 
boats of the type similar to GRANT RAID MK III. For storage, one will be hung under the 
ceiling of the container, the other will be placed on a undercarriage on the floor. A windmill 
will be installed on the roof of this structure. 
Floor space: 
14.78 m2 
Volume of structure: 
38.30 m3 
 
 
 
B0  10    Launching ramp 
 
The construction of the ramp will allow for a safe and controllable location for floating 
watercraft and conditions for the unloading of supplies and materials (foodstuff, fuels etc.) 
during the working season and during the seasonal abandonment and closing down of the 
station. The ramp’s foundation is the creation a flat area sloping off of the existing terrain to 
allow for access to and from the coast; this will be attained by levelling the natural terrain 
with local coarse gravel and aggregates to achieve the flattest possible surface. Because a 
launching cart is to be constructed and used, it is not thought that it will be necessary to 
create a guide rail, and that the surface modifications will suffice. The exact position and 
dimensions will be determined by on-the-spot reconnaissance. The data provided are 
preliminary. 
Built-up area 
- trimming of the ramp plain: 
150 m2 
 
- plank platform: 
  20 m2 
 
B0   11   External cable distributions 
 
This concerns the external cable connections among the individual structures. Considering 
the character of the station’s operation, which is based on pedestrian traffic only by people 
with knowledge of the local conditions, the external cable distributions are to be placed in 
shallow trenches that the local ground conditions will permit. The cable routes will be placed 
along the walkways and this will be indicated by markings. 
 
 
A. 3.3  Operational infrastructure of the station 
 
 
Infrastructure in the following areas is to be installed in the individual buildings: 
  
  
electricity production  
  
   
heat production  
  
  
water management 
  
  
waste disposal management 
      
 
 
18
  
  
warehousing 
  
  
maintenance 
  
  
transportation 
 
  
laboratories 
 
  
electrical devices (weak current) 
 
  
measuring and controls  
 
  
basic outfit of the operation object 
 
 
A. 3.3.1  A brief description of the infrastructure providing the station’s 
main functions 
 
This scientific research station is conceived of as being an insular system. This means 
resources that are either locally available (water) or that work using solar and wind power 
cover all needs. These sources are backed up by energy systems for production of electric 
energy or heat using diesel generators with a defined 100% reserve capacity. Each aspect of 
the infrastructure is divided up into blocks, each of which will now be described. 
  
 A. 3.3.1.1 Electric energy production 
 
The part of the infrastructure deals with the creation, distribution and consumption of 
electric energy. It will utilize two sources, namely wind energy as the primary source and 
diesel generators as the secondary source.  
A significant part of the proposed electric energy consumption of 20-25kW can be covered 
by the wind-generated power (windmills). Provided that the conditions on the selected site 
will be similar to those on the South Shetlands, we may expect approximately 60% of the 
time during the Antarctic summer that there will be exploitable wind velocities with a 
dispensable power of 1400kWh per wind generator. 
 
We propose to use eight wind generators with a nominal capacity 1400W each. These will 
provide 50-60% of the seasonal consumption of electric energy. The wind aggregates will 
supply electric energy to the distribution system through a block of batteries and converters 
and from there to the distribution systems 3PEN AC 50Hz 230/400 V/TN-C, 3 NPE AC 
230/400 V/TN-S and 2DC 48V.  The distribution systems are separated with respect to the 
type and importance of the appliances hooked up to them. 
       
The electric batteries fulfil an important task in compensating the disproportion between the 
supply and consumption of the electric energy during normal operations. If there were to be a 
serious failure of the electric energy supply, the capacity of the full loaded batteries is to be 
designed to supply full coverage of the expected average consumption for two hours (in 
this case approximately 10kWh). The two hours is considered sufficient time to for 
contingency to the failure, refilling fuel into the tanks or starting-up of the backup source. 
Ni-Cd batteries with a nominal voltage 24V are suggested because of their particular 
characteristics.  
 
      
 
 
19
The whole of electric energy supply system is backed-up using liquid fuel sources, ensuring 
a supply of is in the event of a total lack of wind-generated electricity energy. Two Honda 
EXT 12 diesel generators (one in reserve for extreme conditions) have been preliminarily 
selected as a generator with a sufficiently stabile capacity of 10kW. This generator uses low 
viscosity oil, is 3 x 230/400V, has fully body-supported body with a sound damper, a 
transport cart and a pulley and is equipped with automatic regulation and remote starting. 
The total weight is 380 kg. 
 
For instantaneous mobile sources of electric energy, portable petrol generators with manual 
start-up and capacities up to 6kW (which is not a problem in this case, as petrol must be in 
the fuel store for the ship’s engines) will be used.  
 
A. 3.3.1.2   Heat supply 
 
The production of heat will be based on the expected and/or real consumption. An external 
temperature of -15°C was chose for calculation purposes. The heat loss from the structure is 
8.4kW. According to meteorological data from surrounding stations, the average temperature 
during the summer from beginning of November until the end of March oscillates around 
+1.5°C.  If the average temperature inside the object is 23°C, the temperature difference to 
be covered by heating will be on average 21.5°K. This corresponds with an average heat loss 
4.52 kW. Under such conditions, the consumption of heat energy for heating for the 120 
days of the Antarctic summer amounts to 13,020 kWh. 
 
For heating, three independent sources are available, namely: 
- electricity 
- solar energy 
- thermal pump 
 
Solar energy production is divided into two parts - a hot water and a hot air system. The 
latter is intended to support the heating of the residential building. This means that solar 
energy will serve in the daytime as the preferred method preheating of air circulating through 
the hot-air heating system. The hot water produced by solar energy is to be used preferably 
as water for hygienic needs. 
 
A thermal pump is an integral part of heating system of the residential building. The 
proposed capacity that is sufficient for the needs of the heating system is 9kW. It forms the 
basic part of the heat source for heating the residential building. Its expected heating factor 
in the Antarctic conditions is estimated to be about 2.5, but on colder days it will be lower. 
During the warmer days of summer, it will be higher. It is accepted to use the least 
ecologically harmful heating fluids, i.e. R134a, R407c, etc. Through their use, the 
consumption of the electric energy for heating will be reduced from the originally assumed 
13,020 kWh per season to approximately 5,300kWh per season (i.e. by 41%). In the same 
way, the consumption of fuel in the electric energy sources could by lowered. In other words, 
with a steady wind and a sufficient generating capacity in the generators, the production of 
electric energy from the wind generators (7200 kWh/season) together with solar energy 
      
 
 
20
could be sufficient for covering the needs of the heat pump (5,300 kWh only) as well as 
heating water. 
 
A. 3.3.1.3  Water supply 
 
At the station, water will be used for: 
- 
drinking water and hygienic needs (max. 15 persons) 
- 
cooking ( 30 meals/day) 
- 
research needs (laboratories) 
- 
fire equipment. 
 
Water for drinking and cooking will be quality potable water. Water for the laboratories will 
be prepared according to research requirements. For hygienic needs, bacterially 
uncontaminated water will be used. The source of water will be the chosen fresh water 
stream sustained from a melting glacier or snow patches, flowing by gravity to the sea. 
 
 
The water will be transported to the station: 
a) by gravity from a reservoir, if the configuration of the terrain allows (recommended 
elevation min. 15m) 
b) by pumping from the accumulation reservoir. 
 
In the accumulation reservoir, the mechanical pre-cleaning and settling of possible 
suspended solids will occur. For the gravity-driven water supply, the necessary water 
accumulation and hygienic purity of the water will be ensured. The reservoir will also serve 
for the internal and external fire safety of the station. The water supply system will be made 
of a PET pipes. At the lowest point, a sludge removal device that will allow the system to be 
completely emptied will be provided. 
 
Given the permanent occupation of the station by 15 people, the water needs according the 
guidelines in 9/73 MLVH will be: 
Qd = 15.0 x 15 = 2.250 l/d, i.e. 2.25 m-3.d-1 
qaver. = 0.03 l.s-1 
qmax = 0.25 l.s-1 
 
A. 3.3.1. 4  Waste water disposal  
 
Sewage wastewater – this is the wastewater from the hygienic facilities and from the 
preparation of food. The amount of waste water is given by the amount of water consumed: 
 
Balance sheet 
Q yearly 
Q daily 
q average 
q max 
m3 per year 
m3.d-1 
l.s-1 
l.s-1 
675 
2.25 
0.03 
0.25 
 
      
 
 
21
This will be normal domestic wastewater. The production of contaminants is calculated 
based on one equivalent inhabitant (EI). For the calculations, 15 EI are assumed in the 
station. 
 
Given a daily water consumption of 2.25 m3.d-1, the production of contaminants is 
 
kg.d-1 
kg/year 
mg.l-1 
BOD5 
0.90 
270 
400 
DS 
0.83 
248 
367 
COD 
0.67 
203 
300 
pH 
 
6.0 – 8.0 
 
dissolved 
matter 
1.88 
563 
834 
N total 
0.18 
54 
80 
P total 
0.02 
7 
10 
Where: 
BOD 5  
- biological coefficient of oxygen 
N - nitrogen 
DS 
- dissolved solids 
P - phosphorus 
COD 
- chemical coefficient of oxygen 
 
After the completion of the next project stage, these requirements will be adjusted and the 
project will be adapted to reflect this.  
 
 
A. 4  Basic data and information sources 
 
Waste disposal in the Antarctic. Report SCAR Panel of Experts (ATCM XIII 4), Australian 
Antarctic Division 1989 
 
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991), Madrid, Reprint of 
SCAR Cambridge, May 1993, 67 pp. 
 
Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica, SCAR,  
COMNAP, 1996 
 
Final report of the Twenty-fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Saint Petersburg, 
Ruusian Federation, 9 – 20 July 2001 
 
Climatic data obtained by realization of own scientific programmes between    1994 - 1997 
and between 1999 – 2001 
 
James Ross Island – map 1 : 100 000.  Series BAS 100, Sheet 2, Edition 1, 1995 
 
Aerial photographs of  selected perts of James Ross Island. Source: BAS    
      
 
 
22
 
Personal findings and information 
 
Information and experience acquired by stays of employees of Masaryk University Brno, 
Institute of Botany AS CR Trebon and others on the stations: H. Arctowski (Poland), 
Bellingshausen (Russia), Cdte. Ferraz (Brazil), PDTE E. Frei (Chile), Great Wall (China), 
King Sejong (Korea), Machu Picchu (Peru), Rothera and Signy (UK) and Vernadski 
(Ukraine). 
 
Findings obtained by reconnaissance travels and by the stay of persons responsible for the 
project of the Czech station: 
- on the possible sites proposed for localisation of the Czech station, 
- by the trips of British and Ukrainian scientific ships in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula.  
 
 
A. 5   Environmental impact of the construction 
 
Complex evaluation of potential environmental impacts of the station projected is being 
carried out at present as requested in international accord (draft CEE). An evaluation of the 
technical parameters of energy production and waste management has been prepared under 
the direction of the Ministry of Environment of the Czech Republic and in accordance with 
Czech and international environmental legislation. The environmental impact on the abiotic 
and biotic components of the station’s surroundings will be assessed “in situ” immediately 
after the approval of proposed station site.  
 
A draft CEE will be prepared and distributed to the consultative parties and CEP in October 
of this year. Comments received to the draft CEE will be discussed at the XXVI ATCM 
2003. The final CEE will subsequently be issued. After the addressing of comments 
received, including a written summary of such comments, the project will proceed no earlier 
than 15 month from the date of publishing the draft CEE, pursuant to paragraph 5, Article 3, 
Annex I to the Madrid Protocol. 
 
 
A. 5.1  Basic starting points of environmental care 
 
The Czech research station complex in Antarctica is designed to minimize its impact on the 
local ecosystem. The preparation and processing of the proposed project respects to the 
maximum the Protocol on Environmental Protection of the Antarctic Treaty. In assessing the 
environmental impacts of the station activities, the analysis of anthropogenic influences in 
the Antarctic region issued by SCAR and COMNAP in 1996 entitled “Monitoring of 
Environmental Impacts from Scientific Research and Operations in Antarctica” was taken 
into consideration (see Section A.5 – Basic Data and Information). In addition to analysis, 
this report also addresses monitoring programmes that will be applied in estimating the 
quality of activities of the stations and their environmental impact. 
 
      
 
 
23
Given the expected level of activity at the station, the environmental care has two aspects. 
The primary one is the concept of the station and the programme of its use, which is based 
on the seasonal character of the station. With respect to energy, it is based on the use of 
actually available and renewable energy sources. This concept has as its aim in part the 
limiting of environmental impacts and in part to ensure a realistic estimation of the technical 
needs for such demanding climatic conditions. The other important aspect is that the station 
will not be operated during the winter when massive energy demands would lead to the large 
consumption of liquid fuels. It is therefore realistic to assume that the overall environmental 
impact of the station will be minimal. 
 
 
 
A. 5.2 Wastes  
 
A. 5.2.1  Wastes from the station’s construction  
 
During the construction of the station, two types of waste will be created: 
a. Wastes of a municipal nature. It is assumed that they will amount to approximately 300kg, 
which will have to be placed into plastic barrels and either taken away from the Antarctic 
Treaty area by the construction crew, or disposed of in one of the permanent stations, 
b.  Wastes created during assembly and building activities. 
b.1. Building waste 
It is a matter of trimmings and pieces of wood that constitute the basic building material. 
Because of production and pre-assembly operations prior to dispatch, this amount will be 
optimised from the point of view of maximal usability. The usable cut timber can be used for 
the building of waste bins or shelves in containers, intended for operational use, etc. 
Appropriate construction elements will also be stored for possible repairs, etc.  
 
b.2. Wrapping materials 
There will be of two kinds - safely disposable wood and paper and PET foil. 
 
The storage of wooden containers (boxes, pieces of wood, etc.) for later use is planned. 
Cardboard and PET foil will be sorted and can be modified to create an insulation layer, e.g. 
for insulating the inner walls of the containers. Unused wastes will be bounded in such a way 
as to minimize the space needed for storage and thus prepared for transport from the station. 
 
To ensure the maximal use of wrapping material on the spot is a presupposition for a 
minimal of hauling and the elimination of incineration the preparatory phase prior to the 
station’s occupation.  
 
The detailed amounts of waste will be calculated in the next phase of preparation, as soon as 
questions concerning the expedition have been clarified with the manufacturers and 
suppliers of individual components, structures and elements of the station. In principle, all 
will be carried out in accordance with the corresponding provisions of the Attachment No. 3 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
      
 
 
24
 
A. 5.2.2   Wastes created during station operation 
 
 For purposes of estimating their occurrence and their disposal, wastes arising from the 
operation of the station are divided as follows: 
 
A. 5.2.2.1 Solid wastes 
 
 Solid wastes that may be classified as municipal waste will be sorted as combustible and 
non-combustible during their collection. 
 
The mixed combustible waste, i.e. remains of office paper, wrapping paper, wrapping of 
foodstuffs and consumables, PET bottles, PET wraps etc. will be separated and placed in 
designated boxes in the container.  
 
In accordance with the requirements of the Madrid protocol, the non-combustible wastes, 
e.g. battery elements, glass, rubber etc. will be deposited in special boxes and prepared for 
transport from the area. 
   
Ash created during incineration belongs to this category and is therefore considered as waste 
to be transported away from the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
Solid wastes created during the station’s research activities, especially those created in the 
biological and physical-chemical laboratories, can be defined as non-contaminated as long as 
we are referring to biological remains, which will be incinerated. 
 
The disposal of solid wastes in the station will be carried out by an incineration process in 
special equipment placed in the Structure 002, the waste incineration plant connected 
directly to the main building of the station. 
 
The incineration cycle will be based on experience from a specific plant. According to the 
information obtained from other stations, we assume a cycle at intervals of two weeks, with 
the amount of waste to be incinerated being approximately 200 kg.  
 
The collection and sorting of wastes into prepared bins will be carried out inside the cargo 
containers. Combustible wastes will be incinerated as municipal-type mixed waste.  
 
Consultations with a specialized manufacturer of incinerators, TEAMTEC Norway, led to 
the recommendation of GOLAR 120 Marine type incinerator. 
 
The incineration plant consists of following four main parts: incineration chamber, electric 
control panel, exhaust for combustion gases and controller (damper) of waste gas exhausts. 
 
The Fremo HF-210-R atomising pressure burner for vacuum incineration, modified for our 
purposes, has a capacity 5.7kg/h.  For special purposes and conditions, nozzles with other 
      
 
 
25
capacities and/or with an automatic programme and a photoresistor sensing can be delivered. 
  
This incineration equipment can incinerate all types of solid wastes based on their heating 
value: 
Classified material      
17.270 kJ.kg-1 (dry paper) 
Wastes of type II 
 
  9.901 kJ.kg-1 
 
Type II wastes can be processed in 200 litre batches by this incineration equipment at a 
frequency of 3-5 hours. This type of waste is defined as consisting of roughly a uniform 
mixture with a maximum moisture content of 50% by weight and a maximum non-
combustible residue of 7% content. 
 
The high temperature in the combustion chamber (in some cases up to 1400oC) secures 
a smokeless, complete combustion. 
 
The solid wastes in the gas exhaust are neutralized (disposed) by the burner ensuring that the 
process is ecologically safe. As soon as the waste gases pass the burner zone, they are mixed 
with the cooled air before entering the spent gases exhaust and leave the plant through a 
chimney. 
 
The wastes should be prepared to a heating value of approximately 10,000 kJ/kg. For the 
mixing process, a manual will be prepared for the operators so that the combustion process 
proceeds smoothly with a consumption of support fuel (diesel oil) that is as small as 
possible. 
 
The incinerator is equipped with boxes for sorting of wastes into the following groups: 
combustibles, glass, plastics, metals, rubber, batteries. 
 
Non-combustible wastes will be prepared for safe storage prior transport away from 
Antarctica. For transport, the sorting of the wastes according to the SCAR is crucial. 
 
It is assumed that the wastes require this type of disposal will be prescribed by the waste 
management plan and will be concentrated in PE transport barrels with a lid. After being 
filled to the recommend weight, they will be put on a ship and shipped to a country where 
their disposal will be carried out. 
 
Given the distance from Europe, this treatment will be carried out on the basis of a contract 
in a South American port. 
 
A. 5.2.2.2  Liquid wastes 
 
The standard liquid wastes like domestic sewage at a maximal amount of roughly 2.5 m3 will 
be drained directly into the sea. Additional liquid wastes will consist of: 
 
-  chemical solutions from laboratory research. These kinds of wastes will be specific the 
      
 
 
26
types of research being carried out in the laboratory. It is assumed, that for the type of 
laboratory research selected specific wastes in their given quantities will be directly 
neutralized (if necessary) and their packing and placing in transport containers will be 
specified. 
 
- liquid fuels from oil products can be primarily expected to be used oils from engines and 
generators and spillage from fuelling. This will be collected in separated canisters and 
returned to the supply ship either for incineration outside of the Antarctic Treaty area or for 
use as fuels for the ship’s engines. 
 
A. 5.2.2.3  Gaseous wastes 
 
They will consist of:   
- exhaust gases of diesel-electric generators. Their amount will be maximally minimized 
through the use of renewable energy sources, 
-  combustion gases created during the disposal of solid combustible wastes from the 
operation of the station. 
  
Given the complex the energy management plan and the extent of station activities, the 
occurrence of gaseous wastes can be defined as more or less insignificant.  
  
 
A. 5.3  Waste management plan 
 
In accordance with the regulations that are being prepared on the initiative of SCAR, the 
procedure for waste management will be further elaborated on the basis on monitoring 
carried out in 1996 by SCAR and COMNAP and which is set out in Attachment 2 of that 
report. 
In accordance with the Article 8, Attachment No. 3 of the Madrid Protocol, the waste 
management plan will be further detailed at the next project stage and it will observe 
following structure and categorization of wastes: 
    Group 1.  Sewage and domestic liquid wastes, 
    Group 2.  Other liquid wastes and chemicals including fuels and lubricants, 
    Group 3.  Solid substances, intended for incineration, 
    Group 4.  Other solid wastes. 
 
Pursuant to this structure, a realistic estimation of waste production will be quantified in the 
next stages of the project’s preparation. The level of production should be monitored during 
the first working season and evaluated according to the conditions mentioned in the 
Attachment No. 3 of the Protocol and to the expectations set out in the next stage of the 
project.  
The technical disposal of particular types of waste is described in the corresponding text 
sections above and includes proposals for their disposal.  
 
 
      
 
 
27
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. 6   Conclusions  
    
The project of a Czech Antarctic station is the result of many years work by that part of the 
Czech scientific community that is engaged in research into issues relating to polar 
environments, a community that is internationally recognized for its research in a number of 
different fields of polar research. 
 
The aim of the station is to create conditions for further research that will enable the further 
integration of the Czech scientific community into international research activities. 
 
The project proposal conceives of the station as the most optimal ecological system possible. 
In its technical specifics, it should answer questions of a general systematic influence on 
permanently sustainable development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
28
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        B.     Graphic Attachments 
 
         B0 01   
Central unit incl. accommodation facilities, ground floor plan, rooms    
listing, northern and western view and section A – A´ 
 
         B0 02       
  Waste processing 
 
         B0 06/1, 06/3    Operational stores 
 
         B0 04        
  Power supply building 
  
         B0 05       
  Diesel generators 
 
         B0 06/2     
  Fuel store  
 
         B0 09        
  Watercraft garage 
 
         B0 10     
Czech Antarctic station: generally view on the supposed   
configuration of station objects (in idealised area) 
 
         B0 11                   Map of north part of Ulu Peninsula (James Ross I.) with Brandy Bay 
– a possible area of the Czech station 
 
 
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory trial version http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory trial version http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory trial version http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory trial version http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory trial version http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory trial version http://www.fineprint.com
BO 10
CZECH ANTARCTIC STATION: GENERAL VIEW ON THE SUPPOSED CONFIGURATION
OF STATION OBJECTS (IN IDEALISED AREA)
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
0
5 km
B0 11 MAP OF NORTH PART OF ULU PENINSULA (JAMES ROSS I.)
          WITH BRANDY BAY - A POSSIBLE AREA OF THE CZECH STATION
