 
 
CEP V 
Information Paper IP - ? 
CEP Agenda Item 3 
Australia 
 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the CEP Observer SC-CCAMLR XX,  
22 October to 2 November 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by Australia 
 
 
 
 
Report of the CEP Observer to SC-CCAMLR XX, 
22 October to 2 November 2001 
 
At the second meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection, the Chairman 
of the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR, who attended the CEP as an observer, 
proposed a reciprocal arrangement whereby a representative of the CEP should attend 
meetings of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR (SC-CAMLR) as an observer.  At 
CEP IV Dr Tony Press (Australia) was nominated to represent the CEP at SC-
CAMLR XX (October 2001). 
CCAMLR XX and SC-CAMLR XX were held in Hobart from 22 October to 2 
November 2001.  All CCAMLR Members attended, including Namibia at its first 
meeting as a Member of the Commission.  The Netherlands, a Contracting Party, also 
attended. 
The Report of CCAMLR XX noted the attendance of the Chair of SC-CAMLR at 
CEP IV, and that Dr Press (Australia) represented the CEP at SC-CCAMLR XX. 
As part of the Commission's continuing efforts to develop improved relations with 
non-Contracting Parties with interests in fishing in the Convention Area or trade of 
toothfish, a number of non-Contracting Parties (Belize, Mauritius, Panama, 
Seychelles, Vanuatu and the People’s Republic of China) were invited to attend 
CCAMLR XX.  The People’s Republic of China, Mauritius and Seychelles were 
represented. 
SC-CAMLR XX 
Fishery Status and Trends 
A total of 98 414 tonnes of krill (Euphausia superba) was caught during the 2000/01 
split-year, compared with 114 425 tonnes in 1999/2000.  The total catch was taken 
from Area 48 in the South Atlantic by Japan, Republic of Korea, Poland, Ukraine and 
the USA.  A shift of fishing activity within Area 48 to Subareas 48.1 and 48.2 was 
evident, with the highest catches taking place in Subarea 48.1 (South Sheltand 
Islands).  This change in the fishery is attributed to easier access through reduced sea-
ice extent.  To assist the Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management 
(WG-EMM) in monitoring the development of the krill fishery, the Scientific 
Committee requested details on krill processing, economic analysis and market 
development.  The Scientific Committee also noted the value of catch and effort data 
from the Japanese fishery and encouraged the submission of similar data from other 
participants of the fishery. 
The total reported catch of finfish in the Convention Area during the 2000/01 split 
year was 12 998 tonnes, compared with 21 340 tonnes in 1999/2000.  Of this total, 
10 619 tonnes of toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) were reported 
(9 995 and 624 tonnes respectively), compared with 17 146 tonnes in 1999/2000.  The 
reported catch of mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari) was 2 368 tonnes.  
The major catches of finfish reported were from Subarea 48.3 (5 484 tonnes), 
Division 58.5.1 (2 546 tonnes) and Division 58.5.2 (2 274 tonnes). 
The Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) estimated illegal, 
unreported and unregulated (IUU) toothfish catches for the 2000/01 split year at 7 599 
tonnes, compared with 6 546 tonnes for the 1999/2000 split year and 4 913 tonnes for 
 
 
 
the 1998/99 split year.  The Scientific Committee noted the WG-FSA conclusion that 
the Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) data presented to that Group suggested Area 
51 had assumed importance as a source of D. eleginoides and that it was not possible 
to conclude whether this was a true indication of increased catch in Area 51 or 
whether it was a reflection of improved information on catch location arising from the 
CDS.  Illegal fishing continued to occur around Crozet, Kerguelen and Heard Islands, 
but has decreased around the Prince Edward Islands probably due to low levels of 
toothfish there. 
Crabs were taken as by-catch of the pot fishery in Subarea 48.3, however there was no 
directed fishery for crabs in the Convention Area during the 2000/01 split year.  An 
exploratory jig fishery on squid (Martialia hyadesi) in Subarea 48.3 was undertaken 
by The Republic of Korea and the UK during the 2000/01 split year.  The total catch 
was 2 tonnes. 
Dependent Species 
SC-CAMLR noted that the WG-EMM and the Working Group on Incidental 
Mortality Arising from Longline Fishing (WG-IMALF) reports contained new 
information relating to status and trends in certain populations of dependent species: 
a change in the Adélie penguin populations at Ross Island (Subarea 88.1) relating 
to the extent of winter sea-ice; 
declines in Adélie penguin breeding populations at King George Island (Subarea 
48.1) concurrent with reductions of krill biomass estimates from the same area; 
a decrease in gentoo and macaroni penguin breeding populations at Bird Island, 
South Georgia (Subarea 48.3), related to the potential changes in krill availability; 
a possible reduction in rates of increases of fur seal breeding populations at Cape 
Shirreff (Subarea 48.1); 
major declines of black-browed albatrosses at the Falkland/Malvinas Islands 
which may result in the reclassification of the species as "Vulnerable" by IUCN; 
and 
substantial declines in wandering and grey headed albatrosses, southern and 
northern giant petrels and white chinned petrels at Marion Island (Subarea 58.6).  
These changes were attributed to increased incidental mortality as a result of a 
change in longline fishing effort for tuna outside the Convention Area and IUU 
fishing for Dissostichus spp. 
The Scientific Committee reviewed WG-EMM’s discussions regarding the 
interpretation of CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) indices and their 
usefulness in addressing management issues.  WG-EMM agreed to consider whether: 
the nature and use of existing CEMP data continued to be appropriate for 
addressing the original objectives; 
these objectives remain appropriate and/or sufficient; and 
additional data was available which should be incorporated into CEMP or be used 
in conjunction with CEMP data. 
The Scientific Committee agreed the Subgroup on Methods should: consider new, and 
revisions to exiting, CEMP standard methods; advise on and review new techniques 
for the analysis of parameters; and develop criteria to evaluate the methods used in the 
collection of non-CEMP parameters identified by WG-EMM as relevant to its work. 
Analysis of 2001 data for seabird by-catch for regulated fishing in the Convention 
Area showed a reduction in the seabird by-catch rate in Subareas 58.6 and 58.7 from 
0.022 birds/thousand hooks in 1999/2000 to 0.018 (199 birds – a 61% reduction over 
last year).  The estimated seabird by-catch for Subarea 48 was 0.0014 birds/thousand 
 
 
 
hooks and similar to last year’s value (0.0004).  There was no seabird by-catch 
reported for Subarea 88.1.  It was noted and commended by the Scientific Committee 
that the seabird by-catch in respect to longline operations in the 2000/01 season had 
continued to maintain the high standard of 1999/00 in Subarea 48.3 and had shown 
considerable improvement in the South African EEZ in Subareas 58.6 and 58.7. 
The total seabird by-catch for the whole Convention Area for IUU longline fishing in 
2000/01 was estimated at 36 000–69 000 (lower level) to 48 000–90 000 birds (higher 
level). This compares with 26 400−35 300 (lower level) to 50 900−68 300 (higher 
level) for 1999/2000, 18 000–20 000 (lower level) to 44 000–59 000 (higher level) for 
1998/99 and 43 000–54 000 (lower level) to 76 000–101 000 (higher level) for 
1997/98.  The Scientific Committee endorsed its conclusions of recent years that the 
levels of mortality reported remain entirely unsustainable for the populations of 
albatrosses, giant petrels, and white-chinned petrels breeding in the Convention Area. 
The Scientific Committee noted and endorsed the advice concerning mitigation 
measures and indicated its support for incorporating appropriate advice into 
Conservation Measure 29/XIX, specifically regarding the use of scupper screens to 
prevent offal discharge, the emerging developments of streamer lines, undertaking 
trials on bait loss, monitoring the success of underwater setting, and further trialing of 
line weighting.  The Scientific Committee requested Members further support these 
research developments. 
ISSUES TAKEN FROM SC-CCAMLR TO CCAMLR XX 
Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area 
The estimated IUU catch for all areas in the 2000/01 split year was 7 599 tonnes, 
compared with 6 546 tonnes in 1999/00 and 4 913 tonnes in 1998/99.  30 152 tonnes 
was reported via CDS as having been caught outside the Convention Area.  The 
Scientific Committee advised the Commission that it had “concluded that practically 
all the toothfish catches reported from Area 51 represent catches taken as a result of 
IUU fishing in other areas inside the Convention Area” and recommended that the 
Commission task the Secretariat to provide further CDS data to WG-FSA  The 
Commission agreed to this recommendation and to more closely investigate CDS 
records for Area 51.  The Commission also asked two Members to report at 
CCAMLR XXI on their respective verification procedures used for catches in Area 
51.   
The Commission decided that: 
a list of Flags of Convenience should be compiled and maintained by the 
Secretariat together with a consistent process for identifying such flags; 
CCAMLR efforts to eliminate IUU fishing in the Convention Area should be 
further strengthened; and 
toothfish landings attributed to Area 51 needed to be properly verified, and that 
the level of misreporting could seriously undermine the objective of the 
Convention. 
The Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp. adopted by the 
Commission at CCAMLR XVIII, requires that Parties document the nature and origin 
of all toothfish catches, transhipments, landings and imports involving their flag 
vessels, ports and markets.  The CDS came into force on 7 May 2000 and the 
Commission agreed that it had commenced in an encouraging manner, with signs that 
the scheme was proving useful in combating IUU fishing for Dissostichus spp, 
making trade in toothfish more difficult and less profitable. 
 
 
 
Further refinements were made to the CDS and associated documents (Conservation 
Measure 170/XIX) at the Commission meeting to include revisions of procedures 
dealing with export verification, greater use of VMS for verification of catch 
documents, confiscated or seized catches and operation of the CDS Fund. 
The Commission noted that while the current CDS system may allow the opportunity 
for fraudulent practices, it is having a positive impact on addressing IUU fishing 
activities, in that it is providing new and valuable data and information to CCAMLR, 
fraudulent catch documents are being identified and acted upon, and seizures and 
confiscations of possible IUU products are occurring.  It was recommended that 
further improvements could be made such as establishing a paperless web-based 
electronic CDS.  The Commission was advised that it plans to host a workshop on the 
development of such an electronic system. 
The Commission recognised that addressing non-cooperation by non-Contracting 
Parties with CCAMLR remained a key priority and as such revised CM 118/XVII to 
provide a clear and consistent process for evaluating the cooperation of non-
Contracting Parties, and to provide for effective measures to address non-cooperation. 
Assessment and Avoidance of Incidental Mortality of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources 
The Commission endorsed the Scientific Committee’s recommendation to discontinue 
the current system of reporting on the collection of marine debris by vessels at sea, as 
few reports have been received and all were essentially anecdotal. 
The Commission noted a general increase in levels of debris, including numerous 
plastic packaging bands, and that entanglements of Antarctic fur seals had doubled 
compared with last year, with plastic packaging bands accounting for the majority of 
these entanglements.  To this end the Commission requested Members to improve 
their standards of disposal and treatment of debris, particularly in respect of plastic 
packaging bands. 
The Commission noted unprecedented levels of longline fishing hooks were recorded 
in association with wandering albatrosses at Bird Island, South Georgia indicating 
widespread discarding of gear and offal complete with hooks.  Similar findings had 
been reported from Marion Island. 
The Commission noted evidence of recent population declines of seabird species in 
Subareas 48.3 and 58.6, attributed mainly to combinations of longline fishing in areas 
adjacent to the Convention Area and IUU fishing for toothfish within the Convention 
Area.  This provides the first potential evidence of the initial impact of IUU fishing on 
Convention Area seabirds. 
The Commission noted that the estimated potential level of seabird by-catch arising 
from IUU fishing in the Convention Area in 2001 is, at 36 000–69 000 to 48 000–90 
000, comparable to the totals in recent years.  This is potentially unsustainable for 
populations of albatrosses, giant petrels and white-chinned petrels breeding in the 
Convention Area. 
The Commission encouraged Members who have not yet developed and implemented 
national plans in support of the Food and Agricultural Organisation’s International 
Plan of Action (FAO IPOA)-Seabirds to do this as soon as possible.  It commended 
those Members, particularly Japan, New Zealand and the USA, who had produced 
plans. 
 
 
 
The Commission noted that there was only one marine mammal reported killed by a 
longline vessel in the Convention Area in 2001. 
The Commission noted that one Antarctic fur seal was reported killed by a trawler in 
Division 58.5.2, and that no instances of incidental mortality of seabirds were 
reported in Divisions 58.4.2 and 58.5.2.  However in Subarea 48.3, trawlers fishing 
for icefish reported 132 birds entangled of which 92 were killed, a total three times 
the estimated seabird by-catch mortality of all regulated longline fishing in this area in 
2001.  As a result the Commission endorsed the advice of the Scientific Committee 
that a catch limit per vessel of 20 birds should not restrict most of the fishing fleet but 
could suffice as an appropriate interim measure this year for protecting seabirds while 
maintaining by-catch rates at levels not dissimilar from the longline fishery in the area 
and requiring improvements in the fishing practice. 
New and Exploratory Fisheries, Precautionary Catch Limits, and By-catch 
The Commission noted that fourteen conservation measures relating to new and 
exploratory fisheries were in force during 2000/01, but fishing only occurred in 
respect of four of these, and in most of these active exploratory fisheries, the numbers 
of days fished and the catches reported were small.  As was the case last year, the 
notable exception was the exploratory fishery for Dissostichus spp. in Subarea 88.1. 
The Commission noted that most of the fisheries notified in 2000/01 had not been 
fished, and that many of these had been the subject of repeat notifications in recent 
years.  The Commission understood that some Members had not undertaken 
exploratory fisheries due to economic considerations, or may have postponed fishing 
operations so as to better comply with measures adopted by CCAMLR. 
The high burden of repeat notifications for fisheries which are not yet explored on the 
Scientific Committee and WG-FSA was recognised by the Commission.  
Consequently, Members were urged to minimise the number of future notifications 
for fisheries which were unlikely to be fished in the season notified. 
The Commission noted that 13 notifications of new and exploratory fisheries had been 
made for the 2001/02 season.  Further, the Commission noted that once again there 
were a large number of notifications for Division 58.4.4 
The Commission agreed that catch limits defined for the exploratory fisheries for 
Dissostichus spp. in 1999/00 remained appropriate with the following revisions: the 
catch limit for Dissostichus spp. in Subarea 88.1 and the catch limit for D.eleginoides 
in Division 58.4.4. 
A total of twenty-three new conservation measures were adopted at the Commission 
meeting, five measures were revised, and one new resolution was adopted.  These 
measures dealt with the CDS, the compliance of vessels with CCAMLR Measures, 
research plan measures, prohibition of directed fisheries, experimental line-weighting 
trails, precautionary and total catch limits for established fisheries, and new and 
exploratory longline and trawl fisheries for toothfish and other finfish species. 
Assessment of Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas which include 
Marine Areas 
At CCAMLR XX, WG-EMM reported to the Scientific Committee on discussions on 
the request by the Commission to develop scientific advice regarding MPA proposals.  
They reported that that not all proposals for MPAs would require the same 
information, and that the future assessment of the two questions from the Commission 
 
 
 
should include an assessment of available information relevant to CCAMLR and its 
objectives, as well as any other matter which may be relevant to the implementation 
of Article II of the Convention. 
The Scientific Committee recommended that CCAMLR advise ATCM of the time 
that will be required for review of draft management plans, taking into account the 
annual schedule of CCAMLR working groups, the Scientific Committee and the 
Commission to ensure a timely review. 
The Commission noted the Scientific Committee’s latest report and its request for 
clarification from the Commission on several specific issues involved in the review of 
draft MPAs.  In response the Commission: 
reaffirmed that the 2 criteria set out in CCAMLR XIX paras 11.20 and 11.21 were 
central to the consideration of such proposals by the Scientific Committee, 
however they should not be limited exclusively to consideration of these 2 criteria; 
indicated that proposals received by the Secretariat should be immediately 
referred to the Scientific Committee for attention at the next meetings of its 
subsidiary bodies.  These bodies would provide advice to the Scientific 
Committee which would, in turn, advise the Commission.  It was noted however, 
that there might still be some uncertainty as to whether proposals could be 
submitted directly from ATCPs or could be submitted via an ATCM; 
confirmed that the Scientific Committee shall, while considering advice from 
other scientific bodies such as SCAR, review proposals irrespective of whether 
any review of a proposal; is being undertaken within SCAR; and 
indicated that it hoped that proposals could be reviewed by the Scientific 
Committee and considered by the Commission within one calendar year of 
receipt, however this would depend on the timing of submissions to the Secretariat 
and on the complexity of the proposal. 
The review process should include the following procedural steps: 
submission of an ATCM proposal to the Secretariat and immediate forwarding to 
the Scientific Committee; 
consideration of issues by WG-EMM and WG-FSA; 
development of advice by the Scientific Committee; 
consideration of issues and decisions by the Commission; and 
reporting of discussions and decisions to the ATCM. 
The Commission tasked the Executive Secretary with contacting Poland to outline the 
procedural steps, and to request that the ATCM forward current proposals, if any, to 
CCAMLR by June 2002 so that these may be first considered at the 2002 meeting of 
WG-EMM.  The Commission also requested clarification from the ATCM on its 
process for submitting proposals to CCAMLR. 
