The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
The Antarctica Project
ASOC Secretariat
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W.
Washington, DC 20009 USA
Tel +1 202 234-2480
Fax +1 202 387 4823
antarctica@igc.org
www.asoc.org

XXV ATCM
Information Paper 76
Agenda Items 9, 11, 14 
ASOC
Original: English

Improving awareness of Protocol obligations
Amongst
Antarctic Yacht Operators

Information Paper submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)


Summary

Many yacht operators conducting expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty Area appear to be unaware of their obligations under the Protocol. This Information Paper suggests that  one means of improving awareness of these obligations is through the Antarctic navigation guides or pilots produced by national hydrographic or mapping agencies of Parties. These guides provide an obvious place for the presentation of clear, unambiguous advice to yacht operators concerning their obligations under the Protocol, and contact details for national or international agencies from which they might obtain further advice on these obligations.


Introduction

Concern has been expressed by Parties, ASOC and the tourist industry that many yachts operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area are doing so without being aware of or meeting the substantive and generically applicable environmental obligations of the Protocol, including prior Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).

This concern appears to be supported by the very few IEEs for yacht-based expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty area recorded by Parties in their annual reports to the ATCM pursuant to Protocol Article 17, and in the resulting cumulative listing of IEEs and CEEs provided by the ATCM Secretariat. 

Yachts are rarely employed by national Antarctic programmes.  Although some yachts operate under charter – two of which are IAATO members – others are owner-operated and used for personal adventure.  There are concerns that yacht operators may be entirely outside the usual Antarctic community, have limited day to day contact with Antarctic environmental managers, and no awareness of international treaty obligations.  They have proven hard to reach in relation to their legal obligations under domestic legislation, even when they are domiciled in, or departing from, a Consultative Party state.1

At the present time there is no basis for concluding that yachts pose particularly significant problems, and it is ASOC’s position that more serious environmental risks are posed by parts of the mainstream commercial tourist industry, by the increasing number of larger vessels now operating in Antarctic waters, and by the general trend of annually increasing tourist numbers and diversification of activities.2 

However, yacht activities plainly have environmental impact, and contribute to cumulative impact.  Accordingly, whatever measures can be put in place to improve compliance with the Protocol by yacht operators should be seriously examined.  To ASOC’s knowledge there has only been a private initiative to inform the yachting community of their responsibilities for the protection of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean environment.3 Two SCAR/IUCN Workshops4 have recognised the need to have information on Antarctica available at ports of departure and placed in materials commonly used by yacht masters, but to ASOC’s knowledge this has not resulted in concrete initiatives to date.  

Based on ASOC’s enquiries into to yacht expeditions passing through the major Southern hemisphere departure ports (particularly: Punta Arenas, Ushuaia, Cape Town, Hobart and Lyttleton), we have concluded that one relatively simple route to improving yacht operator awareness of Protocol obligations available to Parties is through the Antarctic navigation guides or pilots.  Hitherto this route has been inadequately realised.  Whatever deficiencies there may be in awareness of Antarctic Treaty and Protocol obligations, on the part of yacht masters and crews (noting that some of these people are very well-informed about their obligations), few yachts proposing to enter the Antarctic Treaty area do so without one of the standard regional navigation guides - or pilot books – produced by national hydrographic or mapping agencies.

These guides therefore provide an obvious place for the presentation of clear, unambiguous advice to yacht operators concerning their obligations under the Protocol, and contact details for national or international agencies from which they might obtain further advice on these obligations.  

Antarctic “Navigational Guides” or “Pilots”

ASOC examined the following navigational guides. There are undoubtedly other guides, produced by other states, but these appear to the ones most commonly used by yacht operators, particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula where most activity occurs:
  
    1. The Argentine Derrotero Argentino, Parte V, Antártida y Archipiélagos Subantárticos Argentinos. 5a Edición, 1984, published by Talleres Gráficos del Servicio de Hidrografía Naval Buenos Aires; 

    2. The Chilean Instrucciones Generales de Pilotaje en las Aguas del Territorio Chileno Antártico, 1993, published by the Servicio Hidrográfico y Oceanográfico de la Armada de Chile, Valparaíso;

    3. The United Kingdom’s The Antarctic Pilot (NP 9).  Fifth Edition, 1997 published by the UK Hydrographic Office, Taunton; and

    4. The United States’ Pub. 200. Sailing Directions (Planning Guide & Enroute) Antarctica. Third Edition, 1997. Published by the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, Bethesda, Maryland.

Generally, such guides are issued in new editions at greater than decadal intervals – although some are brought up to date more frequently through supplements (sometimes many) during the lifetime of a particular edition. 

Two of the currently available editions of these guides were published prior to the adoption of the Protocol.  All were published prior to the entry-into-force of the Protocol in 1998. 


Current Advice on Protocol Obligations

Plainly, neither the Argentine or Chilean guides can say anything about Protocol obligations.

The UK guide refers to the Protocol at only two points – a single paragraph under “Regulations – Antarctic Treaty” on page 3:

“The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 1991, with Annexes, is a supplement to the Antarctic Treaty, further broadening the environmental protection of the Antarctic environment; the protocol has yet to be adopted [sic] (1997)” 

and at “Appendix I – The Antarctic Treaty” (pages 221-224), where the text of the Antarctic Treaty is followed (page 223) by another single paragraph:

 “In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties agreed the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The Protocol designates Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science, introduces a set of environmental principles, and establishes regulations to provide comprehensive protection for the Antarctic environment and related and dependent ecosystems [sic]. An important provision is that all activities in Antarctica should undergo an assessment of their environmental impact before they are allowed to proceed.”

Thereafter – under 6 summary headings – there is a precis of obligations under Annex IV of the Protocol.

It is difficult to imagine that somebody not already familiar with their obligations under the Protocol would be able to determine that they had specific duties from this text.

The United States guide provides more information. Under “Legal Information and Regulations” (pages 45-48) it reviews the Antarctic Treaty and (apropos Article VII) says that “nations shall give advance notice of their expeditions and voyages to the Antarctic” (page 45).

It notes “of particular operational importance to mariners”:

“Article VII.5 requires each contracting party to inform the other contracting parties of expeditions to Antarctic by its ships or “organised in or proceeding from its territory”. Planned U.S. government expeditions are reported through the Department of State by the National Science Foundation, which funds and manages the United States Antarctic research Program. Nongovernmental U.S vessels or nongovernmental expeditions, organized in or proceeding from the U.S.A., should report their plans directly to the Office of Ocean Affairs, Room 5801, Department of State, Washington, D.C. 20520.” (pages 45-46)

“Guidelines for visitors to the Antarctic were discussed in 1979 at the 10th Antarctic Treaty consultative meeting. Subsequently, the treaty nations adopted a recommendation (X-8) which is primarily intended to inform tourists and nongovernment expeditions of suitable actions and behavior. The recommendations included subjects such as disturbing wildlife, retaining litter, use of sporting guns, introduction of plants or animals, collecting eggs or fossils, taking care of historic monuments and entering restricted areas” (page 46)

and – on the Protocol:

“ … that significantly modified environmental standards in Antarctica and superseded CRAMRA. 

The Protocol applies to the area, as defined in the treaty, as that located to the S of 60oS.  It prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources, other than scientific research; it requires an environmental impact assessment of any proposed activity; and it obliges member nations to devise rules and procedures relating to liability for damages.

The protocol has four annexes which describe the procedures for environmental impact assessment, the elaborate measures for conservation of fauna and flora, the procedures for waste disposal and management, and the rules concerning disposal of waste at sea and the prevention of marine pollution.”  (page 46)

Contact details for NSF regarding obligations, regulations, etc are provided.

Notwithstanding its broader coverage, it still lacks the kind of specific exposition of obligations for private vessel operators that is likely to be obvious to yacht operators.


What is Required?

Clearly these guides’ sole area of application is the Antarctic (whether or not they are confined to the Antarctic Treaty or CCAMLR areas of coverage).  It would therefore seem reasonable that major revisions of the Antarctic Treaty System are viewed as significant events in the planning of guide revisions, or the issuance of supplements. Presently this is not evident.  Even the websites have not kept up with the Protocol obligations.   

    • Accordingly, there may be merit in responsible national Antarctic authorities raising this issue with those departments responsible for publishing the guides.

    • There is a need for clear, unambiguous text on Antarctic Treaty and Protocol obligations – advance notice; prior EIA; waste, sewage and fuel handling (including contingency planning); protected areas; avoidance of harmful interference.

    • The technical details of these obligations may not be best placed in the guides – given their infrequent revision this risks embedding obsolete specifics – but the generic obligations, eg that everyone has to do an EIA, should be made explicit. (These details would also provide a succinct guide to obligations for use by Port and Maritime Agency officials likely to be attending to yachts for other purposes, thus facilitating a second means of improving awareness.)

    • Contact details – telephone, fax, email – should be provided for agencies able to provide details on obligations pertinent to the particular expedition, and guidance as to which agency mandatory obligations such as EIA should be directed.

    • All of this information needs to be prominently displayed – and indexed – in the guides, and not buried several hundred pages into it. 

This of course is not the only thing that Parties can do to improve awareness within the yachting community of their obligations under the Protocol.  Notices could usefully be attached to those sailing charts covering the most frequently visited parts of the Antarctic - i.e., the South Shetland Islands and the western side of the Antarctic Peninsula - and subantarctic islands. Targeted posters or notices could be displayed in sailing clubs, Coast Guard or Harbour Master offices in relevant gateway ports. Given that most yachts depart from perhaps no more than half a dozen such ports, these sorts of actions should be neither burdensome, nor expensive. 

These simple measures would substantially improve the likelihood that yacht operators would be aware of their Protocol obligations prior to their arrival in Antarctica.  Whether it would translate into effective compliance remains to be seen.  ASOC would hope that it would make a difference.

