XXV ATCM 
 
 
Coordination of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) of 
Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands 
 
             The Antarctic Specially Managed Area of Admiralty Bay, a joint Brazil/Poland 
proposal, in coordination with Ecuador, Peru and United States of America, was voluntarily 
adopted by the ATCPs at the ATCM XX (Utrecht, 1996).  
 
             Since January 1997, the coordination of the implementation of the plan has been 
under the responsibility of the Manager of the Brazilian Antarctic Programme, as reported 
in the attached document. Since the coordinator is appointed on a rotation basis, Brazil has 
obtained the accord of the Manager of the Polish Antarctic Programme in succeeding Brazil 
in the coordination of the said ASMA. The other three countries concerned have also 
expressed their consent on the matter. 
 
              The Brazilian Delegation would, therefore, mostly appreciate it if the Secretariat of 
the XXV ATCM could take the necessary steps to carry out, on a formal basis, the 
proposed transmission of coordination.  
 
              
Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) 
Admiralty Bay,  
King George Island, South Shetland Islands 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The Antarctic Specially Managed Area of Admiralty Bay was jointly proposed by Brazil 
and Poland, in coordination with Ecuador, Peru and United States. The Management Plan 
for the area was voluntarily adopted by the ATCPs at the ATCM XX (Utrecht, 1996).  
 
Such designation was done on the grounds that, owing to the area's outstanding 
environmental, scientific, scenic and historic value, and the number of national Antarctic 
programmes and tourist parties operating in close proximity to one another, the opportunity 
existed to:  
1. improve the level of mutual assistance and cooperation among the Parties operating 
in the area;  
2. avoid or minimise the risk of mutual interference and cumulative impacts on the 
terrestrial and marine environment;  
3. improve the understanding of natural processes at work in the area, which in turn 
will help protect the environment from unnecessary disturbance;  
4. protect the important physiographic features, and the outstanding biological, 
ecological, historical and aesthetic values of the area and;  
5. safeguard the long term scientific research in the area. 
The ASMA of Admiralty Bay (herein called the Area) comprises the area considered to be 
immediately within the glacial drainage basin of Admiralty Bay as well as part of the 
present SSSI No. 8 which is adjacent to this region but outside the drainage basin. The area 
is bounded by a line extending from Telefon Point (62°14'S, 58°28'W) in the south to The 
Tower (62°13'S, 58°29'W), and then towards Jardine Peak (62°10'S, 58°30'W) intersecting 
the ice divide of the Warszawa Ice Field, thence following this divide to the west of 
Ezcurra Inlet (62°10'S, 58°33'W), north eastwards to enclose Mackellar (62°05'S, 58°27'W) 
and Martel inlets (62°05'S, 58°22'W), and then southwards through Ternyck Needle 
(62°05'S, 58°16'W) to Syrezol Rocks (62°12'S, 58°17'W) on the eastern shore of Admiralty 
Bay. The waters of Admiralty Bay, and a small part of Bransfield Strait north of a straight 
line between Syrezol Rocks and Telefon Point, are also included in the ASMA. 
Approximate area: 370 km2. The area contains Arctowski Station (Poland), Comandante 
Ferraz Antarctic Station (Brazil), Machu Picchu Station (Peru) and the summer field camps 
Point Hennequin (Ecuador) and Pieter J Lenie (USA), as well as SSSI No. 8 and HSM No. 
51.  
 
 
 
 
Implementation of the Management Plan 
 
In January, 1997, Brazil was designated the coordinator for the implementation of the 
management plan (MP) for the Area.     Preliminary initiatives undertaken to implement the 
MP have been described in the XXI ATCM INF 40 and XXII ATCM/IP 37.  Since then, 
other measures have been adopted to implement the MP.  These measures are briefly 
reviewed in this report. 
 
Meetings. Joint meetings were held for reviewing the functioning and implementation of 
the Management Plan.  An informal field meeting occurred on January, 1998, at Henrick 
Arctowski Station, with representatives from Poland, Brazil, Peru and USA.   A workshop 
on implementation of the MP was held in April, 1988, at the University of São Paulo, 
Brazil, and was attended by Brazilian and Peruvian scientists, involved in research projects 
related to problems of environment preservation and conservation.  During the Meeting of 
Latin American Antarctic Program Managers, RAPAL, in 1988, in Quito, there was the 
opportunity for the Latin American Antarctic Programmes, active in the Area, to discuss 
the progresses on the implementation of the MP. 
 
Adopted measures.  Besides several measures internally adopted, within the national 
programmes, to standardize procedures, to train and educate personnel in environmental 
matters, to better equip facilities and to promote the development of research projects 
related to environmental monitoring, some were discussed on a jointly coordinated basis.   
 
During the summer campaigns in Antarctica and in occasional meetings, practical results 
and problems arising from the implementation of the MP were observed and reviewed, 
since its adoption, which included:  a) review of the regulations and the code of conduct for 
the area; b) inspection of the present state of the natural diversity and of some of the values 
of the Area; c) review of the zones of scientific and/or ecological interest within the Area 
listed in the MP, the need of their redefinition, deletion or of nomination of additional 
zones; d) review of procedures of environmental monitoring requirements; e) survey of the 
distribution and possible removal from the area of drifted debris found ashore in the Area; 
f) study of ways of co-operation among the Parties with active scientific programs in the 
Area with a view to rationalize scientific and science support activities in the Area. 
 
Review of the text of the MP.  Particular attention has been given to a critical analysis of 
regulations and elements of the code of conduct for the Area, especially the restrictions to 
the use of vehicles and displacement of pedestrians, state of permanent and semi-permanent 
structures, and the list of zones in which activities should be regulated.  The main 
conclusions have been: 1. the need for revision of the physical description of the Area.  A 
satellite image (SPOT) mosaic of King George Island at the approximate scale 1:295,000 
processed by the Laboratory of Antarctic and Glaciological Research, University of Rio 
Grande do Sul, Brazil, allowed a better definition of the boundaries of the ASMA; 2. At the 
moment, it was not necessary to alter any of the guidelines related to operation of vehicles 
and displacement of pedestrians in the Area, however, it was recognized the need for a 
better delimitation of areas and routes for displacement of vehicles and pedestrians around 
and between the stations and the isolated modules and more strict compliance with the 
pertinent regulations in the MP.   
 
Education and training.  It has been discussed possible ways to improve even more the 
expeditioners knowledge of the MP details, regulations and code of conduct.  Another 
initiative suggested involves the preparation of a short handbook on Admiralty Bay in three 
laguages (Portuguese, English and Spanish) with information on the main characteristics of 
the MP and a description of the different values of the Area that MP is aimed to protect. 
 
GIS ASMA.  The Admiralty Bay Geographic Information System is part of the King 
George Island GIS Project, which aims to produce an integrated geographic database for 
use by all countries and in multi-disciplinary applications. It provides spatial data for 
environmental impact assessments.  The KGIS is co-ordinated under the Geographic 
Information Program of the SCAR Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic 
Information. The project activities include developing a specification for an Antarctic large 
scale geographic database and obtaining and integrating geographic data for King George 
Island. 
 
The Admiralty Bay GIS was an initiative of Brazil in accordance with Poland, and has been 
implemented  with integration of diverse data sources (e.g. digital data at the Institut für 
Physische Geographie - IPG, Freiburg University; British and Polish topographical maps; 
remote sensing data), with the use of ARC/INFOTM GIS.   
 
The first seven layers for Admiralty Bay GIS are already available: topography, batimetry, 
coastline, glaciology, ice-free areas, and human presence place names.  The implementation 
of the GIS follows the standards of SCAR WG-GGI, allowing compatibility with the KGIS 
project. This GIS serves as an important support tool to the ASMA management plan. It 
could be used for planning of scientific and logistic activities, monitoring and 
environmental impact evaluations. Additional layers will be integrated into the system (e.g., 
geology, geomorphology, hydrology, bedrock elevation, mosses fields, birds and seals 
colonies) and areas near scientific stations mapped with more details (e.g. at 1: 2,000). 
 
Environmental Monitoring Programme.  The Brazilian Antarctic Programme has 
recently established a research network to undertake an environmental impact assessment 
in Admiralty Bay. The network is constituted by 15 research groups from 8 Brazilian 
Institutions.  The groups will carry out multidisciplinary studies of a series of biotic and 
abiotic parameters, aiming at the implementation of a strategy for environmental 
management. 
 
Over a 20 year period, the scientific community has studied various aspects of Admiralty 
Bay and its terrestrial surrounding. This has resulted in a set of biotic and abiotic data that 
needs evaluation so that environmental monitoring of the bay can be implemented in an 
efficient and effective manner.  There is the need for implementing a database and a 
geographic information system (GIS) with capability for continuous update and broad 
accessibility. Critical evaluation of the results shall indicate which variables are necessary 
for an efficient environmental impact assessment of Admiralty Bay. This information will 
also provide decision support for minimising possible environmental impacts in the region. 
 
The integrated knowledge of the environment will allow the elaboration of a plan for 
organization and usage of the Antarctic Brazilian Station “Comandante Ferraz”. This will 
be done in accordance to its support capacity and technological developments for the 
Brazilian buildings in Antarctica, and coherent with the needs, logistics, and the Madrid 
Protocol. 
 
The main objectives are:   
 
• 
In the marine environment - to obtain measurements for the following parameters: physical 
(current, temperature, salinity, tides, wind and atmospheric pressure); chemical (organic 
hydrocarbons from petroleum, persistent organic compounds, chemical indicators of 
sewage, heavy metals, nutrients, chlorophyll, pH, alkalinity, dissolved oxygen and partial 
pressure of CO2 in the seawater); microbiological (microbiological indicators of faecal 
origin, xenobiotic and pathogen-degrading micro-organisms); biological (benthic 
communities structure and marine food web); and geological (bathymetry, bottom 
morphology, and distribution of sediments). 
 
• 
In the terrestrial environment - to conduct studies of the plant and animal communities 
through: their ecological distributions and relationships, aiming at the identification of 
species and indicators of environmental impact for future monitoring projects; pedological 
and micro-morphological characterization of soils of the area, including organic matter, 
biochemical cycles and heavy metals, as well as their spatial distribution (mapping).  
 
• 
To include multiple controls in the detection of anthropogenic effects through asymmetrical 
analyses (these are univariate statistical analyses appropriate for the examination of data 
post impact, in which the parameter’s value in the disturbed area is compared to the mean 
value from control areas, in order to distinguish natural from anthropogenic impacts). 
 
• 
To conduct toxicity, bioaccumulation and biotransformation experiments, and evaluate 
marine organism responses to anthropogenic contaminants in the field and laboratory. 
 
• 
To implement a Geographical Information System (GIS) as a tool for spatial integration of 
data obtained by all projects within this research net, providing support to monitor the 
environmental impact caused by human activities and decision support for the ASMA 
management plan. Through the use of routine data analyses, the GIS will make available 
the necessary information to the planning of logistic, scientific and tourist activities. Also, it 
will provide multi-temporal information for environmental monitoring and impact studies 
in the area. 
 
• 
To elaborate a database of past and future data in adequate format to be made available on 
the Internet.  
 
• 
To elaborate, together with SeCIRM (Interministerial Commission for the Resources of the 
Sea, manager of Proantar), a Guidance Plan and the Environmental Management Plan for 
the Antarctic Brazilian Station “Comandante Ferraz” (EACF), based on environmental data 
generated by this network. 
 
• 
To develop appropriate technologies for constructing a standard Antarctic module, adopting 
environmentally and adequately correct solutions for the implementation of  the Protocol of 
Madrid. 
 
• 
To elaborate a conduct manual for users of the Brazilian buildings in Antarctica, with 
specific focus on diminishing the environmental impact caused by the use of installations 
and equipment.  
 
The expected products are:  data worksheets to feed the GIS and generate the cartographic 
base with a scale adequate to the ASMA; thematic maps of environmental parameters for 
the ASMA; implementation of the GIS, making it available to the research community; and 
monitoring strategy and plan for the management of the ASMA.  
 
Future Actions.  A comprehensive study of the environmental condition of this region, as 
mentioned above, will allow a full evaluation of the impact of human activity generated by 
scientists, tourists and support personnel from the stations, and impact from current and 
past logistic operations.  The next step will be the discussion of the monitoring programme 
proposed by Brazil with all Parties operating in the Area to foster mutual cooperation. 
 
 
