25ATCM/IP/001/E 
 
1
 
Information Paper  
XXV ATCM 
POLAND 
 
The Long-term monitoring of avifauna in Admiralty Bay in light of the 
changes in the sea-ice zone ecosystem (South Shetland Islands, Antarctica) 
 
 
 
King George Island is dominated by ice, which covers over 90% of its 
surface. The largest ice-free area on the island, the western shoe of Admiralty 
Bay, was designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1979 (SSSI No. 8). 
During the last 21 years the deglaciation processes caused the ice-free patches to 
triple in surface area, and now they cover 9 km2.  About 400 m to the North 
from the SSSI No. 8 border, the Polish Antarctic Station is located. The Station 
was founded in 1977. 
In the Admiralty Bay and on its western shore altogether 34 species of 
birds have been recorded. Of that number 13 are breeding species, four are 
present regularly, and the remaining 17 were visiting only sporadically. All 
except for one were observed during the summer, with some seen also in the 
spring and fall. Only Halobaena caerulea was noted exclusively in spring (3rd 
September 1989) and fall (26th May 1995). Several of the nesting species leave 
the area of Admiralty Bay after completing the breeding season (Table 1). Some 
individuals of the Southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus), pale-faced 
sheathbeal (Chionis alba) and kelp gull (Larus dominicanus) populations stay in 
this area through the winter, while the other nesting birds remain here in winter 
only when the waters of Admiralty Bay are not frozen. The presence of eight 
species was noted only once, and two species were recorded solely as single, 
dead specimens (Table 1). 
As a result of a banding study conducted within the area of SSSI No. 8 
two individuals of Southern Giant Petrels Macronectes giganteus were found to 
25ATCM/IP/001/E 
 
2
have travelled between King George Island and the eastern coast of Australia, 
and Northern coast of New Zealand. They covered the distance of 16 thousand 
km in 74-88 days. 
In December 1978, the total biomass of birds was 2.8 g per m2 of the 
Admiralty Bay's surface. The penguin biomass prevailed: their biomass 
constituted 99% of the above number. During the summer, penguins are the 
main conveyors of the organic matter consumed in the sea to the land, where it 
is deposited as excreta, feathers, and egg shells. Thanks to those deposits the 
soils that have been originally nutrient poor become locally and intensively 
enriched in biogenic salts: NO2, NO3, NH4, PO4, and kations: K, Na, and Ca. 
From the local centres of deposit concentration the nutrients are being 
transported by water and wind, and thus are spread in the land ecosystem. 
Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) was the most abundant of the three 
penguin species nesting in Admiralty Bay. Dominance of P. adeliae is not 
typical to the King George Island, on which the chinstrap penguin (P. 
antarctica) are most numerous. The numbers of penguin nests were declining 
within the SSSI No. 8. From 1978 to 1995 the nest counts fell by 9% for P. 
adeliae, 53% for P. antarctica. 
Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba Dana) is the main food source for the 
penguins. The surface area of pack-ice in winter plays an important role in kill 
feeding and reproduction, thus having a large influence on its stocks. So the 
pack-ice surface area determines also the amount of food accessible to penguins. 
Together with warm winters and with decreasing pack-ice surface there are also 
noted declines in food availability for krill-eating animals, including penguins. 
Therefore the global change, and the resulting warming of the western 
Antarctica can be a factor in the diminishing trend in penguin populations. As a 
consequence there is a decline in the amount of organic matter brought to land.  
On the other hand, deglaciation aids the enlargement of the ice-free areas, and 
supplies new terrain accessible to penguins and other birds for breeding and 
25ATCM/IP/001/E 
 
3
resting grounds. Deglaciation also provides plants with new areas and conditions 
suitable for colonisation and succession. Thus the deglaciation processes in 
western Antarctica seem to have the opposite effects on the sea and on the land 
ecosystems. 
There could be also local causes of the decreasing trend in penguin 
numbers or their moving to other nesting sites. These causes could include 
disturbances from the station functioning or the presence of people, including 
tourists. Numbers of breeding pairs of Gentoo penguins (P. papua) have 
declined at a site near the station, Rakusa Point, from 700 in 1977, to 205 in 
1996. But at a site 2 km further away, Llano Point, the nesting pair numbers did 
not indicate any directional changes. The numbers were: 1900 in 1977, 1510 in 
1980, 3195 in 1991 and 1406 in 1996.  
The numbers of nests of the Southern Giant Petrels were declining in a 
small colony located less than 1 km away from the station. While at the same 
time, the numbers in the more remote colonies increased. It is worth nothing that 
both, in case of Gentoo penguins, and Southern Giant Petrels the most dramatic 
declines took place in 1970-ties and 1980-ties. The anthropogenic influence on 
bird abundance and distribution seem to have little geographic range. The legal 
regulations accepted by the Antarctic Treaty as management plans for the SSSI 
No. 8 and comparatively SSSI No. 34, plus the management plan for the ASMA 
in Admiralty Bay should minimise the effects of humans on the avifauna of this 
region. 
 
References 
 
Ciaputa, P. and Sierakowski, K. (1999) Long-term population changes of 
Adélie, chinstrap and gentoo penguins in the regions of SSSI No.8 and 
SSSI No. 34, King George Island, Antarctica. Pol. Polar Res. 20, 355-365. 
Loeb, V., Siegel, V. Holm-Hansen, O., Hewitt, R., Fraser, W., Trivelpiece, W. 
and Trivelpiece, S. (1997) Effects of sea-ice extent and krill or salp 
dominance on the Antarctic food web. Nature 387, 897-900. 
25ATCM/IP/001/E 
 
4
Myrcha, A. (1993) Birds. In: Rakusa-Suszczewski, S. (Ed.) The Maritime 
Antarctic Coastal Ecosystem of Admiralty Bay. Warszawa, Department of 
Antarctic Biology, pp. 128-141. 
Rakusa-Suszczewski, S (1999) Ekosystem Morskiej Antarktyki. Zmiany i 
Zmiennosc. Warszawa, PWN, 135 pp. 
Rakusa-Suszczewski, S. (2002) Funkcjonowanie geoekosystemu na zachodnim 
brzegu Zatoki Admiralicji (Wyspa Króla Jerzego, Antarktyka). Polish 
Polar Studies 2002, 25-38. 
Alberts, F.G. (1995) Geographic names of the Antarctic. IInd edition Arlington. 
National Science Foundation. Office of Polar Programs.pp: 834. 
25ATCM/IP/001/E 
 
5
Table 1. Birds reported from Admiralty Bay, King George Island, 1977-1996 
 
 
  Breeding 
        Non-breeding 
                     Species 
 
  Frequent 
  Sporadic 
Gentoo Penguin Pygoscelis papua 
S, [W] 
 
 
Adelie Penguin Pygoscelis adeliae 
S, [W] 
 
 
Chinstrap Penguin Pygoscelis antarctica S 
 
 
Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes gigan S, W 
 
 
Cape Petrel Daption capense 
S, [W] 
 
 
Wilson,s Storm-petrel Oceanites oceanicuS 
 
 
Black-bellied Storm-petrel Fregetta tropicS 
 
 
Antarctic Shag Phalacrocorax bransfieldeS, [W] 
 
 
Pale-faced Sheathbill Chionis alba 
S, W 
 
 
South Polar Skua Catharacta maccormickS 
 
 
Brown Skua Catharacta antarctica lonnb S 
 
 
Kelp Gull Larus dominicanus 
S, W 
 
 
Antarctic Tern Sterna vittata 
S, [W] 
 
 
Macaroni Penguin Eudyptes chrysolophus 
S 
 
Southern Fulmar Fulmarus glacialoides  
S 
 
Snow Petrel Pagodroma nivea 
 
S, [W] 
 
Arctic Tern Sterna paradisaea 
 
S 
 
King Penguin Aptenodytes patagonicus 
 
 
S, O 
Emperor Penguin Aptenodytes forsteri 
 
 
S, W 
Rockhopper Penguin Eudyptes chrysocom 
 
S 
Magellanic Penguin Spheniscus magellan  
 
S, O 
Black-browed Albatross Diomedea melan 
 
S 
Sooty Albatross Phoebetria fusca 
 
 
S, O 
Light-mantled Albatross Phoebetria palpe 
 
S, O 
Antarctic Petrel Thalassoica antarctica 
 
 
S, [W] 
Blue Petrel Halobaena caerulea 
 
 
migrating 
Antarctic Prion Pachyptila desolata 
 
 
S, O, D 
Cattle Egret Bubulcus ibis 
 
 
S, D 
Black-necked Swan Cygnus melanocoryp  
 
S 
Chiloe Wigeon Anas sibilatrix 
 
 
S, O 
Yellow-billed Pintail Anas georgica 
 
 
S 
White-rumped Sandpiper Calidris fuscico  
 
S 
Wilson,s Phalarope Steganopus tricolor 
 
 
S, O 
Chilean Skua Catharacta chilensis 
 
 
S, O 
 
 
25ATCM/IP/001/E 
 
6
S – observed in (spring), summer, (autumn); W – observed in winter; [W] – observed 
only in winter months when the Bay was free from permanent ice cover; O – only one 
visit noted; D – only dead specimens were reported. 
 
