The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
The Antarctica Project
ASOC Secretariat
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W.
Washington, DC 20009 USA
Tel +1 202 234-2480
Fax +1 202 387 4823
antarctica@igc.org
www.asoc.org


XXV ATCM
Information Paper 77
 Agenda Item 8
ASOC
Original: English


LIABILITY

Information Paper submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)


1. THE PRESENT SITUATION

The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty includes a specific commitment to the elaboration of a liability regime addressing damage to the environment:

Article 16
Liability

Consistent with the objectives of this Protocol for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, the Parties undertake to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by this Protocol. Those rules and procedures shall be included in one or more Annexes to be adopted in accordance with Article 9 (2).

This commitment was reiterated in the Final Act of The Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting, at the adoption of the Protocol in Madrid on 4th October 1991:

The Meeting underlined the commitment of the Parties to the Protocol in its Article 16 to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol, with a view to their inclusion in one or more Annexes and expressed the wish that work on their elaboration could begin at an early stage, In this context, it was understood that liability for damage to the Antarctic environment should be included in such an elaboration.

Eleven years after the adoption of the Protocol, four years after entry into force of the Protocol and Annexes I-IV, and four months after the entry into force of Annex V, the commitment on liability has still to be realised. Obligations under Article 16 are the remaining element of the Protocol to be agreed by Consultative Parties – and a critical element. This despite the protracted discussion of liability (including drafts of an annex) since 1992, through 11 meetings of the Group of Legal Experts (see: XXII ATCM/WP 1, 1998) and subsequently through dedicated sessions of Working Group I at two annual ATCMs (see: XXIII ATCM/WP 41, 1999; XXIV ATCM/WP 17, 2001) and a SATCM (informal papers only). In Warsaw, liability is again to be discussed (see: XXV ATCM/WP 14, 2002).

As Parties meet for their 15th session of liability discussions, the conclusion of even one restricted liability annex appears still some way off. The irony of Parties discussing revisions of existing Protocol Annexes in the Committee for Environmental Protection because these are now a decade old, whilst in an adjacent room still unable to agree a first level liability annex despite vastly greater discussion, should be lost on nobody, inside or outside this meeting. It is long past the time when Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties can claim that their treaty commitments in relation to comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems are being properly met through progress on the mandatory liability regime. 
 
2. KEY ISSUES
(1) Process:

If Parties are only prepared to move forward incrementally on liability, an initial annex restricted to liability for environmental damage is as reasonable a place to start as any. However, there is a concomitant logic to this path which Parties need to recognise: 

    (i) that the argument for incrementalism needs to be actually supported by evidence of timely progress on the more restricted front; and

    (ii) that having agreed to a particular first annex, Parties then proceed to the next – and don’t merely use the first as a fig-leaf to supposedly cover their entire Article 16 liability obligations.

The first issue can be addressed through a commitment by Parties at XXV ATCM to complete an annex on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies at XXVI ATCM in Madrid in 2003, with whatever intersessional meetings are necessary to ensure that this can be done.

The second issue can be addressed through a formal commitment – and this should be done in Warsaw – such as a Decision, declaring that the negotiation and adoption of a first liability annex on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies, is without prejudice to the negotiation and adoption of subsequent liability annexes, and that Parties will work in good faith towards this.

(2) Textual 

The Chairman’s text offers a reasonable basis for a restricted first annex on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies. A detailed article-by-article critique is provided below in Section 3 of this Information Paper. The key changes that ASOC would seek in the draft Annex include:

    1. Article 2(b) - restore "unplanned events" to the draft. In the event that the term “significant and lasting” is retained, ensure that it is restricted to liability and does not corrupt the wider Antarctic environmental management regime.

    2. Article 2(c) – remove the ambiguity about whether an operator who neglects to do an EIA is even covered by the Annex. This loophole must be closed. Whilst ASOC does not believe that an EIA should insulate an operator from liability, it may be possible to allow an operator acting pursuant to a properly-issued EIA some advantages. Without an EIA, operators should be vulnerable to proceedings without any liability protection. 

    3. Article 7 – revise the very short time horizons for actions for compensation through grounding the period at the point of detection (not occurrence) and extending the temporal window to 20 years (commencing after the adoption of the annex). Similarly, Parties should reject any inclinations to constrain response action obligations under Article 5 to a short window.

    4. Article 10 – establish a linkage between the violation of State responsibility and a liability mechanism under the Annex through a cross-reference to Article 10 in Articles 6 and 12.

3. TEXTUAL COMMENTARY ON CHAIRMAN’S DRAFT (WP 14)
Preamble:

This is a positive addition. ASOC particularly supports the recognition here that a prime function of liability is deterring both states and operators from causing damage.

Article 1 - Scope:

Unchanged from the 2001 draft.

Article 2 - Definitions:

    (a) "Agreed Measures" – the use of the term here risks ambiguity, given an established
use of the term to mean the 1964 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Fauna and Flora, and references to it in, inter alia, CCAMLR (Article V). 

    (b) "Environmental Emergency": The category of "unplanned" events – found in both The Chairman’s 2001 and US drafts – has been dropped. Accordingly, environmental emergency is now much more narrowly conceived. “Unplanned” events should be restored.

The present text suggests that an operator who simply does not reasonably plan – a very different situation to one who is facing an emergency – escapes liability. This is surely not acceptable to Parties. 

The qualification of impact to "significant and harmful", revisits concerns about this term repeatedly made by ASOC over the past decade. Unlike the “less than / no more than / more than minor and/or transitory” formulation (widely used across Antarctic EIA, audit, monitoring, and other environmental management documents), the “significant and harmful” standard has no case-history to draw from. If this term is ultimately used, it would mean:

(i)	a reversal of the general commitment to the precautionary principle implicit in the Protocol;

    (ii) changing the burden of proof obligation explicit in the "less than / no more than / more than minor and/or transitory" formulation used throughout the Protocol; and

    (iii) there will be continuing difficulties of terminological relationship wherever EIA and liability for environmental emergency are coupled.

If Parties are determined to use the novel and less onerous qualifier "significant and harmful" – and there should be no doubt that it is favoured precisely because it represents an easier, lower operational standard for damage – the term should be quarantined in the Liability Annex and not allowed to infect the wider environmental management regime created by the Protocol.

    (c) "Operator": There appear to be problems with qualifying the operator's activities as "pursuant to an environmental impact assessment of its activity". If it hasn't conducted an EIA – regrettably, a not unheard of event – the present text apparently does not recognise it as an operator. The second sentence, casting the operator as one "subject to the laws and regulations of that Party ..." is an improvement over the previous draft, where it hinged on the "approval" of that operator's activities by its Party. The present formulation appears to satisfactorily cover the situation where a Party should have, but has not in fact, applied those laws and regulations.

    (d) "Response action": The addition of "may include clean-up in appropriate
circumstances" is strongly supported by ASOC. Indeed, we would argue that response action should ordinarily include clean-up.

    (e) "Reasonable": This term is now pegged to the definition of "response
action" as well as “objective criteria”. ASOC continues to have concerns about the objectivity of these criteria in practice, given the emphasis on technological, economic and practicality aspects and absence of values. 
Article 3 - Preventative Measures:

The obligation in paragraph 1 has changed from the "maximum extent practicable" to "reasonable preventive measures". A restrictive view of "reasonable" through supposed objective criteria (above), may now mean something very much less substantial than "maximum extent practicable". The core concern here is that once again there has been a reversal of the burden of proof. Maximum extent possible might still mean one cannot do much in a particular situation, but at least one has to demonstrate that this is the case. Once we switch to reasonable measures, Parties and their operators are in an appreciably stronger position and essentially do not have to demonstrate anything – this burden is shifted to any critics of the proposed action or inaction. 

Article 4 - Contingency Plans:

The substantive content of the article is unchanged from the 2001 draft - but 
more clearly laid out. ASOC believes these are important obligations.

Article 5 – Response Action:

The substantive changes from the 2001 draft include the introduction of the notion of responsibility of the operator's state (where it is a Party), along with other Parties, to undertake response action should the operator not do so. This is a valuable addition. 

However, it presumes that both the causal operator and the appropriate state linkage are known, whereas either or both may in practice be unknown at the time when response action is required. There is, accordingly, a need for some recognition of the circumstance where an event is detected by someone other than the operator who caused it. Response action may still be possible in some of these instances - eg, a national programme field party at location X discovers hydrocarbons from tank flushing at the beach or ice edge. One of a number of vessels in the area the day before (a tourist vessel, a departing national programme vessel and a CCAMLR-authorised longliner) may be responsible - but it is not immediately clear which. Presumably it would be a widely held expectation that the detecting programme - to the extent of its capacity – should be required to attempt some sort of response action (conceivably initiating coordination across a range of states) and not wait until causal responsibility was determined?

If so, this scenario is not easy to fit to the current structure of Article 5 - notwithstanding the "imminent" threat clause in paragraph 3. This situation of uncertainty about responsibility seems likely to be a common situation. Making response action contingent upon resolving responsibility, or upon some determination of “imminent risk” – rather than requiring a general duty on the part of those who encounter the consequences of environmental emergencies – would suggest a higher priority is being given to administrative process than to environmental protection.

Article 6 - Liability:

Paragraphs 1, 3, 4, 6 are largely unchanged from the 2001 draft.

Paragraph 2 now has "prompt and effective response action" qualified to where it "was
possible" - which seems to provide a stronger escape clause than on the
implicit grounds of reasonableness which would ordinarily apply. What is the basis for this change?

Paragraph 3 states the critical obligation to liability and payment to the Environmental Protection Fund in cases where response action was not carried out. It is extremely important that the annex provide no incentives for operators (or states) to deem response action impossible, thereby escaping operational obligations and avoiding financial costs resulting from causing damage to the Antarctic environment for which response was possible. This would also create the ridiculous situation where the greater the damage, the less the practical consequences of liability. The formulation here appears to preclude this, and ASOC therefore strongly supports it.

Paragraph 3i replaces the CEP with SCAR as the one identified group. ASOC believes that the CEP should indeed be the prime referral group – particularly since it is already explicitly mandated to provide advice on procedures for response action in environmental emergencies (Protocol Art 12 1 (f)) and is exhorted anyway to consult with SCAR (ibid para 2) 

Paragraph 3iii is unchanged from the previous draft, although, with its attention to the extent of "fault", this paragraph plainly substantially changes the basis of liability from "strict" applying elsewhere in this draft annex.

Paragraph 5 usefully introduces joint and several liability where the emergency arises from activities of more than a single operator.

Paragraph 6 again raises the issue of Sovereign Immunity in the Antarctic context. The majority of ships and aircraft in Antarctica are still owned or operated by states. As a consequence, to grant these immunity (even if through some supposed pre-existing right) is in fact to substantially diminish the coverage – and hence utility – of the annex.

Article 7 - Actions for Compensation:

There has been a reversion to the time horizon of 3 years from the "occurrence" of the
environmental emergency. It is not entirely clear what this “occurrence”
is. Is it the timing of the causal event or the time when (through detection) the environmental emergency is deemed to have commenced? The Chairman’s previous text took its three years from the "detection" of the emergency, which is much clearer. It is also a more realistic baseline - particularly in situations where the causal operator is not the whistle-blower on the incident, or the operator conducting response action - surely the usual situation where action for compensation is relevant. Furthermore, 3 years is not a workable timeline for actually initiating an action in all jurisdictions by an offshore entity, particularly since that entity will not in practice be in a position to begin thinking about this until some months after it has dealt with the event itself. 

The addition of an arbitration route – and linkage to the Protocol's Arbitration Schedule is useful.

Article 8 - Exemptions from Liability:

Paragraph 1 is unchanged from the 2001 draft. The new second paragraph insulates against liability for an emergency consequential upon response action. ASOC is sympathetic to its qualification to reasonable circumstances. It would, for example, hardly seem reasonable for (say) an incompetent operator, who had caused an emergency, to then make things worse through further incompetence, and thereafter argue that this secondary emergency (which likely would be difficult to separate from the first) carried no liability for them. On the other hand, genuine response action often itself carries risks - and we do not want to discourage best efforts through fear of liability exposure.


Article 9 - Limits on Compensation:

The question, frankly, seems to be less what an appropriate amount might be to meet reasonable environmental emergencies, than agreeing to a minimum amount that State Parties are prepared to pay. To that extent, ASOC imagines that this may be the very last thing on which parties agree. 

Whatever that figure is, it is essential that it can be periodically reviewed and revised – if for no other reasons than to correct for inflation. However, this text has dropped the reference to these figures (whatever they become) being capable of amendment by Measure, and this needs reinstatement.

Article 10 - State Liability:

A new article, attaching liability only to the extent that a State has failed in its obligations under Protocol Article 13 (1). It is a positive addition. 

Unfortunately it is not yet clear what happens if the state is argued to have failed in this obligation. There does not seem to be any way that this failure translates into specific liability exposure. With the exception of the references to sovereign immunity of vessels in Article 6 (6), that article refers only to "operators" - although in Article 7 it is anticipated that actions might be taken against Parties (at paras 2, and 4). The requisite bridge between these two articles is missing. What does state liability mean in practice, in the restricted sense in which it might attach - only arbitration as in Article 7 (4)?
Article 11 - Insurance:

This has been rationalised and looks tighter. The question of insurance (more likely self insurance) for states as states, rather than operators - which is conceivably raised by state liability - is not addressed. 

Article 12 - Environmental Protection Fund:

Substantially unchanged from the 2001 draft, although the fund is now termed an environmental protection fund, to be administered by the Secretariat of the ATS - which seems sensible 

There is a fundamental asymmetry through this article, whereby although obligations throughout the annex are preferentially imposed on operators, reimbursement is to states.

Article 13 - Amendment or Modification

Now uses the standard two paragraphs employed in the existing 5 annexes.


