CEP V 
Information Paper  
Agenda Item 4c 
New Zealand 
Original: English 
 
Environmental Impact Assessment of Fishing Vessels 
 
Information Paper 
New Zealand 
 
 
At ATCM XXIV, New Zealand signalled its interest in further discussion of the 
question of environmental impact assessment of fishing vessels.  The purpose of this 
information paper is to clarify New Zealand’s perspective on this issue.  
 
New Zealand’s practice is to require submission of IEEs (Initial Environmental 
Evaluations) relating to fishing vessel operations in the Ross Sea.   New Zealand 
domestic legislation requires that applicants for permits to harvest Antarctic marine 
living resources must also be subject to environmental impact assessment. 
 
New Zealand has noted that the Final Act of the XI ATSCM (at which the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was adopted) recorded that it was 
not intended that fishing activities undertaken pursuant to CCAMLR would be subject 
to Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedures conducted pursuant to Article 
8 of the Protocol.  New Zealand has become aware, however, that there is significant 
variation in parties’ approach to environmental obligations in respect of activities 
occurring under the authorisation of CCAMLR.   
 
The environmental impact assessment of fishing vessels is seen by New Zealand as an 
integral element of the environmental protection of the Antarctic marine environment.  
New Zealand’s use of the EIA process in this way serves to meet our CCAMLR 
obligations to this end.   
 
Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
are obliged to observe, in their harvesting and associated activities as and when 
appropriate, the Measures recommended by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in 
fulfilment of their responsibility for the protection of the Antarctic environment (Art 
V(2)).  In addition to this, CCAMLR must carry out such activities as are necessary to 
fulfil the objectives of the Convention (Art IX (1)(h)).  An objective of the 
Convention reflected in Art II(3) is the prevention of changes or minimisation of the 
risk of changes in the marine ecosystem.       
 
While assessment of proposals for fish harvest, including mitigation of direct impacts 
such as seabird mortality has been carried out by CCAMLR, associated non-fishing 
activities such as human waste disposal, transportation of prohibited items, matters of 
vessel safety and contingency planning for oil spills have not yet been explicitly 
addressed.  CCAMLR fishing activities account for a large number of the vessels that 
operate regularly in the Antarctic Treaty area.  
   
Environmental impact assessment of such vessels is clearly consistent with 
CCAMLR’s object and purpose.  Although the EIA obligation in the Protocol is not 
directly applicable to activities within the jurisdiction of CCAMLR,  New Zealand’s 
requirement of IEEs for its domestic fishing industry does not imply a conflict of 
competency between institutions of the Antarctic Treaty system. Rather it promotes 
good practice.   
 
Accordingly, at the upcoming CCAMLR XXI meeting New Zealand will propose the 
application of an environmental impact assessment process in respect of fishing 
vessels as a tool for meeting the Commission’s obligations to protect the Antarctic 
marine environment.   
