XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-050
Agenda Item: ATCM 7
AUSTRALIA
Original: English










Report on Co-operation Among Parties with Respect to Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol - Australian Participation in the SWEDARP Expedition to Dronning Maud Land 2001-2002





























Submitted by Australia
Report on Co-operation Among Parties with Respect to Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol - Australian Participation in the SWEDARP Expedition to Dronning Maud Land 2001-2002
1.	Introduction
Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol requires Parties to share information that may be helpful to other Parties in planning and conducting their activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, with a view to the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.  With this article in mind, and as part of a wider collaborative program between Sweden and Australia, the Swedish Polar Research Secretariat extended an invitation to the Australian Antarctic Division for one of its officers to participate on the 2001-02 SWEDARP expedition to Dronning Maud Land.  Mr Warren Papworth, from the Australian Antarctic Division, was nominated as the Australian representative.  

A variety of operating systems and practices that had been put in place by SWEDARP to minimise potentially adverse environmental impacts to the Antarctic environment were observed during this visit.   In accordance with Article 6 a summary of these observations is provided below for the information of other Treaty Parties.   A full copy of the Australian report can be viewed at this URL www.aad.gov.au/swed.


2. 	Overview of SWEDARP 2001-2002
The 2001-02 SWEDARP expedition to Dronning Maud Land took place between 6 December 2001 and 31 January 2002.  It was termed a ‘light-weight’ research expedition as it was deployed via aircraft with minimal cargo and skidoos were used as the main form of transportation in the field.  This was the first time that SWEDARP had used aircraft as the principal means of transport to and from Antarctica and an important aim of the expedition was to test the viability of this system.  

The expedition left Cape Town, South Africa on 6 December 2001 on an Illuyshin 76 aircraft, arriving the next day at the Russian station of Novolazarevskaya.  Expedition personnel were then flown on a Basler DC-3 to Sweden’s main station, Wasa, located at Vestfjella, 73°03´S, 13°25´W at the base of the nunatuk.  The same route was used on the return flights with expedition personnel leaving Wasa station on 29 January, arriving at Cape Town on 31 January 2002. 

Wasa is currently used as a summer only station and has permanent accommodation for 12 people, although greater numbers can be accommodated if required in relocatable field labs/living vans.  The expedition comprised 11 people: an expedition leader, doctor, three scientists, logistics expert, technician, glacier safety expert, environmental chemist, photographer and the Australian representative. 

Four scientific programs were undertaken by the expedition.  These included two projects examining lichen dispersal within and between Antarctic nunataks, a study on the energetics and life history adaptions in Antarctic tardigrades, and research on the local and regional diversity of the microfauna on nunataks in Dronning Maud Land.

Detailed briefings on environmental management practices were provided to expeditioners by Dr Anders Modig, the SWEDARP Enivronmental Officer, both pre-departure and while in Antarctica.  All expedition members showed a high level of awareness of these and implemented them in their day-to-day activities in Antarctica.  

3.	Power Generation
Electricity for SWEDARP’s principal station, Wasa, is provided by solar panels mounted on the walls of the station and stored in 80 1.2v nickel cadmium batteries located underneath the building.  This provided 12, 24 and 220 volt power to the station through the use of a power inverter.  

A total of 12 sq. metres of solar panels (48 individual units) are installed and these produced sufficient electricity to operate the station during the seven weeks it was occupied.  There was only one period of approximately 12 hours when the system was unable to provide sufficient electricity for the whole station.  This occurred following three days of blizzard conditions.  During this period use of the electrical system was curtailed to conserve battery power, however this caused minimal disruption to station operations.  The station also has two diesel generators and two LPG generators as a back-up to the solar system.  These were not used during the 2001-2002 expedition.

The use of solar panels to provide electricity has many benefits for the Antarctic environment, the most obvious being that it does not require the burning of fossil fuels and the consequent production of potentially harmful emissions.  There is also no opportunity for accidental fuel spills to occur and it produces minimal long-term cumulative impacts.  Although such systems can not be used in Antarctica during the winter period, they can be used in conjunction with other power generation systems, such as wind turbines and small diesel or LPG generators, to significantly reduce the use of fossil fuels.  
4.	Energy Conservation
Wasa station has a range of energy conservation measures incorporated into the design of the main station building.  These provide an extremely energy efficient building that is both practical and comfortable to live in.  The walls, floor and ceiling are well insulated with 30-50cm of rock wool insulation.  The building is constructed of box plywood sections with an external cladding of timber vertical boards.  There are windows on the northern, eastern and western walls to maximise heat gain from the summer sun.  All windows are triple glazed and can be opened to provide ventilation and cooling of the building, even in blizzard conditions.

A heat exchange system continuously circulates heat from one part of the building to the other.  This allows heat generated from cooking meals, from use of the shower or sauna, and the heat generated by the occupants to be used to keep the whole building at an even temperature.  This system was so effective that no heaters were required to heat the station apart from three days when the station was first occupied and for one day at the end of a three day blizzard. 

The overall effect of these energy conservation measures is that the station is highly energy efficient.  It is estimated that the total energy cost in fossil fuels for the operation of the station over the seven weeks that it was functioning was only 300 kg of LPG and 28 litres of petrol.  
5.	Recycling
All wastes generated on the station are sorted and then stored in used 200 litre drums for back-loading and subsequent disposal or recycling in South Africa.   The 200 litre drums had half of their lids opened to provide a flap which could be closed to stop the waste blowing out of the containers in windy conditions.  

Wastes were sorted into organics, burnables, glass, metals, batteries, hazardous waste and waste oil.  Due to the bulky nature of some of the burnable waste it was difficult at times to fit it into the 200 litre drums.  One possible solution would be to compact the material with a press prior to containment.  This would also make transportation of the material when it is shipped out of Antarctica easier.
6.	Water Conservation and Use
Water consumption at Wasa station averaged out at only 40 litres a person per day over the summer period.  A range of water saving equipment has been installed in the station including water saving taps at all wash sinks, two standard thermostatic showers with water saving showerheads, a dishwasher machine with low water consumption and a washing machine with low water consumption1.

Fresh water supplies were obtained from a melt ice area approximately 1.5 km from the station.  A small hole was drilled into the ice at the start of the expedition and water pumped from it with a small electrical pump.  The water was transported back to the station, either in 6 x 50 litre urns (300 litres total) transported by skidoos, or in tanks transported by tracked over-snow vehicle (with a total capacity of 1,600 litres).  The water was then pumped into a holding tank located inside the main station building from which it was pumped via a small electric motor to various outlets within the building.

This system for collecting water requires relatively little energy to produce (less than 1 litre of petrol for 300 litres of water) and has no discernable environmental impact on the site from which the water is taken.  It is relatively labour intensive, depending on how the water is collected.  Two people are required when the water is collected with skidoos, one person when collecting with a larger tracked vehicle.  However, the collection of potable water in Antarctica is often a difficult, energy expensive process and the low environmental impact of this method has much to recommend it.

7.	Sewerage and Waste Water Treatment
The sewerage system consists of a simple long-drop into a 200 litre fuel drum that has had its lid removed.  Both faeces and urine are collected in the drum.  When the drum is full the drum lid is placed loosely on top and the drum left in Antarctica for two seasons to allow freeze-drying and evaporation of the liquids.  The residue is normally shipped to South Africa for disposal.  This system has many environmental benefits.   It does not require the discharge of sewerage effluents into the local environment, the only discharge being water which evaporates slowly into the atmosphere over a relatively long period of time. This is unlikely to have any adverse impact on the local environment.  Just as importantly, it does not require the establishment of a large infrastructure with the consequent long-term cumulative impacts associated with this.  Energy costs associated with the processing of the wastes are minimal.  

The eleven members of the 2001-2002 expedition produced a total of 5 drums of human waste over a period of two months.  Each drum was approximately 2/3rds full.

Grey water from showers, the laundry and kitchen is transported via a 100-metre long insulated and heated pipe to an ice covered area below the station where it drains into the surrounding ice.  

8.	Concluding Remarks
The design of the Wasa station has incorporated a wide range of technologies, the use of which results in it having a very low impact on the Antarctic environment.  

Importantly, the design of the buildings will minimise any long-term environmental impact.  There was very little build up of ice around the buildings and the construction of the foundations is such that they can be easily removed, leaving little evidence of the existence of the station. 

These design features have been complemented with operating procedures that similarly aim to minimise negative impacts on the environment.  Adoption of these measures has resulted in a highly efficient, comfortable and effective Antarctic station that could well be used as a model for other stations being built in Antarctica.

The Australian Antarctic Program records its appreciation for the opportunity to participate in and observe the Swedish Antarctic Program and for the hospitality shown to the Australian observer.  The inclusion of observers from other Antarctic programs is a valuable means of sharing experiences to the benefit of both Antarctic programs.

Bibliography

    1. Reuterskiold, M., Editor 1991: Swedish Antarctic Research Programme 1989/90 - A Cruise Report, Swedish Polar Research Secretariat.
