XXV ATCM 
CEP Information Paper 
September 2002 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Progress Report from the Intersessional Contact Group on Cumulative Impacts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Paper Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by 
the United States of America 
Progress Report from the Intersessional Contact Group 
On Cumulative Impacts 
 
Information Paper Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by 
the United States of America 
 
 
At the last CEP meeting (St. Petersburg, July 2002), the Committee agreed upon the 
importance of a coordinated approach to monitoring cumulative impacts, and established 
an intersessional contact group (ICG) to consider means to further that objective.  Dr. 
Joyce Jatko (United States) was designated to chair the ICG.  It was envisioned that the 
ICG would provide the Committee with advice on how to encourage coordination of 
research and monitoring relating to cumulative impacts of activities in Antarctica. 
 
The Terms of Reference agreed upon for the ICG are as follows: 
 
• present an annotated summary of past and continuing studies and reports that are 
examining cumulative environmental impacts pertinent to the Protocol, including, for 
example, those examining tourism, national programmes, and non-governmental 
expeditions; 
 
• consider and advise on how future studies on human impacts could be coordinated 
and conducted, including the roles that SCAR, COMNAP,CCAMLR  and IAATO, 
ASOC and other non-governmental organizations might play in this work; 
 
• 
identify priorities for future studies on cumulative environmental impacts of human 
activity in Antarctica; 
 
• 
provide a progress report to CEP V and a final report to CEP VI. 
 
In the first year of the two-year ICG, members were asked to provide an annotated 
summary of past and continuing studies examining cumulative environmental impacts to 
the chair of the ICG.  Australia, Argentina, Sweden, New Zealand, the United States, the 
United Kingdom, and ASOC participated in this effort, and their responses were 
circulated to all members of the ICG. 
 
Australia submitted information on four monitoring projects they have undertaken, in 
addition to a description of their monitoring database.  Australia further included a 
discussion of priorities for future research on cumulative impacts.  Argentina submitted 
detailed information on three major monitoring programs, as well as information on other 
monitoring programs they participate in cooperatively.  Sweden submitted a description 
of the Swedish environmental monitoring program.  New Zealand submitted information 
on three monitoring projects it has undertaken.  The United States submitted an annotated 
bibliography of thirty-four published works citing research and monitoring projects 
relating to environmental impacts of human activities.  The United Kingdom submitted 
information on its long-term environmental monitoring project at Rothera Station.  
Finally, ASOC submitted detailed information on two research/monitoring programs 
relating to cumulative impacts. 
 
In the coming year the ICG will consider and advise on how future studies of human 
impacts could be coordinated and conducted, and identify priorities for future studies.  A 
final report, with the complete findings of the ICG will be provided to CEP VI. 
