 
  
CEP V  
Information Paper IP-? 
Agenda Item 4(g) 
Australia 
 
Original:  English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clean up of a Former Subantarctic Research Station at 
Heard Island  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Submitted by Australia 
 
  
Clean up of a Former Subantarctic Research Station at 
Heard Island 
 
While Heard Island lies outside the Antarctic Treaty area, Parties may be interested in Australia’s 
experience with cleanup operations at a significant subantarctic site. 
Heard Island is located at 53° 06' S, 73° 31' 59E, some 4,500 km south west of Perth.   The islands lie 
outside the Antarctic Treaty Area but within the CCAMLR convention area.  The island was 
inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1998, in recognition of its outstanding natural values.  
The Australian Government established the first ANARE research station at Atlas Cove on Heard 
Island in December 1947 and occupied it until 1954, when it was closed to allow the establishment of 
Mawson station, in eastern Antarctica.  Following the closure of the station the condition of the 
buildings deteriorated due to the frequent gale force winds, rain and snow that is characteristic of the 
climate on Heard Island.    
The station ruins are cited in the Heard Island Wilderness Reserve Management Plan as a potential 
environmental liability, as an occupational health and safety hazard to visitors, and a risk to wildlife 
and aesthetic values.  Accordingly, the Australian Government announced in May 1998 that the 
Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) would be responsible for cleaning up the site, including 
demolishing ruined structures, and collecting scattered debris in the vicinity.  
The opportunity was taken during a short visit in January 2000 to undertake essential clean up tasks, 
and to compile an inventory of the site. As a result of this work, the AAD scheduled cleanup activities 
for the 2000/2001 season.  This included developing a Cultural Heritage Plan for the site and an 
environmental assessment.  The clean up was planned to be done without the use of heavy equipment.   
A four-person cleanup team visited Heard Island in November 2000 with the objective of cleaning up 
the derelict buildings and rehabilitating the abandoned site, provided that doing so did not damage the 
environment or detract from the site’s heritage values. 
The cleanup team achieved the following: 
• 
Surveyed and documented buildings and artefacts at the site. 
• 
Dismantled 13 buildings that posed an environmental threat. 
• 
Retained only those parts of the structures (such as floors of demolished huts, foundations, 
concrete pads, engine blocks, tanks etc) that were likely to survive for the foreseeable future, 
which would indicate the site’s history, and which did not pose an environmental threat. 
• 
Collected debris scattered around the site. 
• 
Shipped approximately 25 tonnes of waste to Australia for disposal, including 1.2 tonnes of 
waste asbestos-cement sheet and asbestos insulation, removed in accordance with appropriate 
Australian standards. 
• 
Stabilised the former recreation hut in accordance with the Cultural Heritage Plan. 
• 
Disposed of combustible, non-plastic material that did not have significant heritage value by 
controlled burning on-site,. 
• 
Collected post-ANARE artefacts that were unlikely to survive the elements. 
Additional clean up will be necessary as remnant material is exposed by wind-blown sand, and to 
remediate a small amount of hydrocarbon and heavy metal contamination. 
The clean up was successful in preserving a record of Australia’s activities in the Antarctic, removing 
a substantial amount of waste material, and reducing environmental and safety hazards. 
