XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-014
Agenda Item: ATCM 13
Russia
Original : English







Russian scientific geological research 
in Antarctica
in context of Article 7 of the Madrid Protocol

















During XXIV ATCM (St. Petersburg, Russia, July 9 – 20, 2001) some delegations expressed concern about the nature of Russian scientific geological research in Antarctica. As noted in item 126 of the Final Report, “the English language translation of the Working Paper XXIV ATCM/WP27 tabled by Russia could give rise to a perception that some of the geological research being undertaken was mineral exploration, contrary to Article 7 of the Madrid Protocol”. Despite clarifications made by Russia that this was not the case and the research was purely scientific, similar inquiries were made at other meetings and in mass media. To this end the Russian delegation feels it appropriate to provide additional clarifications with regard to interpretation of Article 7 of the Madrid Protocol and to related activities carried out by Russia in Antarctica. 
The wording of Article 7 is so simple and straightforward to afford any misinterpretation. It contains no limitation whatever with regard to scientific research associated with mineral resource expectations in Antarctica, thus demonstrating a full compliance with the freedom of scientific research provided by the Antarctic Treaty. 
A clue to distinction between geological investigations that can be classified as “scientific research” and those that fall under “mineral resource activities” (“mineral exploration”) in the sense of Article 7 of the Protocol is provided in the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA) that unequivocally defines the mineral resource activities as consisting of prospecting, exploration and development, i.e. three successive stages of a continuous economic process aimed at commercial production of mineral wealth. 
Any geological observations, however relevant they might have appeared for the decision to proceed commercially, may not be considered as mineral resource activity and must be classified as advancing scientific research. The latter can be subdivided into an earlier (reconnaissance) stage and a later (regional) stage. The methods and technologies applied during both these stages are similar while their main difference is subject to the density of observation coverage. Random reconnaissance lines (tens and hundreds kilometers apart) are applied at the first stage allowing the initial recognition of geological features along individual profiles. At the second stage more systematic and closer spaced (5 – 20 km) intersections are focused on the correlation of the revealed features between the lines. In general, and particularly in the Antarctic terra incognita, the means and methods of the advanced science research remain unaltered in the studies of a purely academic nature (e.g. subglacial Lake Vostok project, tectonic evolution of the Antarctic lithosphere and Gondwana breakup, etc.).

Summary 
The Russian geological scientific programs in the Antarctic, both on land and offshore, correspond precisely to reconnaissance and regional stages of geological investigations and must not be mistaken for mineral exploration. The results of these studies are regularly reported to SCAR, freely exchanged and widely published and used in fundamental context (global tectonics, Precambrian geology, environmental change, etc.) by analogy with other Gondwana continents and their submarine margins.
