XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-103
Agenda Item ATCM 5b
IUCN
Original: English


REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION
 (IUCN)

Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
XXV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

September 2002
Warsaw, Poland


General

IUCN congratulates the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty System on the recent coming into force of Annex V on Area Protection and Management to the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection.  This provides a valuable opportunity to take a systematic approach to protecting the Antarctic environment through a network of protected areas, including marine areas.   The Plan of Implementation agreed by governments last week at the World Summit on Sustainable Development reinforces the timeliness of an expansion to offshore waters.  Paragraph 31 of the Plan of Implementation of Agenda 21 calls for governments to protect marine biodiversity both within and beyond national jurisdiction, and to consider a range of tools, including the development of representative networks of MPAs by 2012.  IUCN and its network of experts would be pleased to offer their assistance, as requested, to develop such a network.

Background

IUCN, The World Conservation Union, is a unique partnership of States, government agencies and non-governmental organizations. Founded in 1948, it now has 880 members, including 173 States and government agency members, from 133 countries.  In addition, over 8000 volunteer scientists and practitioners contribute to fulfilling IUCN’s mission, through six global Commissions.

The Union’s mission is:
“to influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the work to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable.”

Activities

IUCN has been concerned with Antarctic conservation issues for over 40 years.  Some of our most recent activities relevant to Antarctic conservation are listed below

High Seas

A High Seas Ecosystem Protection Project has been developed by the IUCN, IUCN’s World Commission on Protected Areas, Marine (WCPA) and WWF. This is the beginning of a major initiative to conserve marine living resources of the high seas. A report entitled The Status of Natural Resources on the High Seas (2001) has been published, which concludes that urgent action is necessary to protect some of the most fragile high seas ecosystems and build upon the existing ocean governance structures to give greater importance to the conservation of the living resources and ecosystems of the high seas. A recent IUCN publication clarifies many of the elements of the existing legal regimes in this field: International Oceans Governance: Using International Law and Organizations to Manage Marine Sources Sustainably. Lee Kimball.2001. These two documents are available online at www.IUCN.ORG/themes/marine/pubs/html.

World Commission on Protected Areas

The IUCN/WCPA aims to increase the capacity of management institutions and practitioners while building a sustainable network of globally representative MPAs. WCPA-Marine is developing mechanisms and global standards for improving management effectiveness of protected areas. Current programmes of high relevance to protected areas in the Antarctica include the demonstration of MPAs as a tool for sustainable fisheries management as well as for the protection and restoration of marine biodiversity. 

IUCN has recently published revised editions of three important contributions to MPA establishment and management: Guidelines for the establishment of Marine Protected Areas (IUCN/WCPA, 1999)  (Available online at wcpa.iucn.org/biome/marine/marine.html). 
Marine and Coastal Protected Areas: a Guide for Planners and Managers (Clark and Salm, 2000), and Net Gains: Linking Fisheries Management, International Trade and Sustainable Development (Deere, 2000).

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee

IUCN activities specific to the Antarctic include efforts to promote the establishment and management of new forms of Antarctic protected areas, with special emphasis on marine sites; steps to insure that cumulative environmental impacts are understood and taken into account in decision–making within the Antarctic Treaty System; and efforts to stop illegal fishing in the ocean around Antarctic while improving CCAMLR’s legal and enforcement systems.  IUCN also participated in intercessional discussions on Annex II regarding protection of species of flora and fauna.  


Recent IUCN Resolutions and Recommendations

At the World Conservation Congress in Amman Jordan, October 2000, IUCN members agreed Resolutions urging all Parties to the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection to take the necessary steps to ensure that its provisions are mandatory in the domestic legal context; bring Annex V on Protected Areas into force while developing a comprehensive network of protected areas. 

IUCN is now organizing the Fifth World Parks Congress, in Durban, South Africa 8-17 September 2003, dedicated to demonstrating the importance and relevance of protected areas to the broader economic, social and environmental agendas of the world in the 21st century.  A special focus of the conference is on building comprehensive protected areas systems, including in areas beyond national jurisdiction.

IUCN members and Commissions particularly those for Protected Areas, Species Survival and Environmental Law, stand ready to continue their associations with the Antarctic Treaty System.  We would like to play an important role in providing a forum for the discussion of issues affecting Antarctica’s environment by governmental and non-governmental bodies and in contributing to the work of the components of the Antarctic Treaty System. 

Annex:

Resolution from the IUCN World Conservation Congress in Amman Jordan, October 2000

2.54. 	Antarctica and the Southern Ocean

