ATCM XXV 
Information Paper IP-61
Agenda Item: ATCM 10
Australia
Original:  English



















3rd International Conference on Contaminants in Freezing Ground – Collaboration between the Arctic and Antarctic Research Communities































 Submitted by Australia



3rd International Conference on Contaminants in Freezing Ground – Collaboration between the Arctic and Antarctic research communities

Introduction 
Contamination in cold regions has only recently become a widely recognized problem. Extraction of oil and gas, mining, disposal of nuclear wastes, and pollution associated with military activities, settlement, tourism, shipping and even infrastructure support of scientific research have all been sources of contamination in the ground in cold regions. Once in the ground, contaminants typically become mobile in the summer months and are readily dispersed from their immediate sources, where they then cause environmental impacts or pose risks to human health. However, the ways by which contaminants in freezing ground disperse and interact with associated ecosystems is a new and challenging field of applied research. Such research must underpin the design and optimisation of techniques for site management and assessment, particularly since remediation in cold regions is inherently more difficult and expensive than elsewhere. 

Brief history of the first two conferences
To facilitate the exchange of ideas and to promote a better understanding of the unique characteristics and problems that contaminants in freezing ground pose, the First International Conference on Contaminants in Freezing Ground was held in Cambridge in 1997. Research topics at the first meeting covered a broad range of interests, including a synthesis of the Arctic environmental strategy as it stood in 1997, the fundamental physical, chemical and biological properties of contaminated frozen soils, experimental approaches to contaminant movement, and possibilities for in situ bioremediation of petroleum spills.

The Second International Conference on Contaminants in Freezing Ground was held in 2000, also in Cambridge. Sixty participants from 12 countries attended the 3-day meeting and workshops. Much of the research was again dominated by discussion of Arctic issues and case studies, although scientists from Australia and New Zealand contributed a southern perspective from their work in Antarctica. In total 26 papers were published that spanned a wide range of issues: fundamental properties of contaminated soil, factors affecting dispersal, use of remote sensing in assessment and management, microbial response to contamination, bioremediation, and site management. Of the 26 papers that were published from the second conference, only 3 were directly concerned with Antarctica. Given the extent of contamination in Antarctica, which is perhaps of the order of 1- to 10-million cubic metres of abandoned waste, with possibly a similar volume of petroleum-contaminated soil, surprisingly little research or remediation has been undertaken in a continent that is widely perceived as being of global environmental significance and a symbol of good environmental stewardship. One of the reasons for the apparent lag in Antarctic remediation is that site-specific R&D is not as advanced as it in the Arctic. 

Objectives of the third conference
Overcoming the apparent lag between remediation and R&D in Antarctic operations was a key issue to develop and promote through the third conference.   Australia is currently embarking on a full-scale trial to clean-up our legacy of abandoned waste sites. However, before proceeding too far we are examining world’s best practices for assessing, managing and monitoring contaminants in freezing ground. It was for these reasons that Australia offered to host the Third International Conference. Our aim was to facilitate the exchange of scientific, technical and practical expertise in dealing with contaminants in freezing ground between northern and southern hemisphere scientists, environmental managers, industry stakeholders, and national Arctic and Antarctic operators; thereby strengthening and broadening the contaminants in freezing ground network to include Antarctic practitioners.  

Attendance at the conference
More than 115 participants attended the 4-day conference in Hobart from 14–18 April 2002, with about 70 abstracts received from researchers from Australia, Canada, Estonia, Finland, France, Holland, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, Sweden, UK, and the US. The conference website has had more than 11 000 visits (excluding internal visits) in the past 18 months, indicating a very high level of public interest. The conference was also well attended by the media, and more than 50 interviews were conducted over 4 days. Several were in non-English languages and the coverage was of international extent.

Conference topics
The conference was structured into 11 plenary sessions, 2 poster and sponsor exhibitions, and 3 parallel workshops. Five presentations either compared or directly considered both arctic and antarctic issues; 40 presentations concerned the antarctic directly, 23 concerned the arctic directly, and 3 were of a more general experimental nature. Day 1 focused on Legal, policy and compliance issues and also covered aspects of Assessment procedures. Day 2 continued with Site assessment but in the context of Remote sensing and how Fundamental properties and dispersal processes contribute to the management decision-making process. Day 3 focused on Strategies for site management and new techniques, with several presentations covering various aspects of Bioremediation. Day 4 began with four talks that all linked to the topics of the workshops.   

Three workshop sessions that addressed key issues identified at the Second International Conference were widely attended, and that reflected the strengths and interests of the participants at this meeting. 

Workshop 1, Developing meaningful environmental guidelines for contaminants in freezing ground, began the process of identifying the potential sources of differences between contaminant concentrations thought to cause environmental harm in temperate ecosystems and cold regions. The issue then was to determine how much is too much and how can we best co-ordinate international efforts to derive meaningful guidelines for polar regions? 

Workshop 2, Development of best practice for bioremediation in freezing ground, is also the topic of a major monograph that is being prepared for publication in the coming years. Discussions considered what the most cost-effective and environmentally safe techniques were and how best to validate success or otherwise. One of the key recommendations from the workshop was not to introduce micro-organisms during bioremediation, apparently a common practice in Arctic. Introductions are usually not needed, and would not be suitable for Antarctica in any case, actually reduce remediation rates in some cases, and there are risks associated with the approach. It was generally held that the common practice in the arctic is motivated more by marketing than sound scientific principles.  

The theme of validation and monitoring was developed in Workshop 3, Principles of contaminant monitoring in freezing ground and associated ecosystems. Because of the need to monitor for chemical contamination associated with two major Australian operations planned for the 2002-03 and 2003-04 austral summers - clean-up of an abandoned waste disposal site at Casey Station, and establishment of an intercontinental air link to Antarctica - Australia sponsored this workshop to encourage international feedback on how we should undertake monitoring. The objectives were to document recommendations for a protocol to monitor for contaminants entering the freezing ground environment from a proposed air transport system; and to discuss techniques and protocols for assessment, monitoring and compliance during site remediation.

Feedback and future developments
The quality of presentations was excellent and the discussions were all lively and often very penetrating. Many respondents, particularly international participants, said they found the breadth of coverage and having both arctic and antarctic research in the same forum to be of great value. 

In many ways the Contaminants in Freezing Ground conference series provides a holistic approach to improve the way that we manage contamination in these precious ecosystems. We found that the strength of the meetings comes from the range of specialists who participate in the various forums, and the long-lasting networks of contacts and collaborations. We were fortunate to have attracted representatives who were environmental managers, engineers, remote sensing specialists, and scientific researchers from a diverse range of disciplines. Participants came from a broad spectrum of organisations including universities, corporations, government and national Antarctic agencies, military, and non-government organisations. 

Approximately 26 papers have been submitted for peer review to the journals Polar Record and Cold Regions Science and Technology, and we anticipate publishing most of these in 2003. Discussions are continuing about how we can most effectively work together at a practical level to improve the environment of the polar regions by reducing the presence of contaminants in freezing ground.

Although the venue of the 4th International conference on Contaminants in Freezing Ground will be back in the northern hemisphere in Alaska in 2004, we achieved our objective of bringing the two polar research communities together on this emerging field of science. Many participants are now part of an international network of specialists who are collaborating on common issues, and we know of several joint ventures and research proposals that are now bi-polar. One important medium for this communication is the establishment of an interactive web site to allow the contaminants research and remediation community to exchange ideas, get technical advice and discuss problems. This is one of the future developments we are currently working towards.

For further information contact:
Ian Snape at the Australian Antarctic Division, on ian.snape@aad.gov.au

