XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-018
Agenda Item: 	ATCM 4
Ukraine
Original: Russian


On Ukraine interest to achieve Consultative Party status of the Antarctic Treaty

The Ukraine expresses interest to achieve Consultative Party status of the Antarctic Treaty. The Ukraine plans to send the official documents to the Depositary Governments of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol (USA) before XXVI ATCM, 2003 in Madrid (Spain) and informs all the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties on following:
According to Article XIII (1) of the Treaty Ukraine acceded to the Antarctic Treaty on 17 September 1992, the Treaty ratification by the Ukraine Parliament was implemented on 7 August 1992.
In accordance with Article XIII of the Treaty on XVII ATCM on October 1992, (Italy) Ukraine has got the status Party, which was joined to The Treaty.
The Ukraine is a member of CCAMLR, and since 1994 is the associated member of SCAR. 
Due to the Memorandum of Understanding between the British Antarctic Survey and the Ukrainian Antarctic Center signed in June 1995, the British Antarctic station Faraday was transferred to Ukraine (now – Akademik Vernadsky Antarctic station). 
According to Article X of the Treaty the Ukraine has provided the complex and systematic research in Antarctica since 6 February 1996. The six Ukrainian Antarctic expeditions were organized and the seventh is carried out. The Ukrainian Antarctic Center is the organization for undertaking, co-ordinations, and logistics supply the Antarctic studies as the national operator of the Ukraine in Antarctica.
The Ukrainian scientists are carried out the meteorology, hydrology, geomagnetic and ionosphere measurements, total ozone observations. The intensive studies of upper atmosphere are provided at Vernadsky. Unique VLF and ULF receivers, high sensitive magnetometers equip the station.
The state program of Ukrainian researches in Antarctica for 2002 –2010 adopted by Cabinet Ministries of Ukraine act of 13 September 2001 No 422-r had defined the strategy of Ukraine activity in Antarctic region for development and support of social-economic, ecologic, scientific and technical, national culture and other activity. The program is the complex of projects of scientific researches in Antarctica and foreseen the development of new technology (Article IX of Antarctic Agreement). 
According to Article IX of the Treaty and Article 22 of the Madrid Protocol the Ukraine is accepted the law of adhering the Protocol (February, 22 2001, No 2284-III). On XXV ATCM the Depositary Governments of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol (USA) has reported on acceding of the Ukraine to Madrid Protocol and Recommendations XVI-10 (Annex V to the Protocol).
Nowadays the Ukraine according to Article 3, 8 of the Protocol is implementing the Protocol rules on legislative and practical level in Ukrainian law. The Cabinet Minister of the Ukraine is discussing the law "On Antarctic activity". The resolution of the Cabinet Minister on "Designation act for the appropriate authority for the permits issue on Antarctic activity the Ukraine citizens in Antarctic Treaty area” are under consideration. The Ukraine committee for permits issue was created.
According to Article VII of the Treaty the international inspection in 1999 and 2001 of the Vernadsky station reports that Ukraine follows the principles of Antarctic activity and main issues of the Antarctic Treaty System.

