XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-011
Agenda Item: ATCM 4b
CCAMLR
Original : English


Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

Summary

Information on the proposed Antarctic Treaty Secretariat has been requested from CCAMLR by various Parties. Such information has been provided and is consolidated here on the understanding that that it should not be taken out of context. The CCAMLR Secretariat is keen to provide any assistance required, as it is also part of the Antarctic Treaty System. In this context, there is a high level of awareness that relearning past lessons will not only cause in-efficiency to any common membership, it may also delay the Treaty Secretariat’s effective and timely implementation.


    1. Background


1.1	The following notes have been prepared for ATCM-XXV to facilitate discussion and to assist in resolving issues concerning the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. They are presented as insightful comments and not as formal advice to be used without additional interpretation or expansion.  These notes do not constitute a commentary on the operations of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), its Members or Secretariat and should not be considered as such.


2.	Headquarters Agreement

2.1	From precedent set by the Headquarters Agreement Between the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the Government of Australia, any future Agreement between the Host Government for the Secretariat (Argentina) and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties should, inter alia:

    • Be able to address future changes in local conditions and in the organisation (i.e. Secretariat) itself;

    • Accord appropriate status to the organisation, meetings, delegates, secretariat, offices and staff (including those recruited locally);

    • Detail appropriate measures to standardise treatment of Secretariat staff members from different Member States;

    • Make appropriate allowances to deal with other regulatory and/or bodies affected by the Secretariat’s location/activities (e.g. Buenos Aires City authorities), and

    • Depending on the Host Government’s resources being utilised, address issues such as security and confidentiality concerning such resources.

3.	Secretariat Headquarters

3.1	Assuming that the staffing levels and tasks for the Treaty Secretariat are likely to be similar to those of CCAMLR, some indication of the accommodation necessary to support the functions of the former is possible.

3.2	The CCAMLR Secretariat accommodates 23 staff, eight of which share office space and one of which is located in a common reception area. In addition to normal amenities such as staff kitchen, reception area and toilets, other specifically designated spaces include two meeting areas, a library area, a storage/archive area, a photocopy room and a specially ventilated computer room. 

3.3	The rental for the CCAMLR building is the subject of a lease between the Australian Commonwealth Government and the Tasmanian State Government. This lease sets the conditions of payment, the responsibilities for building services (e.g. air conditioning and emergency response) and maintenance, and various other conditions of occupation. CCAMLR funds light, cleaning and telephone services while the Australian Government pays the basic rent.

3.4	Access to the CCAMLR Secretariat is controlled by an electronic key system and the premises are monitored by an electronic alarm system. Parking spaces for 20 cars are also provided.
    

4.	Staffing

4.1	The CCAMLR Staff Regulations are fairly comprehensive, although experience has shown that they could be more effective in addressing some issues (e.g. Australian income tax status) for General Services Staff 1 recruited locally. 

4.2	The CCAMLR Secretariat performs on-going work as well a specifically-defined tasks, both of which are seasonal in nature.  The current mix of skilled, experienced, casual, permanent, management, supervisory and operational staff has evolved with time to match specific needs within prevailing budgetary limitations. Given the specificity of CCAMLR’s needs, these are not likely to constitute appropriate indicators of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s functionality at this stage. Nevertheless some indication of CCAMLR’s general staff structure based on functionality may be useful in the context of the type and scope of tasks which the Treaty Secretariat is likely to address.

4.3	Accepting that the CCAMLR Secretariat’s structure is by no means rigid or clearly delineated, its specific areas of function comprise:

    • Compliance (including Catch Documentation Scheme) (2 Staff Members);

    • *Data Management (4 Staff Members);

    • *Publication Preparation (1.5 Staff Members);

    • *Publication, Document Distribution & Storage (1.5 Staff Members);

    • *Translation (6 Staff Members);

    • *Information Technology & Website (2.5 Staff Members);

    • *Administration, Reception & Finance (3 Staff Members), and

    • Other (1 Staff Member).

Those tasks most likely to duplicate similar tasks within the Treaty Secretariat are marked with “*”. The list does not include cleaning staff, interpreters (see below) etc. provided for under short-term contracts with the service providers.

4.4	Details of CCAMLR staff deployments can be broken down by:

Contracts Based on Working Hours
Full-time Staff	14
Part-time Staff	  9

Employment Type
Permanent Staff	20
Casual Staff		  3

Contract Type
UN Based		  4 (Pay Levels - 1xD1, 2xP4, 1xP3)
Locally Based		16

4.5	A Staff Assessment Levy is payable by staff in lieu of income tax and credited to CCAMLR as income. The rates used to determine the Levy level for each Staff Member are derived from United Nations’ (UN) rates for Professional Staff2 and Australian Tax rates for others.  The latter is complex and requires assessment in the light of other Australian tax consider-ations (e.g. such as investment earnings). The entire process is further complicated since Australian CCAMLR employees are subject to Australian taxes. The Levy therefore aims to avoid double taxation with taxes for Australian staff being recovered from the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

4.6	The extent of allowances paid under the UN System depends on the country of origin of the employee concerned (e.g. Australian citizens are entitled to only a few allowances, including social security) and the number of dependents. Available allowances include:

    • Settling In & Repatriation Allowances;

    • Dependents Allowance (as defined by the Staff Regulations – e.g. for children under 18-yrs of age);

    • Education (up to, but not including, university level), and

    • Home Leave Every Two Years for Expatriate Staff.

There appear to be no inherent difficulties associated with staff being on pay scales set by the mother organisation (e.g. the ATCM).  However, CCAMLR’s use of the UN scales ensures a common standard and maintains the Secretariat’s international character as well as status. On the other hand, the use of the UN scales reduces CCAMLR’s ability to directly control the amounts expended for staff appointed against such scales. The UN pay scales have an overall effect of limiting the number of staff appointed against them, but do assist in budgetary control.


5.	Financial

5.1	Budgeting
The CCAMLR Secretariat is responsible for preparing and administering the organisation’s budget. CCAMLR Financial Regulations are based on normal Australian government accounting practices from the time of the Headquarters Agreement’s entry into force (i.e. from two decades ago). These have been modified to address specific requirements.  Since both government accounting practices and CCAMLR’s specific requirements have substantially changed, it has been periodically necessary to revise the Financial Regulations.  These are currently adequate in terms of control/accountability, but exhibit some scope for improvement in assisting efficiency, transparency and the management of resources.  Two specific areas currently under consideration include the general accounting policy to be followed (modified cash v accrual) and the budgetary presentation formats to the Commission. 

5.2	It should also be noted that, at times, the CCAMLR Financial Regulations have been subject to different interpretation. A clear example of this has been the rather patchy implement-ation of the Contingency Fund (see 5.7 below). The need for such a Fund is clear under circumstances when cash flow is clearly compromised, but its justification may be less at other times when a “zero growth” budget is the objective. This may result in a budgetary shortfall over some years which has to be made up at some later time – with an obvious fiscal lag which also must be addressed and which may raise redress costs in the short term. It is therefore suggested that the role, dynamics and/or institution of a Treaty Secretariat Contingency Fund should be elaborated as objectively and as soon as possible to avoid any inconsistent future application.

5.3	The CCAMLR Financial Regulations also address Members’ obligations in contribution payment. The conditions associated with contribution payments have been made more stringent from time to time, but often with difficulty. Therefore, it is worthwhile expending some effort on ensuring that the conditions associated with contribution payment are as clear and as stringent as possible from the beginning.

5.4	CCAMLR continues to experience major problem with late payment of contributions, although compared with many other international organisations it has not as yet experienced a complete payment default. Payment defaults and delays cause both budgetary and cash-flow problems with obvious impact on the organisation’s functionality. For these reasons, it is essential that there be an agreed procedure in place to monitor payments and to address possible contingency plans to avoid organisational dysfunction(s).

5.5	A breakdown of CCAMLR’s current annual expenditure is given in Table 1.

5.6	Scheduling of Meetings
The CCAMLR Standing Committee on Administration and Finance (SCAF) meets at the same time as the Standing Committee on Observation and Inspection (SCOI).  There is insufficient time for both committees to complete all their work, and the pressure of time is a major impediment to their effectiveness.  Although as much as possible is prepared in advance, there are still issues arising in SCOI, the CCAMLR Scientific Committee and the Commission itself which cannot be predicted.  One way of reducing such time pressures to promote more efficient working of the committees could be to limit their participation to a few Commission Members (i.e. working as a select committee). However, with consensus- based decision-making being at the core of both CCAMLR and the ATCM, any advantages from utilising select, as opposed to fully representative, committees are likely to be outweighed by issues being reopened in full plenary discussion.

5.7	Contingency Fund
The impracticality of intersessional or correspondence meetings probably outweighs the disadvantages of an annual meeting.  Over recent years, CCAMLR has encountered substantial financial difficulties which have had to be addressed intersessionally with even temporary solutions only being provided at the annual meeting.  Such problems have now been recognised as a standing risk, so CCAMLR has agreed to establish a Contingency Fund for use in facing intersessional financial emergencies. Being built up over a couple of years and with appropriate restrictions for its use, the Executive Secretary, with the support of the Commission and/or SCAF Chair, should be able to access the Contingency Fund to weather any future/unseen problems.

5.8	Computer Renatl
CCAMLR has considered it necessary for the Secretariat to establish a computer rental policy since the continuous upgrading of computer software and hardware is expensive and outright purchase may lead to deferment of upgrading until equipment is “written off” (as much as eight years after purchase) . Given the rapid advances associated with computer development, there are obvious maintenance, incompatibility and inefficiency implications inherent in long term commitment to single systems.  

5.9	As a one-off, the change to a computer rental system has enabled the CCAMLR Secretariat to get abreast of current technological advances in both computer hardware and software in a single year and with minimal extra costs.  Other advantages include possession of new and current equipment, no need to manage the disposal of redundant equipment and more frequent upgrades, where necessary, are relatively easy.  Two other advantages include improved cash flow and the ability to follow an accounting practice on a cash basis which more closely approximates an accruals system. A minor disadvantage is marginal extra cost.


6.	Translation and Interpretation

        6.1 Like the ATCM, most major CCAMLR publications are in the four official languages (English, French, Russian and Spanish). The CCAMLR Secretariat has learnt over the years that there are difficulties associated with, and inherent risks underlying, the estimation of the time required for document translation.  Simple translation is relatively quick, but translations of complex work, technical papers, sensitive texts and appropriate formatting all take much longer.  A clear example of this is the CCAMLR annual meetings when over 400 pages of reports, as well as many pages of drafts, working papers and correspondence are translated in about three weeks. However, it takes a number of months before translations are sufficiently polished for the reports to be published.  As a result, the CCAMLR Secretariat avoids budgeting for translation on an ‘unseen’ basis wherever possible, and instead works with the translators to estimate costs in specific circumstances.  As a general rule an estimate of about A$100 per page appears to offer a good starting point on which to base translation costs, but consideration of other factors might increase this figure substantially. Alternatively, there could be cost reductions if similar work has been done before.

6.2	Historically, CCAMLR has employed part-time translators as this enables the language translation teams to cope more easily with fluctuating work loads while maintaining appropriate checking procedures and capacity.  It also ensures continuity of quality should any single translator leave. CCAMLR translators are located in the Secretariat as this provides the critical mass and synergy necessary to provide accurate, efficient and cost-effective translation.

6.3	CCAMLR contracts interpreters as a team via an open/competitive tender. Effective management of this team is crucial to maintaining quality over the extended (two-week) CCAMLR meeting period. Some continuity in the composition of the teams from year-to-year also improves interpretation efficiency and accuracy.  CCAMLR employs nine interpreters in the team, but could get by with only six. However, this would place additional pressure on interpreters (especially during busy sections of the meeting(s)) and so increase the risk of service loss over a full two weeks.


    7. Communications

        7.1 Currently, e-mail and the CCAMLR Website appear to be effective and efficient forms of communication.  However, there are still a number of problems. These include the applied use of passwords and the need to ensure on-line, and secure, availability of the CCAMLR-
e-address year round, day and night.  In addition, keeping track of the Member represent-ative(s) to which communications are to be addressed, and on which subjects, remains an ongoing challenge.  The best way to minimise such difficulties appears to be to retain standard procedures for as much and as long as possible, even to the extent of incurring some internal short-term inefficiencies.


    8. Legal Personality

8.1	Article VIII of the CAMLR Convention imbues the Commission with legal personality. The attendant modalities are carried through to the establishment of a CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart (Article XII) and the setting up of the Secretariat (Article XVII). In contrast, the Antarctic Treaty does not explicitly elaborate the System’s legal personality and Treaty Article IX lacks formality in respect of the associated administrative arrangements for which it provides. Therefore, the matter requires some consideration, and possibly some elabor-ation, to ensure an appropriate legal status for the Treaty Secretariat.  


9.	Other Considerations

9.1	Other matters worth considering are:
    • It is important for there to be a clear understanding on the extent to which authority and responsibility is delegated to the Executive Secretary.  The establishment of clear guidelines and reporting processes avoid Members having to do things which can be more efficiently addressed by the Secretariat, and

    • There are a number of areas where specific policies should be established at an early stage to avoid later misunderstanding(s).  These might include, for example:


            ▪ Data availability
            ▪ Cooperation with other organisations
            ▪ Secretariat travel
            ▪ Contingency funding

9.2	The considerations outlined here only scratch the surface and hopefully CCAMLR can provide further practical advice on establishment and ongoing management to the ATCM.  It would be unfortunate if decades of CCAMLR experience in problem resolution was ignored and if past mistakes were repeated in the setting up of the Treaty Secretariat.  As part of the Antarctic Treaty System, CCAMLR stands to benefit from the establishment of an effective and efficient Treaty Secretariat.  To date, the CCAMLR Secretariat has only responded to specific questions, rather than provide the full assistance which a more structured and comprehensive discussion could provide. Therefore, it is suggested that a formal link be established for communication between the ATCM, Host Government (Argentina) and the CCAMLR Secretariat. This should go a long way to taking CCAMLR’s experiences and lessons into account when selecting and finalising the Treaty Secretariat’s detailed operations and functionality.

TABLE 1.	Typical annual costs incurred by the CCAMLR Secretariat. All figures are 
given in Australian dollars. Figures marked with “*” are calculated on a per capita basis.

COMPONENT
COST ($A Million)
Professional Staff Wages
0.24*
General Services Staff Wages
0.06*
Computer Rental
0.11
Services (Power, Internet, Telephones)
0.07
Other Office Costs (e.g. Photocopying)
0.14
Official Travel
0.12
Meeting Support
0.24
Building Lease Costs (Paid by Australia)
0.18
TOTAL BUDGET
2.70





