
XXV ATCM
Information Paper 
Finland


RELEVANCE OF DEVELOPMENTS IN THE ARCTIC AND THE ANTARCTIC


The Arctic Council was established in 1996 by eight Arctic countries: Canada, Denmark (incl. Greenland and the Faroe Islands), Iceland, Norway, Sweden, the Russian Federation, the United States and Finland. The representatives of the indigenous peoples participate in the work of the Council as Permanent Participants. They work, de facto, on an equal footing with the member states. The six organizations of the indigenous peoples are: the Aleut International Association, the Arctic Athabaskan Council, the Gwich’in Council International, the Inuit Circumpolar Conference, the Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North (RAIPON) and the Saami Council. The Arctic Council has been recognized as a unique forum for cooperation between national governments and the indigenous people.

Five non-Arctic countries contribute to Arctic cooperation as observers of the Arctic Council.  Poland, the host of this meeting, France, Germany, Great Britain and the Netherlands have been granted observer status in the Arctic Council. Several observer countries are diligently involved in the activities of Arctic Council Working Groups. 

Cooperation between the Arctic Council and international organizations serving as observers of the Council has evolved favorably during the past year. NGOs such as the WWF have a crucial role in Arctic cooperation. 

The European Commission has attended the principal meetings of the Arctic Council during the past two years. As Chair of the Arctic Council, Finland has fostered deeper EU engagement in Arctic affairs, especially regarding research, technological development and protection of the environment, including addressing the impact of climate variability and change. The role of the EU in northern cooperation, including in the Arctic, will be further discussed during the current Danish Presidency of the European Union. 

Finland is the third host country of the Council after Canada and the United States. The Finnish Chairmanship in 2000-2002 will culminate in October 2002 with the Third Ministerial Meeting,  in Inari, in the northernmost region of Finland. Iceland has offered to serve as the next chair during the period 2002 –2004.

The Arctic Council Sustainable Development Program and the Johannesburg World Summit

The Arctic Council is a regional partnership for sustainable development. The mandate of the Council includes all aspects of sustainable development, be they ecological, social or economic dimensions of sustainability. The goal of the Arctic Council’s Sustainable Development Program is to propose and adopt measures to be taken by the Arctic States to advance sustainable development in the Arctic, including opportunities to protect and enhance the environment and the economies, culture and health of indigenous communities and of other residents of the Arctic. The Arctic Council Ministerial in Barrow, Alaska, in October 2000, agreed upon a strategic framework document on sustainable development emphasizing that the needs of the present must be met without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Economic, social and cultural development are, along with environmental protection, interdependent and mutually reinforcing aspects of sustainable development. Capacity building is a necessary element for the achievement of sustainable development. 

The global dialogue on sustainable development has high relevance for the circumpolar North. Even if the cooperation among Arctic states is already close, the need for global cooperation on sustainable development, including protection of the environment, is strong. The Arctic states cannot protect the Arctic environment without the help of other states of the world. On the other hand, the Arctic partnership on sustainable development, the positive lessons learned in this partnership and the ways and means of Arctic cooperation could be utilized in other parts of the world as well.

As a result of climate change and long-range transport of certain chemicals, the circumpolar Arctic has emerged since the 1992 Earth Summit as an “indicator” region of global environmental health. The Arctic Council has therefore issued information on Arctic concerns during the preparations for the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) and will follow up these activities in Johannesburg in cooperation with indigenous organizations. The message from the Arctic to Johannesburg is unique due to the Arctic’s pristine nature and particular living conditions. The fate of the Arctic is largely dependent on progress in global efforts to adjust human economic activities to the capacity of nature. Global action, with the circumpolar North as an active partner, is essential for the future of the Arctic. 

Global market demands and technological progress offer new opportunities for expanded utilization of natural resources in the Arctic. If properly managed, these opportunities can bolster sustainable growth and well-being in the region. But without precautionary measures the traditional livelihood of indigenous and other local people, as well as the existence of vast areas of unspoiled nature, may be in danger. Securing sustainability in the use of natural resources, including biological resources, is an important challenge to all Arctic states. 

Assessment of the environmental, social and economic impact of undertakings to develop the use of natural resources in the Arctic parts of the territories of the Arctic states is important, taking into account the latest research on the specific circumstances of the Arctic. Harmonization of Environmental Impact Assessment procedures could be beneficial in the Arctic, taking into consideration possible transborder impacts of production and transportation of, especially, hydrocarbons. 

Arctic states encourage public and private sector dialogue in the Arctic on environmental practices in the utilization of natural resources in the region. The Arctic Council Environment Impact Assessment guidelines and the Offshore Oil and Gas Guidelines help serve this purpose. Use of resources requires investment in infrastructure, which should take into account the principles of sustainability and the social needs of local communities.

Arctic communities and cultures remain vital and resilient, despite tremendous social, demographic and technological changes during the last century. Many Arctic populations are still very dependent on traditional sources of livelihood. With technological advances, some traditional ways of using the environment and its renewable resources for subsistence have become economically less viable. New economic activities are urgently needed to support a population big enough to keep communities themselves viable and to enhance the quality of life in the Arctic. 

Capacity building, e.g. through cooperation among educational institutions in the Arctic, can contribute to the viability of Arctic communities. Traditional knowledge should be used in capacity building. Use of advanced information technology can mitigate problems related to long distances. Tourism, as it expands to new areas, complements traditional occupations but also calls for attention to environmental factors, navigational safety and preparedness for emergencies. This is also the case in the Antarctic where tourism is on the increase. 




Measures to eliminate pollution in the Arctic 

In some parts of the Arctic, residents who continue to consume traditional foods have been exposed to high levels of environmental contaminants. Persistent contaminants, particularly certain organics and mercury, are carried to the Arctic via long-range movement by air and water and accumulate and biomagnify in some animals that are traditionally used as food. The Arctic ecosystem, along with its human population, is increasingly exposed to ultraviolet radiation. The Arctic serves as a basin for global pollution transported mainly via atmospheric and riverine pathways and by sea currents from sources located far from the region. 

The international Stockholm Convention on POPs and earlier regional protocols on POPs and heavy metals are of utmost importance to the region. Early entry into force of the Stockholm Convention would be warmly welcomed in the Arctic. By the time of this meeting, all Governments of the eight Arctic States will have signed the convention. Canada, Iceland and Sweden have ratified it and several other Arctic states, including Finland, are working hard on ratification before the Johannesburg World Summit.

The findings of the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program (AMAP) in its report on pollution in the Arctic in 1998, contributed to the scientific knowledge base of the Stockholm Convention. It illustrated convincingly the need for an effective global agreement on POPs and certain other hazardous substances. The report in 1998 highlighted the risks posed to human health and wildlife by persistent organic pollutants (POPs), heavy metals and long-lived radio nuclides.

AMAP will present its second report on trends in contaminants and their effects on the Arctic environment to the Arctic Council Ministerial Meeting in Inari, Finland, in October 2002. The 2002 Assessment deals with Persistent Organic Pollutants, Heavy Metals and Radioactivity. Data on some POPs not covered by the Stockholm Convention will be included. A separate report will deal with the adverse effects on health due to exposure to contaminants in traditional food. A very interesting assessment is one that deals with the influence of climate variability and change on contaminants’ pathways.

As a follow-up to the 1998 report the Arctic Council has launched an Action Plan to eliminate pollution in the Arctic, with focus on cooperation with the Russian Federation. The recent signature by Russia of the Stockholm Convention will facilitate the further implementation of the Action Plan, in cooperation with GEF, UNEP-Chemicals and other concerned partners. 

The Action Plan includes projects on the phase-out of PCB use and the management of PCB-contaminated wastes, on evaluation of dioxins and furans and on environmentally sound management of stocks of obsolete pesticides in the Russian Federation. These projects may facilitate the preparation in Russia of a national implementation plan for the Stockholm Convention. The Russian National Plan of Action for Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment, under UNEP’s Global Plan of Action framework, also has potential to contribute to the implementation of the Stockholm Convention. The Arctic Council, through its Working Group on the Protection of the Marine Environment (PAME), has assisted Russia in the preparation of the Plan of Action.
 
Arctic countries are supporting developing countries and countries with economies in transition in their efforts to eliminate or reduce production and use of POPs and reduce the harmful effects of heavy metals on nature and human health.

Radioactivity as an Arctic concern

Long-lived radio nuclides from emissions of radioactivity in the past, in and outside the Arctic region, can still be measured in the Arctic. Of great concern are the potential consequences of accidents in nuclear power plants, in handling and storage of nuclear weapons, in the decommissioning of nuclear submarines and in the disposal of spent nuclear fuel and other radioactive waste from submarines and other vessels. A nuclear accident would have particularly severe consequences in the Arctic because of the vulnerability of the food chains to radioactive contamination. Protection of the Arctic environment requires rigorous adherence by all states to relevant international conventions and guidance on radiation protection, nuclear safety, radioactive waste management and emergency preparedness and response to minimize the probability and consequences of accidents.

Conservation of species, habitats and biodiversity 

Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty stipulates conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, including specially protected species in Antarctica. Furthermore, CEP, and its intersessional contact group led by Argentina, has paid special attention to Annex II and to the need for its review. In addition, it has been considered how the IUCN red list criteria could be used in the identification of species which might be designated as specially protected Antarctic species.

In the Arctic, the Arctic Council Working Group “Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna” (CAFF) has the mission to promote conservation of Arctic biodiversity and ensure that the use of Arctic living resources is sustainable. 

CAFF released its overview report "Arctic Flora and Fauna: Status and Conservation" in June 2001. It is the first circumpolar overview of Arctic biodiversity. It gives the reader a clear understanding of the importance and status of the Earth's largest ecoregion.

Although the report finds that much of the Arctic remains in a natural state, it points to several areas of concern. Some of the damaging impact stems from local activities, such as the disturbance, loss and fragmentation of habitats resulting from oil, gas and hydropower development, road building and other infrastructure projects, tourism, unsustainable management of natural resources as well as over-exploitation of living resources. At the local level, there is clear evidence of over-exploitation of several economically important species.

Other effects arise from global problems such as climate change and long-range pollution. 
 
Of particular concern for conservationists are rare and endangered species. Rare and endangered species of a stationary character are identified on a national basis. The IUCN’s red list has also been taken into account. CAFF has identified 96 species of rare vascular plants (i.e. those with a root system) which are endemic or unique to the Arctic region as a whole. Several shared species of birds and mammals are targeted for cooperative action as species of concern in circumpolar conservation. While these species may not be considered rare or endangered globally, some populations may be seriously threatened at the local level in parts of the Arctic.

The report shows that remoteness has not made the Arctic immune to global environmental issues. Climate change already has measurable effects on Arctic species, permafrost, and sea ice. Alien invasive species are increasingly penetrating the region. Contaminants released thousands of kilometers away are appearing at high levels in human and wildlife communities.

The report also highlights the lack of critical information in many areas. Population figures for plants and animals may be uncertain, and our understanding of how the Arctic ecosystem                                                                                                       functions in a changing environment is incomplete. Regardless of the uncertainties, the population figures in the report provide a base line for later research and monitoring data.

On the basis of the report, CAFF is developing a new strategic document, containing conservation recommendations and directions for the circumpolar Arctic region. The document will be presented for discussion and approval by the Arctic Council at the 3rd Ministerial Meeting in October 2002. 

Climate change

The report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on Climate Change Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability (2001) states that climate change in polar regions is expected to be among the most extensive and most rapid of any regions on Earth. It will have major physical, ecological, sociological, and economic effects. Both direct and indirect effects are foreseen in the polar regions. Examples of directs effects are ecosystem and species shifts, loss of sea and river ice and thawing of permafrost. Among indirect effects in the polar regions the report names changes in ocean currents,  increased temperature and higher precipitation with loss of ice affecting climate and sea levels globally. 

Ozone depletion is a common problem, too. According to recent scientific studies, climate change is also expected to affect stratospheric climate and increase ozone depletion. While the carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere is expected to increase, the lower atmosphere will become warmer and the upper atmosphere colder. The cooling of the stratosphere stabilizes the polar vortices and leads to further ozone depletion. 

From a global perspective, the greatest ozone depletion has been observed at the high latitudes of both hemispheres. The primary motivation behind the considerable efforts to study stratospheric ozone depletion is the potential for biological consequences of increased solar UV-B radiation. Direct links between ozone depletion and biological effects have been measured in organisms living in Antarctic waters below the ozone "hole".

Climate variability and change, and most recently, notable increases in UV radiation, have become important issues in the Arctic over the past few decades. The Arctic Council finds this issue highly important and has established an assessment focused on impacts in the Arctic caused by climate variability and change. The Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) is conducted through the Arctic Council programmes Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP) and CAFF, in close collaboration with the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC) and IPCC.

The goal of the ACIA is to evaluate and synthesize knowledge on climate variability, climate change, and increased ultraviolet radiation and their consequences. The aim is to provide useful and reliable information to the governments, organizations and peoples of the Arctic on policy options to meet such changes. The project will pay special attention to the effects of climate change on indigenous peoples.

The ACIA will also examine possible future effects on the environment and its living resources, on human health, and on buildings, roads and other infrastructure. A major scientific assessment of the effects of climate variability and change and UV-B radiation on ecosystems and societies will be delivered in 2004. In addition, a Policy Document will be prepared by AMAP and CAFF to provide scientifically based advice and recommendations on further actions to support Arctic governments in their efforts to take preventive or remedial action in response to climate change and ozone depletion.










	




	 













 

