XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-096 
Agenda Item: CEP 6 
PERU 
Original language: English 
 
PERUVIAN NATIONAL COMMISSION 
FOR ANTARCTIC AFFAIRS 
CONAAN 
 
KEY ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN BY PERU IN ANTARCTIC MATTERS 
DURING THE 2001-2002 PERIOD 
 
 
 
Aiming to promote scientific knowledge within the professional community and comply 
with the Antarctic Treaty’s mandate, which calls for ensuring the conservation and 
protection of Antarctic resources and ecosystem, Peru, as an Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Party, has been carrying out several yearly scientific and logistics 
activities. 
  
 
Among the activities coordinated by the Peruvian National Commission for Antarctic 
Affairs (CONAAN), which is the entity responsible for the National Antarctic Program, it 
is worth highlighting the XIII Scientific Expedition – ANTAR XIII that concluded last 
March; updating the National Antarctic Policy; and planning the next scientific 
expedition, entitled ANTAR XIV and set to begin this coming December. 
 
 
I. 
XIII SCIENTIFIC EXPEDITION TO THE ANTARCTIC – ANTAR XIII 
 
 
Peru’s XIII Scientific Expedition to the Antarctic, entitled ANTAR XIII, was carried out 
during the past austral summer, 11 January ~ 10 March 2002. Its objectives were: 
  
 
• to 
continue 
to 
develop 
scientific 
research 
programs 
in 
Antarctica; 
• to equip and maintain the “Machu Picchu” Scientific Station in Antarctica; 
• to continue carrying out joint projects within the frame of international  
cooperation; and 
• to visit Antarctic bases and stations of other countries in King George 
Island in order to establish scientific exchange and tighten the ties of  
friendship.  
 
Implementation of the National Council for Science and Technology (CONCYTEC) 
research program, entitled “PROANTARCYT 2002-2007”, was possible during the 
execution of ANTAR XIII. The project, which includes systematic and interdependent 
scientific projects (with the participation of various institutions), has a life span of five 
years. To be exact, several research developed during ANTAR XIII are the first stage of 
the “PROANTARCYT” program, which establishes the initiation of expanded Antarctic 
scientific programs (macro) whose execution is expected to be set for the next 
expedition. 
  
 
Within this framework, eleven scientific projects were developed, the following among 
them: 
  
• Wind 
Field 
Modeling 
and 
Evaluation 
of 
Renewable 
Energy. 
• MST 
Radar 
in 
Antarctica: 
characteristics 
of 
winds 
and 
mesospheric 
echoes. 
• Paleontological Study of King George Island. 
 
• Historical Tendencies of Persistent Organic Pollutants. 
 
• Determination 
of 
Organochlorine 
Compounds 
in 
the 
Antarctic 
Krill (Euphausia superba). 
 
• Krill 
Assessment 
and 
its 
Relationship 
to 
the 
Marine 
Ecosystem. 
• Whale Watching. 
  
 
“The Study of Krill” and “The Study of the MST RADAR” are the most famous 
investigations and those that have a greater continuity. 
  
 
Furthermore, joint research works were developed with other countries. Four foreign 
scientists from Germany and the Czech Republic participated in ANTAR XIII and 
developed the following projects in Peru’s “Machu Picchu” Station: 
  
 
• Ecophysiological 
Study 
of 
Antarctic 
Lichens 
and 
Mosses. 
• Biodiversity in Marine Organisms of the Antarctic Seas. 
  
 
ANTAR XIII lasted fifty-seven days and involved the participation of over one hundred 
and ten people, including special guest, as well as scientific and logistics personnel. 
  
 
 
II. 
XIV 
SCIENTIFIC 
EXPEDITION 
TO 
ANTARCTICA 
– 
ANTAR 
XIV  
 
From the beginning of this year the National Commission for Antarctic Affairs 
(CONAAN) has been planning ANTAR XIV, which is set to begin by mid December and 
expected to have a life span of seventy-five days. 
  
 
Specific research guidelines to be prioritized by Peru during the next five years shall 
focus on the following areas: Atmospheric and Space Science (Climatic Changes); 
Environment; as well as Marine and Land Biodiversity. 
  
 
Within the framework of the “PROANTARCYT” research program of the National 
Council for Science and Technology (CONCYTEC), the National Commission for 
Antarctic Affairs (CONAAN) has approved the following six scientific projects for ANTAR 
XIV: 
  
 
• Wind 
Field 
Modeling 
and 
Evaluation 
of 
Renewable 
Energy. 
• Batimetric Studies in Admiralty Bay. 
 
• MST Radar in Antarctica: characteristics of winds and mesospheric echoes. 
• Study of Persistent Organic Pollutants. 
 
• Ecophysiological Study of Antarctic Lichens and Mosses (with the Czech Republic). 
• Biodiversity in Marine Organisms of the Antarctic Seas (with the Thetis Institute).  
 
Moreover, the National Commission for Antarctic Affairs (CONAAN) has recognized the 
importance of maintaining an invitation system for foreign researchers to carry out joint 
scientific projects and has thus proceeded to invite a German scientist from the Thetis 
Institute, as well as two researchers from the Czech Republic. Furthermore, the 
possibility of sending out invitations to South Korea and Canada is being considered. 
  
 
Concerning logistical matters, a rapprochement with Uruguay and Brazil is sought to 
secure facilities and support mechanisms to ensure the successful development of 
ANTAR XIV through bilateral cooperation. 
 
COOPERATION WITH OTHER COUNTRIES  
 
 
a. Cooperation with Germany 
  
 
The Government of Peru and the Government of Germany issued a Joint Declaration 
on Antarctic Cooperation in March 14th, 2002, in Lima. Furthermore, in Berlin the Thetis 
Institute and the National Commission for Antarctic Affairs (CONAAN) signed a 
Scientific and Logistics Cooperation Agreement in Antarctic Matters in May in order to 
formalize scientific activities and research they had been developing in Antarctica since 
2000.  
 
During ANTAR XIV, which is set to begin this coming december, a German scientist will 
participate in an underwater biodiversity project at MacKellar Bay. 
  
 
In addition, three Peruvian scientists from IMARPE, CONCYTEC and the Agrarian 
University participated in the Research Cruise, entitled “LAMPOS” (Latin American 
Polarstern Study) on board the “Polarstern” scientific vessel last April. During the event, 
which lasted for a month and was organized and sponsored by the German Alfred 
Wegener Institute, two research projects proposed by Peru, entitled “Ecophysiological 
Adaptations of Benthic and Fish Community Organisms of the Antarctic (Arco Scotia)” 
and “Macrozoo-benthic Structures in the Antarctic Ice Shelf Area” were advanced 
among others. In reciprocity, CONAAN is interested in inviting an AWI scientist to 
participate in ANTAR XV during the 2003-2004 austral summer.  
 
 
b. Cooperation with New Zealand 
  
 
The Government of Peru and the Government of New Zealand issued a Joint 
Declaration 
on 
Antarctic 
Cooperation 
January 
23rd, 
2002, 
in 
Lima.  
In June, Peru proceeded to officially extend an invitation to one New Zealand 
professional to participate in the ANTAR XV expedition during the 2003-2004 austral 
summer. In turn, the Government of New Zealand invited one Peruvian logistics 
scientist/professional to join them in 2002-2003 at the New Zealand Scott Base. 
  
 
Furthermore, New Zealand granted two scholarships to Peruvian students to attend a 
special course in Antarctic Matters at the University of Canterbury –Christchurch, New 
Zealand, which is set to begin this coming November and last almost four months. 
  
 
c. Cooperation with the Czech Republic 
  
 
The Government of Peru and the Government of the Czech Republic issued a Joint 
Declaration on Antarctic Cooperation in March 4th, 2002, in Lima. 
  
 
In three opportunities CONAAN invited Czech scientists to develop research projects in 
Antarctica. In addition, two researchers from the University of Masaryk in Brno are 
expected to participate in the next expedition. 
  
 
The University of Masaryk has donated 60 Antarctic uniforms to CONAAN and offered 
internships at its Faculty of Geography. 
  
 
A photo exhibit of the ANTAR XIII expedition is expected to be schedule for late 2002, 
with the auspices of the Peruvian Embassy in the Czech Republic and the University of 
Masaryk. 
  
 
d. Cooperation with South Korea 
  
 
For years Peru and South Korea have been carrying out joint research of the Krill. In 
1996, both countries signed a Cooperation Agreement. 
  
 
It is expected that one, or possibly two, Korean scientists shall be invited to participate 
in the ANTAR XV expedition during the 2003-2004 austral summer. 
  
 
In addition, the Korean Government donated 10 computer systems and three facsimile 
machines to CONAAN. 
  
 
e. Cooperation with India 
  
Pursuant to a Bilateral Agreement signed between the countries in 1997, the 
Government of Peru and the Government of India have been exchanging scientists 
specializing in Antarctic matters. In 2000, biologist Shri Anthony Anrose participated, 
upon invitation, in the ANTAR XI expedition. After the convocation process in various 
Peruvian Universities, an invitation was extended to engineer Nora Revollé from the 
National Engineering University (UNI) to participate in India’s XIX Expedition carrying 
out geological research together with a group of Indian scientists during the 1999-2000 
austral summer. 
  
 
To continue such cooperation India has, once again, offered to invite a Peruvian 
scientist to participate in the activities to be undertaken by India during the 2003-2004 
austral summer. 
  
 
f. Cooperation with China 
  
 
Last March, Peru and China signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Antarctic 
Cooperation. 
  
 
The main interest is to engage in joint research in Antarctica and exchange scientists 
specializing in Antarctic research. To formalize this interest, a Scientific, Logistics and 
Technological Cooperation in Antarctic Matters Agreement shall be signed between 
both countries’ Antarctic stations this coming November. 
  
 
g. Cooperation with Argentina 
  
 
During March 2001, Peru and Argentina signed a covenant on Antarctic cooperation, 
which outlines their interest to collaborate in scientific, logistic and environmental areas. 
Upon ratification by the Argentine Parliament, the covenant entered into force in June. 
  
 
It is expected that several joint research projects, such as in the study of the Krill and 
birds, as well as in other scientific areas will be carried out in the Argentine “Jubany” 
Station as from the signing of the Agreement. 
  
 
h. Cooperation with Uruguay 
  
 
Peru and Uruguay signed a covenant on Antarctic cooperation in May 1998, in Lima, 
which outlines their interest to collaborate in scientific and logistic areas. 
  
 
Upon ratification by the Uruguayan Parliament, the covenant entered into force in 
August.  
 
Cooperation with Canada 
  
 
Sometime this year, the Government of Peru and the Government of Canada are 
expected to issue a Joint Declaration in Antarctic Matters, whose final text is currently 
being negotiated. The countries are greatly interested in developing scientific research 
projects in the North Pole and in Antarctica. 
  
 
During the XXVII SCAR Meeting last july, the delegations of Peru and Canada defined, 
in a preliminary manner, areas in which they are interested to develop joint scientific 
projects. 
  
 
Peru is currently pondering inviting a Canadian scientist to participate in the ANTAR XV 
expedition during the 2003-2004 austral summer. 
  
 
j. Cooperation with Ecuador 
  
 
Before the year is over Peru and Ecuador are expecting to enter into a Cooperation 
Agreement in Antarctic Matters in order to develop research projects and exchange 
scientists. The draft agreement also foresees organizing joint scientific expeditions. 
  
 
 
IV. FULL MEMBERSHIP OF SCAR 
  
 
In january 2002, the National Commission for Antarctic Affairs (CONAAN) officially 
submitted Peru’s application for Full Membership to the Executive Secretary of SCAR. 
During the XXVII SCAR Meeting held in Shanghai last july, doctor Ronald Woodman, a 
member of the National Commission for Antarctic Affairs (CONAAN) and President of 
the Geophysical Institute of Peru (IGP), successfully supported the nomination. 
  
 
Within the framework of the Shanghai Meeting, Peru was unanimously accepted as Full 
Member of SCAR in july 22nd, 2002. This will provide an opportunity for Peru to 
coordinate with other countries its participation in larger Antarctic scientific projects and 
to continue to develop joint scientific research at the “Machu Picchu” Station. 
  
 
 
V. CURRENT NATIONAL ANTARCTIC POLICY 
  
 
During this year Peru has proceeded to modernize its National Antarctic Policy and 
strengthen institutions involved in the planning, management and execution of the 
activities carried out in Antarctica and its participation in the various forums of the 
Antarctic Treaty System. 
  
 
By virtue of Supreme Ordinance 016-RE-2002 the current Antarctic Policy was 
approved in february 2002. Likewise, the creation of the Peruvian Antarctic Institute 
(INAN) is a high-priority objective this year. The law that created INAN is currently in 
Congress after having been approved by the Foreign Affairs Commission and the 
State’s 
Management 
Modernization 
Commission.  
 
 
VI. EXHIBITS. 
 
 
In Lima, during the month of June, CONAAN presented a photo exhibit, entitled “Peru–
Antártida: Terra Australis” by artist Walter Wust, displaying forty photographs of the 
“Machu Picchu” Station, the BIC Humboldt’s voyage, the activities of the Peruvians 
expeditionists, as well as of existing flora and fauna of Admiralty Bay, King George 
Island. 
  
 
The exhibit was coordinated by the Thetis Institute and shall be shown in Hamburg this 
coming November, within the framework of a Symposium on Antarctica organized by 
such prestigious German research institution. It is expected that the exhibit shall 
likewise be displayed in other European cities, Prague amongst them. 
  
 
