XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-040
Agenda Item: ATCM 14
COMNAP
Original: English




Information Paper on
The Proposed Antarctic Shipping Guidelines



INTRODUCTION

    1. At ATCM XXIV in St Petersburg, the United Kingdom presented a report (ATCM XXIV/WP26) on the outcomes of the “Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Guidelines for Antarctic Shipping and Related Activities” that was convened in London on 17-19 April 2000.  It was noted that the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) was yet to complete its consideration of the proposed “Arctic Shipping Guidelines” however it was recognized that the ATCM had previously decided to develop guidelines for Antarctic shipping.  In order to further progress the issue, the UK offered to consult intersessionally with interested Parties, COMNAP, IAATO and others.

    2. The UK subsequently submitted the following questions for COMNAP’s consideration: 

        (i) What are the key Antarctic shipping issues where safety improvements are/could be required? (eg, training, pollution control and on-board equipment).
        (ii) Do the IMO Arctic guidelines address the issues at (i)?  If not, what modification is needed to the Arctic guidelines?
        (iii) What Antarctic shipping issues might Treaty Parties address ahead of the IMO documentation being produced?
        (iv) Would a compendium/handbook of information or information sources be useful to Antarctic mariners? (i.e. a maritime version of Antarctic Flight Information Manual - AFIM).
        (v) Does COMNAP want to take a view on the Russian Federation paper put to the ATCM on “Classification of the Antarctic Zone of the Southern Ocean Based on Ice Navigation Conditions”?
CONSIDERATION OF ARCTIC SHIPPING GUIDELINES

    3. As a reference point, COMNAP’s Working Group on Ship Operations reviewed the IMO’s Draft Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice Covered Waters Arctic that was available in January 2002.    The Working Group concluded that this draft complied with the directions issued by IMO/MSC 71 (that is, the 71st meeting of the IMO’s Maritime Safety Committeee).  Previous parts of the document that were either over-prescriptive, in conflict with international law, or were in conflict with other conventions such as MARPOL have largely been removed.  Some additional background information on the development of the proposed Arctic and Antarctic shipping guidelines is given in Annex B.


RESPONSE TO UK QUESTIONS

    4. COMNAP’s response to the questions raised by the UK are as follows:

(i)	What are the key Antarctic shipping issues where safety improvements are/could be required? (eg, training, pollution control and on-board equipment).

The Arctic Guidelines adequately address the shipping issues that should be addressed, namely: Construction, Equipment (including safety equipment), Operations (including training and emergency equipment), Environmental Protection and Damage Control.

(ii)	Do the IMO Arctic guidelines address the issues at (i)?  If not, what modification is needed to the Arctic guidelines?

The Arctic Guidelines do address the issues at Question (i) however, some proposed, minor modifications to the Arctic Guidelines are enumerated in the Annex A to this paper.

(iii)	What Antarctic shipping issues might Treaty Parties address ahead of the IMO documentation being produced?

It should be noted that the Arctic Guidelines are still in draft form. Hence, until the document is completed, (estimated December 2002) it may be premature to request that IMO include the Antarctic. Once the document is completed, certain modifications for Antarctic shipping should be considered such as definitions what constitutes "Antarctic Ice Covered waters" and may be some differences in safety equipment (e.g. no need for a rifle to shoot Polar Bears). Anticipating that the draft Guidelines will not vary in any great substance from the current draft, those modifications should be rather limited. Annex A is attached and lists differences and/or additions as being important to include in any guidelines that would incorporate Antarctic shipping.

(iv)	Would a compendium/handbook of information or information sources be useful to 	Antarctic mariners? (i.e. a maritime version of Antarctic Flight Information Manual - 	AFIM).

	This would be useful, on the basis that it would be a compilation of existing COMNAP and Treaty documents regarding things such as the Protocol as it relates to the Marine Environment, the handling of fuels, communications (ATOM), and other instruments, such as MARPOL special provisions of the Antarctic.  The purpose of such a handbook would be to provide a guide readily available on ships for Captains and crew.  We do not believe that the handbook should be used as a mechanism to develop new guidelines for the Antarctic.

(v)	Does COMNAP want to take a view on the Russian Federation Paper put to the ATCM on 	Classification of the Antarctic Zone of the Southern Ocean Based on Ice Navigation 	Conditions?

Russia introduced similar papers at IMO and the Antarctic Experts Meeting proposing geographic zones based upon ice conditions in the Antarctic.  The Russian proposal is to divide the Antarctic Zone of the Southern Ocean into "zones" of probable ice conditions and recommended ice classifications for ships operating in those zones.  Other countries at IMO did not support these papers.  It is the opinion of the Working Group on Ship Operations that such classifications may be of interest for design and engineering purposes, but should not become guidelines for other countries because they could restrict access to sections of the Southern Ocean.  If zones are adopted, it could place rigid restrictions on access to areas of the Southern Ocean on ships by prohibiting their entry into certain zones.  From a practical standpoint, it is difficult to establish zones because seasonal and annual variations can greatly affect the ice conditions.  Proposing such zones solely as guidelines does not resolve our concerns because national regulators and insurance companies may actually implement them as mandatory restrictions. 

In addition, the International Association of (ship) Classification Societies (IACS) is currently finalizing work on internationally recognized ice classifications for ship design.  The IACS work should be completed before there is any further discussion on the concept of locations for ship operations.  While there may be argument about the sensibility of establishing zones, it can certainly be said that establishing such zones without internationally recognized ice classes would seem to be premature.



ANNEX A

Possible Amendments to the Arctic Shipping Guidelines


The sub-group has considered the IMO guidelines For Ships Operating in Ice-covered Waters draft version as presented to IMO, DE 44/19.  Chapter and paragraph numbers noted below refer to that version of the document.

 It should be clearly noted that the sub-group does not believe that the draft IMO document should be modified to include the Antarctic at this time. While we believe the current version of the draft document is much improved from that of the 1998 and 1999 time and that the current draft document is in near final form, the sub-group recommends that COMNAP wait to review the final Arctic Shipping Guidelines and then consider whether or not to recommend to ATCM whether it is appropriate to include Antarctic shipping.

Working under the assumption that the final IMO document is very similar to the current draft version, the sub group would suggest the following changes should be reflected in the IMO Guidelines if the Antarctic were to be included or be reflected in an Antarctic addendum:

    • The document could be re-named “Polar Shipping Guidelines”.
    •   Applicability of the document should include all ice-covered waters south of 60 degrees south.  The definition of “Ice covered” as noted in G-3.2.2 of the IMO document as being water “in which sea ice concentrations of 1/10 coverage or greater and which pose a structural risk to ships” is applicable for the Antarctic.
    • Paragraph 3.3.2 requires that “all Polar Class ships should have double bottoms over the length between forepeak and afterpeak bulkheads.”  The objective should be to provide a double skin around those areas or tanks that could lead to the discharge of pollutants and not to unnecessarily require double bottoms where they serve no function.
    • It is recognized that Chapter 11, which describes survival equipment, has been much reduced from its original, overly prescriptive detail.  However, the chapter still appears to be prescriptive and may not take into account specific conditions in the Antarctic.  A key phrase in paragraphs 11.3.1 and 11.4.1, which introduce Personal Survival kits and Group survival kits, is that “appropriate alternatives” may be considered.  This should be emphasized in the Guidelines.  Separate from any Antarctic Shipping Guidelines, it is suggested that COMNAP could consider developing their own guidelines for what would be considered appropriate shipboard survival equipment for the Antarctic taking into account regional and seasonal differences.
    • Ice navigator qualifications and training as noted in 14.2.1 should recognize experience and on-the-job training as a substitute for a formal training program.
    • Abandoned ships – To the maximum extent practicable, parties responsible for ships that are abandoned by the crew (e.g. fire, grounding, etc.) should remove those ships from Antarctic waters.  However, consideration of any such removal should fully take into account factors of human safety and environmental impact.  If removal were to impose a serious human safety risk or were to impose environmental risks greater than abandonment in-place then other actions, such as removal of contaminating materials (e.g. de-bunkering) should be considered.
ANNEX B:

Background Information on the Development of the Polar Shipping Guidelines


In 1991, shortly after the EXXON VALDEZ oil spill and the wreck of the BAHIA PARAISO, there was a meeting of the International Maritime Organization (IMO), Marine Safety Committee (MSC).

    • At the 59th session of MSC, Germany introduced a short page and one-half paper that discussed “Requirements ships for intended for Polar waters”.
    • Germany suggested that the following simple rule might be included in SOLAS (the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea), Chapter II-1: “Ships intended for service in Polar Waters should have suitable ice strengthening for Polar conditions in accordance with the rules of a recognized classification society.”
    • MSC referred this action to a subordinate committee, the Sub-Committee on Ship Design and Equipment (DE).
    • DE, in turn, agreed to allow an Outside Correspondence Group, to develop proposed Guidance for Ships Operating in Polar Waters.  This Outside Working Group operated outside of the cognizance of IMO.
    • The result of the effort of the Outside Correspondence Group was a draft document called “The Polar Code”. The original intent of a short, logical, inclusion in SOLAS pertaining to ships operating in Polar Waters had grown into a rather thick draft document that proposed to establish a broad set of new rules.
    • This draft document was reviewed by IMO member nations and was found to have a number of flaws, among them: 

        ◦ The Code was mandatory in nature and should have been written in the form of guidelines.
        ◦ It had numerous provisions that were inconsistent with the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
        ◦ It had many provisions that were either inconsistent with or duplicative of existing instruments such as MARPOL and SOLAS.
        ◦ Certain sections were overly prescriptive and contained excessive detail.
        ◦ It would be applicable to ice free areas.
        ◦ It gave no due consideration to the differences between the Arctic and Antarctic in areas such as ice conditions and the legal and political framework. (Aside: While Germany proposed something for both poles, the Correspondence Group took a very Arctic-centric view and had limited Antarctic input.)

    • Antarctic Nations, in 1998 at ATCM XXII, Tromso recognized that the Polar Code failed to take into account the special conditions of the Antarctic and were encouraged to contact their national representatives to the IMO and express their concerns.
    • In 1999 at ATCM XXIII, Lima delegates modified this position and enlisted a group of  experts to develop specific guidelines for Antarctic Shipping.
    • At MSC 71 (May 1999) a variety of concerned Nations were successful in getting MSC to issue new terms of reference to the Correspondence Group:

        ◦ Delete references to the Antarctic;
        ◦ Make the document non-mandatory;
        ◦ Refer only to ice covered waters north of 60N;
        ◦ Apply only to SOLAS ships (i.e. ships on an international voyage);
        ◦ Only contain provisions that are not already covered by other instruments such as SOLAS and MARPOL;
        ◦ Remove inconsistencies between the document and other international conventions (in particular, UNCLOS).

    • After much review and two annual sessions of IMO/DE, the Code was considerably revised and renamed to be: “Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-Covered Waters”.  

The Guidelines, in their current form, have incorporated all of the terms issued by MSC and are far less prescriptive than the original document.  The Guidelines are still in draft form and are presently undergoing further IMO review.  If the review proceeds without further delay the Guidelines will become final in December 2002.

It would appear that the significant revisions to this document to date would make it far more reasonable for application to Antarctic shipping than the original document had been.  Upon finalization of the IMO Guidelines, Antarctic Treaty Nations should consider whether it is appropriate for inclusion of Antarctic shipping and, if so, what modifications might be necessary to effect this inclusion.
 

[Note:  There is a parallel effort underway that will also effect the design of ships operating in Polar waters.  The International Association of Classification Societies (IACS) (an independent body, not a part of the IMO) is developing unified requirements that will “Harmonize” the various classification society rules  (ABS, Germanischer Lloyd, DNV, Canadian ASPPR, Russian Maritime Register of Shipping, etc.).  This is expected to be a very worthwhile engineering effort and, once completed, complimentary to anything that IMO would develop.]


