1
The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 
The Antarctica Project 
ASOC Secretariat 
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W. 
Washington, DC 20009 USA 
Tel +1 202 234-2480 
Fax +1 202 387 4823 
antarctica@igc.org 
www.asoc.org 
 
 
XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP… 
Agenda Item: 4d 
ASOC 
Original : English 
 
ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE IN CAPTIVITY AND THE MADRID PROTOCOL 
 
Information Paper submitted by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
In 2001, a proposal by Spanish interests to collect a large number of penguin eggs for the purpose of 
hatching in a zoological garden and for ancillary research was denied a permit to proceed by Spanish 
authorities due to concerns about the proposal’s environmental impact and scientific justification.  
This event, which is not the first of its kind among Antarctic Treaty nations, underscored the interest 
in exhibiting Antarctic wildlife for public viewing (and in some instances, private benefit).  The 
number of these proposals may increase in the near future, if commercial interest in Antarctica is 
unchecked.   
 
The Madrid Protocol promotes the protection of the intrinsic values of Antarctica.  Collecting fauna 
from the wild is sanctioned by the Protocol (with a permit) but, as elsewhere in the world, it raises 
ethical and conservation issues, and it is not per se a way of promoting the Protocol’s objectives and 
principles (Arts. 2 and 3), nor is it an essential educational tool to promote Antarctic conservation, 
given the high quality of contemporary visual and other media.  The fact that it is possible to issue a 
permit to take wildlife for educational or cultural uses is not in itself a sufficient justification to do so.  
The justification should be the value of the proposed activity.  Decisions should be based on, and in 
compliance with, the objectives and principles of the Protocol (i.e. Arts. 2 and 3 of the Protocol), and 
of the specific requirements of Art. 8, Annex I and Art. 3, Annex II of the Protocol. 
 
To avoid the risk of biased or inconsistent assessments in the granting of permits, there needs to be an 
Antarctic Treaty System-wide standard and process regarding the taking of Antarctic wildlife for 
animal exhibits. A final decision should not be based on narrowly drawn environmental criteria.  A 
low environmental impact does not necessarily imply that the intrinsic values of Antarctica will not be 
affected negatively by the taking.  Overall, consideration should be given as to how the objectives and 
principles of the Protocol are being promoted by allowing a proposed taking to proceed.   
 
This is an activity that is prone to commercial exploitation by both legal and illegal interests and 
therefore requires that some form of specific regulation be in place.  This should involve open and 
transparent public processes. ASOC notes that the confidentiality increasingly sought by those 
conducting commercial activities in Antarctica is in conflict with the general Antarctic Treaty 
2
obligations in relation to exchange of information, cooperation and free availability of research 
products.  
 
Potential regulatory mechanisms include: 
• 
Requiring that any proposal to collect Antarctic wildlife for animal exhibits should be:  
1. Subject to appropriate level EIA, and  
2. Referred to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) for discussion before a final 
decision is made.   
• 
Considering the issue of the taking of Antarctic wildlife for exhibition in the rolling review of 
Annex II, and add additional appropriate management measures. 
 
These or other alternatives should be the focus of discussion by the Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
Whatever the perspective and approaches used, keeping Antarctic wildlife in animal exhibits or 
equivalent should not be regarded as a wildlife conservation measure.  Wild species should be 
protected in their wild habitats. The conservation of the Antarctic wilderness should be both the 
priority and the means to conserve Antarctic wildlife. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
In 2001, a proposal by Spanish interests to collect a large number of penguin eggs for the purpose of 
hatching in a zoological garden and for ancillary research was denied a permit to proceed by Spanish 
authorities.  The arguments used to support this decision were: 
 
1. Potential environmental impact: The scale of the proposed taking (300 eggs) was too large. 
The Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) did not contain sufficient information concerning 
the location of target colonies, taking procedures and other important details, and  
2. Insufficient scientific justification: The proposed research program, while scientifically 
sound, would not provide any information that was sufficiently relevant to justify the takings 
and that could not be obtained by other means.   
 
This event underscored the interest in exhibiting Antarctic wildlife for public viewing (and in some 
instances, private benefit) in zoological gardens, aquariums, exhibition centres, theme parks and other 
types of animal exhibits.1  There have been previous instances of this type of proposal elsewhere, and 
it is expected that the number of these proposals may increase in the near future, if commercial 
interest in Antarctica is unchecked.  
 
This document discusses some of the main issues concerning the taking of Antarctic wildlife to be 
kept captive in animal exhibits.  It evaluates these issues from the perspective of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol) and makes some 
recommendations concerning how the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) could address this issue before 
it becomes problematic.  This document is not, however, a comprehensive analysis of all issues 
concerning keeping captive wildlife in animal exhibits, and in particular it is not a comprehensive 
analysis of the ethical issues involved. 
 
2. Overview 
 
The Madrid Protocol promotes the protection of the intrinsic values of Antarctica.  Collecting fauna 
from the wild to provide specimens for animal exhibits is sanctioned by the Protocol2 (with a permit) 
but, as elsewhere in the world, it raises ethical and conservation issues, and it is not per se a way of 
                                                 
1 In this document these are referred to generically as “animal exhibits”. 
2 Annex II Art 3 (2).   
3
promoting the Protocol’s objectives and principles (Arts. 2 and 3), nor is it an essential educational 
tool to promote Antarctic conservation, given the high quality of contemporary visual and other 
media.  Any such collection also generates considerable public interest and scrutiny.  In addition, this 
is an activity that is prone to commercial exploitation by both legal and illegal interests and therefore 
requires that some form of specific regulation be in place.  This should involve open and transparent 
public processes. 
 
A particular concern is that there are inherent uncertainties about the actual impact of collecting live 
animals from the wild on local populations (of some taxa at least), given that there is a general lack of 
baseline data on population structure, distribution, and genetic variation.  These are issues that would 
need to be properly assessed before a decision is made as to whether to allow the collection to take 
place or not. 
 
The overall objectives of the Protocol in terms of protecting the intrinsic values of Antarctica should 
not be overruled by the practicalities and possibilities of issuing permits to collect wildlife.  In other 
words, the fact that it is possible to issue a permit to take wildlife for educational or cultural uses is 
not in itself a sufficient justification to do so.  The justification should be the value of the proposed 
activity.  This should be demonstrated by the activity’s proponents, and weighed against the 
environmental impact of the taking and the overall effect on the intrinsic values of Antarctica.  
Decisions should be based on, and in compliance with, the objectives and principles of the Protocol 
(i.e. Arts. 2 and 3 of the Protocol), and of the specific requirements of Art. 8, Annex I and Art. 3, 
Annex II of the Protocol. 
 
It should be noted that the commercial focus of a number of animal exhibits raises concerns beyond 
those specifically related to the ethical issues of captive wildlife and issues of compliance with the 
Protocol (discussed below). The Antarctic Treaty requires that research products should be freely 
available and encourages the exchange of information and the establishment of cooperative working 
relations.  The confidentiality increasingly demanded by commercial activities is in conflict with these 
Treaty requirements, and were it to prevail over the traditional commitments may in the long term 
undermine the Antarctic Treaty itself. 
 
3. Ethical issues and the Madrid Protocol 
 
There is a broad range of ethical issues concerning wildlife in captivity.   A detailed discussion is 
beyond the scope of this document, but these could be summarized (and very simplified) in two main 
groups: animal issues and wilderness issues.  
 
1. Animal issues: The overall question is whether (and to what extent) human intentions may 
take primacy over animal lives.  "Animal welfare” is the idea that animals should be treated 
humanely and without inflicting any pain or suffering upon them.  “Animal rights” embraces 
is the idea that animals have inherent rights that (depending where on a continuum one locates 
oneself) either establish absolute “rights” which should not be impinged upon by humans, or 
establishes some sorts of boundaries to human action. This parallels in many respects the 
discussion of “rights” in the solely human context. It leads to questions about whether the use 
(or exploitation) of animals for the entertainment of humans justifies the disturbance, 
suffering and (potentially) pain that this may entail.  It forms a basis for arguing that wild 
animals have the right to be treated with respect (perhaps reinforcing existing ethical or 
religious imperatives), and that ordinarily includes leaving them in their natural surroundings.  
In some views the rights of individual animals are placed at the same level as the protection of 
ecosystems and biodiversity, thus creating a conflict with nature conservation.3  Animal 
                                                 
3 This is the case, for instance, when the rights of alien invasive species, which may threaten native wildlife populations and 
biodiversity, are placed on the same level as that of native species (an argument that in some instances is used to oppose 
eradication programs for animals such as minks, ferrets, etc.). 
4
welfare and animal rights positions are at times presented as a dichotomy. In other 
perspectives supporting animal rights is not necessarily mutually exclusive of animal welfare 
arguments. 
 
2. Wilderness issues: Perceptions of nature and the role of humanity in the environment may be 
presented as a dichotomy between two differing positions, anthropocentric and ecocentric.  
The first position emphasises the instrumental values of the environment, in which nature is 
defined as a resource that can and should be used for the benefit of human beings, and valued 
for how much it can produce.  The second position emphasises the intrinsic values of nature 
and favours limiting its use by human beings (or, in some views, espouses the rights of nature 
above those of human designs).  This dichotomy has been described as such – that is, as two 
separate belief systems – but has also been described as the opposite ends of a continuum.  
Ethical questions concerning the taking of Antarctic wildlife from its wilderness habitat for 
keeping in captivity in animal exhibits include whether this activity is acceptable or not from 
the perspective of the Antarctic wilderness (rather than uniquely from the perspective of 
wildlife or of individual specimens). 
 
The Protocol recognises both intrinsic values, and instrumental values. The Protocol makes specific 
reference to the intrinsic values of Antarctica, including “…its wilderness and aesthetic values and its 
value as an area for the conduct of scientific research.”4   Further on, the Protocol makes repeated 
reference to the preservation of these values through the use of concepts such as “wilderness value/s”5 
and “wilderness significance”6 in reference to 1. avoiding degradation of, or substantial risks to these 
values, or 2. designating areas where wilderness values should be specially protected.  Concerns about 
animal welfare are explicit in the Protocol, which establishes generically the standards required for the 
taking of wildlife.7 
 
While the Protocol offers guidance on ethical issues concerning wildlife and the protection of flora 
and fauna, a decision on granting a permit to take Antarctic wildlife to be kept in captivity will be 
influenced by the personal worldview of the decision makers on these and other relevant ethical 
issues, and generally on their perception of what constitutes intrinsic values.  For this reason and to 
prevent any bias it is desirable that the decision be consistent, and in full compliance with the 
Protocol’s objectives and environmental principles, regardless of whether the activity could be 
permissible under the Protocol  
 
To avoid the risk of biased or inconsistent assessments in the granting of permits, there needs to be an 
Antarctic Treaty System-wide standard and process regarding the taking of Antarctic wildlife for 
animal exhibits.  However, these should be guided by best practise standards and not by the lowest 
common denominator.  An Antarctic Treaty System-wide standard and process should aim to prevent 
legal loopholes or weak regulations that would permit the taking of Antarctic wildlife, for example, 
under a permit issued by State A, and then later sold to State B, which has strong regulations.8   
 
4. Taking of wildlife and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) requirements 
 
The taking of animals from Antarctica is only allowed under the Madrid Protocol with a permit.  The 
issuance of a permit should be assessed for individual cases to ensure that the criteria established by 
Art. 3 of Annex II concerning the scale of taking and the protection of diversity are met.  The 
completion of an EIA (ordinarily an Initial Environmental Evaluation – IEE or Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation – CEE) should be the basis for issuing a permit.  Whether the EIA required 
                                                 
4 Art. 3 (1). 
5 Art. 3 (1), and Annex V Art. 3 (1). 
6 Art 3 (2) (vi), and Annex II Art 3 (2),  
7 Animal welfare concerns are addressed by Annex II, Art. 3 (6):  All taking of native mammals and birds shall be done in 
the manner that involves the least degree of pain and suffering practicable. 
8 There are of course both international and domestic legal issues to consider concerning the trading of wildlife. 
5
is an IEE or CEE would depend on the scale of the proposed taking, and on case-by-case, site-specific 
considerations.   
 
However, criteria should include not only considerations regarding the environmental impact of the 
taking.  Considerations for decision makers – whether in the context of an EIA or otherwise – should 
include: 
 
• 
The environmental impact of the proposed activity.  The EIA should specify the location, 
timing, number of taxa and individual specimens involved in the proposed collection, taking 
procedures, and availability of baseline data for that particular location. 
• 
The purpose and value of the proposed activity. The educational worth of an animal exhibit or 
equivalent should not be taken for granted.  In addition, it should not be assumed that animal 
exhibits or equivalent exist primarily for the benefit of the public, as they may be private for-profit 
ventures.  Therefore, the ultimate value of the proposed activity should be assessed in addition to 
considerations on environmental impact.  The type and purpose of animal exhibit should be a 
consideration to assess the value of the proposed activity.   
• 
The merits of scientific components of the proposed activity.  In some instances the taking of 
wildlife for animal exhibits has an ancillary scientific research purpose.  The scientific merits of 
the proposal, and the significance of the science component in the context of the overall proposal, 
should also be considered.  
• 
The alternatives.  The educational use of captive Antarctic wildlife should be weighed against 
other alternatives including the educational use of documentation produced in Antarctica (e.g. 
photographic material), and the use of eggs or offspring of Antarctic wildlife available from other 
animal exhibits.  Ancillary scientific uses of captive wildlife should be weighted against other 
alternatives to obtaining the same or equivalent information. 
• 
The likely life expectancy of wildlife in captivity. Historically, initial holdings of wildlife have 
often had shorter life spans than in the wild. For novel Antarctic species this may be a particular 
issue. This has a bearing on the viability of the proposed activity (i.e. public exhibition, 
establishment of a breeding population), the likely interval before replacements are sought, and 
the ethical basis for the captivity.  
• 
The conditions in which wildlife will be kept in captivity.  In addition to addressing Antarctic 
ethical and environmental issues, decision-makers should refer to specialists for advice 
concerning the conditions in which wildlife will be kept in captivity, including: licensing 
requirements, if applicable; accommodation; nutrition; sanitation and disease control; veterinary 
care; general welfare; public safety; etc. 
• 
Plans for the maintenance and replenishment of captive populations.  Unless the captive 
population can become self-sustainable, be replenished from other captive stocks, or has a 
reasonably long life-expectancy, it is likely that there will be recurring applications to replenish it 
by recurring takings of wildlife from their natural habitat.  This is particularly the case if there has 
been an investment in creating an environment suitable to exhibit Antarctic fauna, and the life 
expectancy of captive populations is relatively short.  The plans for maintaining and replenishing 
captive populations should be included in the application.9 
 
A final decision should not be based on narrowly drawn environmental criteria.  A low environmental 
impact does not necessarily imply that the intrinsic values of Antarctica will not be affected 
negatively by the taking.  Overall, consideration should be given as to how the objectives and 
principles of the Protocol are being promoted by allowing a proposed taking to proceed. 
 
                                                 
9 There are precedents of Antarctic fish and invertebrates exhibited in New Zealand for which there were recurrent 
applications to replenish stock.  The initial collections were argued for by the proponents as "seed" stocks from which a 
captive-bred population for exhibition would be built up.  However, their captive life expectancy turned out to be of only a 
year or two.  
6
5. Educational issues and the Madrid Protocol 
 
One view is that animal exhibits are "educational" facilities where visitors can learn about the 
individual species, conservation and environmental issues, and efforts to protect endangered species.  
This pro-captivity view is, of course, debatable and debated.   
 
The Protocol accepts, but does not encourage (or discourage) educational uses of Antarctica in the 
same way that it encourages scientific research and cooperation.  The Protocol refers to the 
“educational value” of a program,10 or to “educational institutions or uses”.11 “Educational values” 
have recently been included in the discussion on management of Antarctic activities, largely as a 
promotional tool of the tourism industry.12  From the perspective of promoting a certain industry, the 
educational value (or use) of Antarctica could easily be applied to transporting Antarctic wildlife for 
exhibition elsewhere without creating apparent tensions with the objectives and principles of the 
Protocol.  However, a more appropriate term than “educational values” would be educational use, 
underscoring that education is an essentially anthropogenic activity that relies on the instrumental use 
of Antarctica.  However worthy and environmentally friendly this use might be, it may affect core 
values of the Protocol.  
 
Even if seeing individual specimens in captivity has some demonstrable educational worth, today 
there are many alternatives to showing live Antarctic wildlife in an animal exhibit. Every aspect of 
Antarctica’s wilderness and wildlife has been filmed over the past years by a multitude of camera 
crews from many Antarctic Treaty states. Watching footage of animals in the wild or similar 
educational materials is likely to provide a better understanding of the Antarctic ecosystem and 
wildlife, and conservation needs, than seeing individual specimens in captivity. Additionally, there are 
now several animal exhibits with captive Antarctic wildlife, and eggs and offspring of these animals 
could be made available, as an alternative to taking wildlife from Antarctica.  
 
6.  Antarctic wildlife already in captivity 
 
In addition to Antarctica, potential sources of Antarctic wildlife are animal exhibits that presently 
exhibit Antarctic wildlife, whether born in the wild or in captivity, some of which may have 
succeeded in procreating species in captivity.  The possibility then exists of transferring Antarctic 
wildlife from one place to another outside the Antarctic Treaty Area and beyond the jurisdiction of the 
Madrid Protocol.  Nevertheless, the transfer of already captive Antarctic wildlife from one animal 
exhibit to another would still raise questions concerning the initial source of existing captive animals - 
how can it be ensured that wildlife sold within animal exhibits were truly born in captivity or 
collected under a permit?   To a degree this will depend on the effectiveness of domestic legislation 
concerning the trading of wildlife, and on the implementation of applicable international legislation.  
Nevertheless, collecting Antarctic wildlife for exhibition in animal exhibits is potentially another form 
of legal or illegal commercial activity in Antarctica, and has implications for the possibility of illegal 
trade in Antarctic wildlife, the need for a certification scheme, etc.  Given the international and unique 
context of Antarctic geography, management regime and institutions, it could be difficult to control 
what is legal and what is not legal (the experience of the fishing industry suggests that it is indeed 
difficult).    
 
7. Conclusions and recommendations  
 
While the Madrid Protocol strongly promotes the conservation of the intrinsic values of Antarctica 
and allows the taking of wildlife for use in animal exhibit under a permit, it does not provide guidance 
                                                 
10 Art. 6 (1). 
11 Annex II Art 3 (2).   
12 There is no earlier reference in Antarctic Treaty System documentation to the notion of “educational value” – there are 
references to educational opportunities, activities, or visits, and social values.   
7
concerning the actual value of the activity or use for which species may be taken. Discriminating 
between the sorts of purposes, and sorts of institutions, for which a compelling case may be made that 
collection is not only legitimate, but also necessary and worthy (given that the present conception in 
Annex II, drawn from the 1964 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, 
is now nearly 40 years old).  Criteria should include not only considerations regarding  “what is the 
environmental impact of the taking?” but also the purpose and value of the proposed activity, the 
merits of scientific components of the proposed activity, the alternatives, the life-expectancy of 
captive species, the conditions in which wildlife will be kept in captivity, and the plans to maintain 
and replenish captive wildlife following the initial taking.  Overall, consideration should be given as 
to how the objectives and principles of the Protocol are being promoted by allowing a proposed taking 
to proceed. 
 
Potential regulatory mechanisms include: 
• 
Requiring that any proposal to collect Antarctic wildlife for animal exhibits should be  
1. Subject to appropriate level EIA, and  
2. Referred to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) for discussion before a 
final decision is made.   
• 
Considering the issue of the taking of Antarctic wildlife for exhibition in the rolling review of 
Annex II and add additional appropriate management measures. 
 
ASOC submits that these or other alternatives should be the focus of detailed discussion by the 
Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
Whatever the perspective and approaches used, keeping Antarctic wildlife in animal exhibits or 
equivalent should not be regarded as a wildlife conservation measure.  Wild species should be 
protected in their wild habitats. The conservation of the Antarctic wilderness should be both the 
priority and the means to conserve Antarctic wildlife. 
