 
 
 
 
1 
An International Expedition to Deception Island 
  
Joint Information paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental 
Protection by Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, UK, USA, ASOC and IAATO 
 
 
1. 
Introduction 
 
Since 1972, parts of Deception Island have been given special area protection 
following piecemeal proposals, but, despite being raised for discussion as an Antarctic 
Specially Managed Area (ASMA) at ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994), no overall 
coherent strategy had been formulated for protecting or managing the island’s 
scientific, wildlife, historic or educational values. In 1998, the UK Foreign & 
Commonwealth Office commissioned the British Antarctic Survey to co-ordinate 
among interested Parties with a view to jointly developing an integrated strategy for 
the management of future activities there.  
 
An island-wide approach was suggested, entailing an Antarctic Specially Managed 
Area (ASMA) comprising a matrix of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), 
Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs), and further zones in which activities could be 
subject to a Code of Conduct. This strategy met with widespread agreement amongst 
those nations with major interests in Deception Island (Argentina, Chile, Norway, 
Spain and the UK). A joint Information Paper (XII SATCM/IP8) was tabled at CEP 
III (The Hague, 2000). 
 
In March 2001, the Instituto Antártico Chileno hosted a workshop in Santiago to 
progress the Management Plan for Deception Island. In addition to the 5 Parties 
mentioned above, the USA, the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) and 
the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) also attended. 
Substantial progress was made on a draft Management Plan for Deception Island, and 
a joint Information Paper (XXIV ATCM/IP63) was submitted at CEP IV  
(St. Petersburg, 2001). The Workshop Report will be submitted at CEP V (Warsaw, 
2002). During the workshop, it was agreed that an international expedition to the 
island would be useful in order to collect baseline information for the proposed 
island-wide Management Plan.  
 
2. 
International Expedition to Deception Island 
 
During February 2002, the Direción Nacional del Antártico (Argentina) hosted an 
expedition to the island at Decepción Station. Logistic support was also provided by 
Gabriel de Castilla Station (Spain). 15 representatives from 6 National Antarctic 
Programmes (Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, the UK and the USA) and two Non-
Governmental Organizations (ASOC and IAATO) participated. Transport to 
Deception Island was provided by the Argentine icebreaker Irízar, and by IAATO 
member vessels. 
 
The aim of the expedition was to undertake field surveys to assist with the joint 
preparation, by the six Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (Argentina, Chile, Spain, 
 
 
 
 
2 
Norway, the UK and the USA) of an ‘island-wide management and protection 
package’ for Deception Island. The work that was undertaken included: 
 
• an environmental audit of Decepción Station; 
 
• a botanical review of Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 21 and other areas 
of botanical importance on Deception Island; 
 
• a conservation/environmental survey of the abandoned Hektor whaling station 
and the abandoned UK ‘Base B’ at Whalers Bay to determine management 
and clean-up requirements; 
 
• a conservation/environmental survey of HSM No. 76 (Presidente Pedro 
Aguirre Cerda Station) at Pendulum Cove, also to determine management and 
clean-up requirements;  
 
• a survey and assessment of tourist landing sites, observations of tourist 
activities, and the interactions between the scientific and tourist communities 
using the island; 
 
• testing an emergency evacuation plan in case of volcanic eruption, and further 
work on an island-wide oil spill contingency plan, using as a basis the existing 
contingency plans of Gabriel de Castilla Station.  
 
Key findings of the expedition included: 
 
• there was agreement on the concept of zones within the ASMA. These may 
include scientific zones, facilities zones, conservation zones and 
historic/educational zones. Specific Codes of Conduct for each zone will be 
included in the ASMA Management Plan; 
 
• the island is a unique botanical site, one of the most important in the Antarctic. 
Its flora includes at least 13 species not found elsewhere in the Antarctic. Of 
particular importance are a number of small but unique communities 
associated with areas of geothermal activity, as well as the most extensive 
known community of Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis), one of only 
2 flowering plants found in Antarctica. The 5 sub-sites adopted as SSSI No. 21 
do not afford adequate protection to the island’s unique flora; 
 
• further clean up of hazardous and non-hazardous waste is needed at Whalers 
Bay, and appropriate interpretative material is required. All buildings, 
structures and artefacts and any cemetery remains located at Whalers Bay 
should be listed as a new unified Historic Site and Monument, encompassing 
the three current HSMs and retaining the values for which each was listed. A 
Management Plan should be prepared for this HSM, although it is not 
envisaged that the site will be separately designated as an ASMA or ASPA. 
The boundaries of the HSM should be defined in the management plan; 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
• A basic code of conduct, interpretative material and clean-up of some debris 
around HSM No 76 at Pendulum Cove should be undertaken. The definition 
of a boundary for the Historical Site requires further examination; 
 
• improved communication is needed between the scientific and tourist 
communities on Deception Island to avoid conflicts of interest. Site-specific 
codes of conduct for the four commonly visited landing sites (Whalers Bay, 
Pendulum Cove, Baily Head and the unnamed crater to the east of Telefon 
Bay) are needed (and are under preparation); 
 
• colonization, microclimatological and environmental measurements, and 
monitoring of morphological changes in the marine and benthic ecosystems in 
Port Foster, also require that those areas in SSSI No 27 be redesigned and 
expanded; 
 
• all activities undertaken on the island should be planned and conducted taking 
into account the significant risk to human life posed by the threat of volcanic 
eruption. 
 
3. 
The Way Forward 
 
Further consultation amongst the Deception Island contact group is planned, with a 
view to completing the ‘island-wide management package’ and tabling it at CEP VI 
(Madrid, 2003). The management package will include:  
 
i  
An ASMA Management Plan for Deception Island; 
ii 
A revised ASPA Management Plan for SSSI No. 21, and possibly other areas 
of important vegetation on Deception Island; 
iii 
A revised ASPA Management Plan for SSSI No. 27; 
iv 
A Management Plan for the proposed new HSM at Whalers Bay; 
v 
Codes of conduct for identified zones; 
vi 
An island-wide emergency evacuation plan in case of volcanic eruption; 
vii 
An island-wide oil spill contingency plan. 
