XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-107
Agenda Item ATCM 13
BULGARIA
Original: English


SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY OF EASTERN EUROPEAN                             POLAR NATIONS

The Bulgarian delegation wish to draw attention of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting to the recent successful workshop in Sofia of nine Central-Eastern European nations (Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Poland, Romania, Russia, Luxembourg, Ukraine, FYR Macedonia) to discuss the priorities in Science and Technology Policy for nations with developing Polar Research Programmes. 

The workshop took place on 4th and 5th of August 2002 in the ‘St Kliment Ohridski’ University of Sofia. The workshop was organised by the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute in close cooperation with the European Polar Board (a component body of The European Science Foundation). The workshop was opened and addressed by the Bulgarian Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr Solomon Passy. The recommendations of this forum will be published by the European Polar Board and circulated to national agencies and international Polar bodies. They will provide an overview of the portfolio of science activities and future areas of mutual interest of Central-Eastern European Polar Nations. 

The meeting concentrated on five key areas:

    1. Discussions of harmonisation in logistical and scientific activities 
    2. The mobility of polar scientists from Central-Eastern European Nations to Institutes in The European Union and shared usage of facilities in the Antarctic and Arctic.
    3. Establishment of National data centres and coordination of information flow between Polar nations in Europe and Internationally.
    4. Closer integration and participation of Central-Eastern European Nations into European and International science programmes.
    5. The establishment of multilateral dialogue between the Central-Eastern European Nations to enhance capacity in science and technology. 

The Bulgarian Antarctic Institute is cooperating with Scientists from many countries. Good traditional cooperation exists between Bulgaria and Spain. The Bulgarian delegation highlights the important role of The European Polar Board in facilitating science policy discussions and advice enabling Central-Eastern European Nations to formulate common strategies. Bulgaria is committed to developing partnerships between nations with long established polar programmes and nations with developing capacities. This, Bulgaria believes, fulfils the spirit of peaceful scientific cooperation and protection of the pristine environment on the continent, which is central to the ethos of the Antarctic Treaty System.     
