XXV ATCM – CEP V 
Warsaw, Poland, 10–20 September 2002 
 
INFORMATION PAPER 
Submitted by SCAR 
 
CEP Agenda Item 4c 
 
MARINE ACOUSTIC TECHNOLOGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT: 
WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
 
At XXIII ATCM there was some discussion about the potential impacts of marine acoustic 
equipment on marine animals, and to what extent there were mitigation strategies available to 
reduce these effects.  Some Parties expressed an interest in knowing what the level of current 
scientific knowledge was in this field to guide them in permitting procedures.  At XXVI 
SCAR in Tokyo it was decided to convene an international workshop to assess the extent of 
knowledge on acoustic impacts.  The workshop was convened in Cambridge during 
September 2001 and the final draft of the report is currently being reviewed, 
 
The report of the workshop is entitled “Impacts of Marine Acoustic Technology on the 
Antarctic Environment” and a copy is annexed to this paper for the information of Delegates. 
 
SCAR has also submitted to this meeting a Working Paper on this subject that summarizes 
the main findings and recommendations of the workshop. 
IMPACTS OF MARINE
ACOUSTIC TECHNOLOGY ON
THE ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENT
Version 1.2
July 2002
SCAR Ad Hoc Group on marine acoustic
technology and the environment
ii
Executive Summary
Equipment using sound waves to investigate the sea bed and the water column are
essential to the understanding of the Antarctic marine environment. At the same time,
there is active research into the effects of such technology on marine animals,
particularly cetaceans. The potential risks posed by equipment are a combination of
source level, frequency and local effects that define the likelihood of interacting with
animals. Many acoustic instruments are of sufficiently low power and high frequency
as to pose a minor risk to the environment. The equipment with the highest risk
potential are airgun arrays and low frequency, high power transducers with wide beam
angles. 
Cetaceans have been observed avoiding powerful, low frequency sound sources and
there is now a documented case of injury to whales from multiple, mid frequency (2.6-
8.2 kHz) military echo sounders. At the same time, some whale populations co-exist
with commercial seismic exploration surveys. In the case of other animals, there is
some evidence for short term displacement of some seals and fish by seismic surveys
but there is little literature available.
The working group felt that the evidence available did not justify a ban on seismic
surveys or scientific echo sounders in Antarctic waters, however, surveys should be
examined on a case by case basis and mitigation strategies should be used to reduce the
risk to Antarctic wildlife from high power, low frequency sources. Acoustic releases
and similar low power, occasional source were not considered a threat to wildlife.
Mitigation strategies should be investigated to evaluate their effectiveness and there
should be a regular review of mitigation strategies and the progress of research in the
field to ensure that new research findings will be avalable to the Antarctic community.
Research into the hearing and rection to noise of Antarctic animals should be
encouraged as should research into sound propagation conditions arounnd Antarctica.
Records of the locations, timing, duration, frequency, and nature of hydroacoustic
and other activities should be maintained to permit retrospective assessment of the
likely causes of any future observed changes in the distributions, abundance, or
productivity of the potentially affected species and populations
Some mitigation strategies in use are:
1. Use of the minimum source level to achieve the result.
2. Use of  “soft starts” whereby power is increased gradually over periods of 20
minutes or more.
3. Care should be taken with line lay outs to avoid restricting animals’ ability to a
avoid the source.
4. Equipment should be shut down if cetaceans are observed within a distance of the
vessel defined by the source power, directionality and propagation characteristics.
5. Surveys should be planned to minimise repeated surveying of areas in consecutive
years with high risk equipment.
6. Care should be exercised to minimise impacts in known sensitive areas and times.
Further research is needed to assess whether these measures work and to better monitor
the proximity of wildlife to a vessel. The Antarctic community and permitting agencies
will need to monitor research progress to ensure practices are up to date.
iii
Workshop participants and contributors
Philip E. O’Brien*, Geoscience Australia, convener.
Wolf Arnt, Alfred Wegner Institute, Bremerhaven, Germany.
Inigo Everson, British Antarctic Survey.
Karsten Gohl, Alfred Wegner Instutute, Bremerhaven, Germany.
Jonathan C.D. Gordon, Sea Mammal Research Unit, University of St Andrews, United
Kingdom
Cathy Goss, British Antarctic Survey
Ulrich Kremser, Federal Environmental Agency (UBA), Germany
Robert Laws, Schlumberger Pty Ltd
Tony Martin, British Antarctic Survey.
Joachim Ploetz, Alfred Wegner Instutute, Bremerhaven, Germany
Paul G. Rodhouse, British Antarctic Survey.
Tracy Rogers, Australian Marine Mammal Research Centre, University of Sydney,
Australia.
David Thompson, Sea Mammal Research Unit, University of St Andrews, United
Kingdom.
Michael Sexton, Geoscience Australia, Canberra, Australia.
Rory Wilson, University of Kiel, Germany.
Eric Woehler, Australian Antarctic Division.
*Address correspondence to: Dr. P. E. O'Brien, Geoscience Australia, GPO Box 378,
Canberra, Australia, 2601. Email: phil.obrien@ga.gov.au
Acknowledgments: The working group would like to thank everyone who contributed
information to the report compilation. Special thanks to Mike Thomson for assembling
the people and arranging the meeting.  Hoc Baldock also helped with arrangements.
Joe Mifsud drafted the diagrams and Rex Bates assisted with file conversions. RD
Instruments provided figure 11. Philip O’Brien and Michael Sexton publish with the
permission of the Chief Executive Officer, Geoscience Australia. 
iv
CONTENTS 
Introduction  
1
Sound in the Ocean  
4
Acoustic Technology 
11
Marine seismic reflection surveys 
11
Transducer based equipment    
17
Cetaceans 
24
Penguins 
33
Seals 
43
Prey Species 
49
Issues in evaluating possible survey impacts 
53
Conclusions and Recommendations 
56
References 
57
Figure 1. Zones of influence around a sound source in the ocean (Richardson et al.,
1995).
Figure 2. Typical impusive sound as a graph of pressure versus time. The pulse was
produced by an airgun.
Figure 3. The geometry of spherical spreading. The same energy is spread over an area
that increases with the square of the distance.
Figure 4. Formation of the source ”ghost” by the Loyd Mirror effect.
Figure 5. Principle of a tuned array where several small guns generate a large far-field
signal  with a suppressed bubble pulse (Dragoset, 2000).
Figure 6. Lay out of an airgun array.
Figure 7. Back calculated source signature and amplitude spectrum for a 3397 in3 array
(Dragoset, 2000).
Figure 8. Polar plot of the beam pattern of a square transducer (Clay and Medwin,
1977).
Figure 9. Beam pattern of a sidescan sonar (Searle et al., 1990).
Figure 10. Beam pattern for a multibeam sonar system (Hill et al., 1995).
Figure 11. Beam pattern for an acoustic Doppler current meter (ADCP).
CONTENTS 
Figures
v
Figure 12. Results from a study of the impacts of helicopter overflights on Emperor
Penguin chicks that recorded noise levels [db(A)] from helicopter overflights (Geise
and Riddle, 1999).
Figure 13. Distribution and size of penguin colonies around Antarctica.
Figure 14. Distribution of penguin colonies, Bellinghausen Sea, Antarctic Peninsula
and the Weddell Sea.
Figure 15. Distribution of penguin colonies, Longitude 000o to 090oE.
Figure 16. Distribution of penguin colonies, Longitude 090o to 180oE. (Shackleton Ice
Shelf to western Ross Sea).
Figure 17. Distribution of penguin colonies, Longitude 180o to 090oW. Ross Sea to
Amundsen Sea. 
Figure 18. Distribution and density of krill (Euphasia superba) from Nicol et al. (2000).
Tables
Table 1.  Approximate conversion of different measures of sound intensity.
Table 2.  Ranges (km) for different received levels with different propagation models
(from Gordon et al., 1998).
Table 3. Elements of the marine biomass, their equivalent diameters and their range of
detection frequencies (modified from Clay and Medwin, 1977).
Table 4. Sounds produced by baleen whales found in the Southern Ocean (Richardson
et al., 1995, McCauley, et al., 1998).
Table 5. Risk assessment for blue whales and seismic surveys on the southern
Australian continental margin (McCauley and Duncan, 2001).
Table 6. Sounds used by toothed whales found in the Southern Ocean (Richardson et
al., 1995). Long-finned pilot whales produce clicks like echo location clicks of other
species.
Table 7. Breeding timetables for Antarctic penguins.
Table 8. Sounds used by seals found in the Southern Ocean.
Table 10. Example of a Likelihood-Consequences matrix (Standards Association of
Australia, 1999).
Table 9. Risk assessment of seals and seismic surveys 
1
INTRODUCTION
Purpose
Marine acoustic technology provides fundamental tools for almost all marine science
research. In the Antarctic, echo sounders map the sea floor, study the distribution of
fish and plankton and allow safe navigation in poorly charted waters. Acoustic releases
enable the deployment and retrieval of seabed moorings without long lines that could
entangle animals and icebergs. Seismic reflection equipment images the sediments
beneath the sea floor enabling the interpretation of past climate. Pingers enable us to
map where samples come from on the sea floor and the water column. Without
acoustic tools, our understanding of the world’s oceans would have made little
progress since the early 20th century. At the same time, it has been increasingly
recognised that marine animals use sound for a variety of purposes and that high
energy sound can potentially damage animals.
This report arose from the XXVI th SCAR meeting in Tokyo where it was recognised
that there were inconsistencies in the way various nations were treating the assessment
of the environmental impact of marine acoustic equipment in research programs. Some
national approval agencies regarded the impacts as minor or transitory but others
demanded full assessments of all acoustic equipment, not just the higher powered
systems such as seismic airgun arrays. It was decided that a report should be prepared
that reviewed the literature on the effects of acoustic technology on major animal
groups and commented on the situation in the Antarctic.
The ad hoc group charged with preparing the report was constituted from the Working
Groups on Geosciences and Biology. The group sought out people with expertise in the
acoustic response of wildlife, knowledge of the distribution of Antarctic wildlife and
knowledge of the various survey equipment. They also sought people with recognised
expertise in the field to review the draft report. This report cannot hope to
comprehensively cover a large field that is the subject of active, multidisciplinary
research, rather, it seeks to review the literature, provide pointers to the major works
that cover topics in greater detail and provide guidance as to how the available
knowledge applies to Antarctica. 
Methods
The approach taken is to provide succinct summaries of knowledge concerning the
reactions of important animal groups to underwater sound, the distribution of these
animals in the Antarctic and how that varies through the year and a brief description of
the various marine acoustic equipment, its output and how it is used. From these
reviews we aim to come up with some general pointers to the level of impact possible
and some guidelines for assessing the risks posed by a particular survey. Some
mitigation strategies in use are suggested,  -although they are found more often in
unpublished government guidelines and permits making a comprehensive review
difficult.
Although definitive answers cannot be provided at the moment, an understanding of
animal characteristics and distribution and an understanding of equipment and survey
design can identify the broad level of risk posed by a survey. The report draws on a
growing body of literature and should be seen as an introduction to the field. Readers
requiring more detail should refer to such important texts such as Richardson et al.
(1995).
2
Because marine acoustics is a complex, highly specialised area, the report commences
with a very brief introduction to the field to define units and terms and the basic
physics of sound in the marine environment. Again, readers should consult the many
excellent publications on the topics to go beyond what is a very basic introduction.
Environmental Impacts
In assessing the potential for environmental impacts of acoustic technology, we try to
address two major themes:
Injury
The questions that need to be addressed are:
• Can the equipment physically kill or injure an animal and if so at what range?
• Can the equipment damage an animals hearing and if so over what range?
This area is difficult because there is little research on injuries to wild animals and
most literature relates to humans and to the use of explosives, which are rarely used for
scientific purposes.
Disturbance
The major questions to be answered are:
• Does the use of the equipment affect animal behaviour and over what area?
• Does the behavioural disturbance constitute a threat to populations by changing
behaviour at critical times and in critical areas?
• Will a survey affect large numbers of animals, a small important group of animals
or will the area be free of most species during the survey?
• Will a survey affect prey species in a way that will increase or decrease their
availability to predators?
• What proportion of an area used by the animals is affected by the survey?
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
0.001
0.01 
0.1 
1 
10 
100
Source level of man-made noise
Received level of man-made noise
vs. distance from source
Respose threshold
of marine mammal
Ambient noise level 
Maximum
reaction
distance
Maximum
detection
distance
dB re 1   Pa
Range (km)
µ
23/09/345
Figure 1: Schematic diagram showing zones of influence around a sound source in the
ocean (Richardson et al., 1995).
The area of influence of an acoustic survey can be understood using the schematic
diagram of Richardson et al. (1995) (Fig. 1). The maximum detection distance is the
distance at which a sound is audible above the ambient noise. The maximum reaction
distance is the distance at which animals exhibit behaviour changes. In between these
distances, survey noise may mask animal communication in some species. These
3
distances depend on the level of ambient noise, the animal’s hearing and behaviour, the
source level of the equipment and the decay of the signal intensity with distance.
Closer to a powerful source, there may be a hearing impairment distance, and closer
still an injury distance where an animal experiences physical damage to tissues in
addition to hearing organs. These distances are even harder to estimate in wild species
than reaction distances but some guidance can be obtained from studies of explosive
safety and from the levels of sounds generated by animals themselves.
Risk assessment
For several animals groups, we have attempted to develop an assessment of risk under
the following headings:
Behavioural effects direct:
What are the possible behavioural effects of the disturbance on the species both short
and long term?
Pathological effects:
What are the possible physiological implications for the species concerned?
Geographical scale:
What is the geographical scale of the disturbance and does this overlap with the range
of the species or space crucial to the species of interest?
Timing/duration of action:
Does the timing of the disturbance overlap with a crucial event for the species?  Does
the disturbance occur over a sustained or short period of time?
Cumulative effect of action:
Does any effects of the disturbance add to similar disturbance types displaced in time
or space, or to different stresses for the species of interest?
Other sources of impacts
In understanding the absolute level of risk posed by acoustic surveys, some
consideration should be given to other sources of risk. For example, Clapham et al.
(1999) examined whale population data and concluded that ship strikes and
entanglement in fishing gear were the most significant threats to endangered baleen
whales, although they regard the data as insufficient to permit an assessment of other
types of activities. We have not reviewed all such issues because to do so would have
increased the work beyond manageable levels. 
4
SOUND IN THE OCEAN
Marine Acoustic measurement
Sound in the ocean travels as vibrations of water molecules that exert push-pull
pressure on objects in their path. Sound is heard by push-pull of the ear or hearing
mechanism of an animal and it similarly exerts pressure on the rest of the animal.
Some important properties of sound are:
Frequency – the rate of oscillation or vibration measured in cycles per second or hertz
(Hz). Ultrasonic frequencies are too high to be heard by humans (>20,000 Hz) but may
be heard by some animals such as dolphins and bats. Infrasound is too low to be heard
(<20 Hz) but can be heard by baleen whales (Richardson et al., 1995).
Wavelength – is the length of the fundamental oscillation of the sound in the
propagation medium.
Basic units
Sound pressure is the parameter measured by most instruments. It is expressed in
pressure units, microPascal (µPa) in the SI system, microbars (µbar) or bars are still
used in the geophysical industry. Microbars and microPascals can be related 
1 µPa = 10-5 µbar
Acoustic intensity is the acoustic power per unit area in the direction of propagation. Its
units are watts/m2. The intensity, power and energy of an acoustic wave are
proportional to the average of the pressure squared (mean square pressure). 
In presenting sound measurements ratios of pressure, or pressures squared are used,
requiring the adoption of a standard reference pressure. For acoustics in water, this is 1
µPa. 
Waveform of a signal is a graph of strength versus time (eg. Fig. 2). The waveform of a
pure tone is a sinusoid whereas a pulsed sound rises sharply to a peak then decays in a
complex manner (Fig. 2). Waveforms are important in seismic surveys and echo
sounders.
Sound Spectra graph the distribution of sound power as a function of frequency (Fig.
2). They may be narrowband spectra that show the levels in 1 Hz bands or
proportional bandwidth spectra that show levels in 1/3 octave or 1 octave bands.
Continuous sources are characterised by an output of power in µPa2 whereas impulsive
sources are characterised by an output energy in µPa2.seconds.
The Decibel Scale
The human ear responds in a logarithmic fashion to increases in sound intensity,
therefore a scale has been adopted to reflect this response. The decibel scale is a
logarithmic scale used to measure the intensity (power) of sound. It is defined as:
dB = 10 log10(I/I0), where I0 is a reference intensity.
However sound measuring devices usually respond to sound pressure (P) and the
intensity of sound varies as the square of the pressure. Consequently, the level of sound
intensity can be rewritten as:
5
dB = 20 log10(P/P0), where P0 is a reference pressure.
In air the reference pressure is 20 µPa which chosen to be near the limit of human
hearing and in water it is 1 µPa, again chosen to be near the limit of human hearing.
The advantage of the decibel scale is that a large range of values can be handled by
smaller numbers. For example a pressure ratio of 10 is equivalent to 20 dB, whilst a
pressure ratio of a million equals 120dB. A convenient value to remember is: 6 dB
represents approximately a doubling of the pressure.
The standard unit of continuous source level in underwater acoustic is the (µPa-m)2.
However, source levels are typically quoted as ‘x dB re 1 µPa at 1 m’ or ‘x dB re 1
µPa-m’.
Pulsed Sounds
Most acoustic devices use pulsed sound. As yet, there is no standard way to describe
pulsed sounds and inconsistencies within the literature produce major confusion when
different studies are being compared.  Readers are advised to consult references such
as Richardson et al. (1995) to ensure a clear understanding of the units involved and
issues relating to their use.
Initial impulse
Surface reflection (ghost)
Bubble pulses
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Strength (bar-m)
Time (ms)
23/09/346
Figure 2: Pulsed sound produced by a single air gun (Dragoset 2000) showing the
major features of a pulsed sound wave form. 
Figure 2 illustrates the waveform of an airgun which is a typical pulsed output. The
sound can be characterised by the zero-peak pressure which is the maximum pressure
of the rising part of the wave and the peak-to-peak pressure which is the sum of the
pressure of first peak plus the absolute value of the first trough. This form of
measurement is common in the geophysical industry. They can be expressed in
pressure units or converted to ( µPa-m)2 or expressed in ‘dB re 1 µPa-m’.   Seismic
source energies are usually quoted for the downgoing signal because this is of primary
interest for seismic imaging of the subsurface.  It is not straightforward to calculate the
side-radiated energy.  The side-radiated energy depends on the array dimensions and
towing depth and the sea-state. 
6
Those interested in the effects of pulsed sounds on the environment recommend some
measure of the energy of the pulsed signal (Richardson et al., 1995, McCauley et al.,
2000). Received energy is proportional to the pressure squared and thus is expressed in
µPa2-s (microPascal squared-seconds). Measurement of energy is difficult because it
depends on the time over which the measurement is taken and the shape of the pulse
and can be distorted by other noises (McCauley et al., 2000). McCauley et al. (2000)
present conversions for their surveys from equivalent energy to mean squared pressure
measurement and to peak-to-peak figures. They point out that the peak-to-peak
conversion is not technically valid however, many other studies use peak-to-peak
values and the potential damage to animal hearing may be proportional to peak
pressures so they use an empirical calculation. Peak-to-peak pressures are the standard
measure of airgun array power used by the geophysical industry. Sound pressure
density spectrum is the mean square pressure per unit frequency measured in  µPa2/Hz.
This measure is that used for continuously distributed sound and is dependent on the
filter bandwidth used in the calculation. A method used for sounds in which tones are
important calculates a power spectrum without a bandwidth correction and has units of
‘dB re 1 µPa’. Theses two measures can be confused and it is not always clear which is
being used in publications. 
In considering the impact of any activity, great care should be taken to ensure
that the same units are being used when comparing equipment outputs and data
on animal behaviour or other effects. Publications commonly use poorly defined
measurements and use incorrect or abbreviated units. Some crude generalisations can
be made about conversions of different measures to provide guidance but actual
conversion figures w ill vary depending on measuring equipment, filtering, time
integration of the signal, signal waveform and the local environment in which the
measurements are made (Table 1). While these conversions are inexact and, in some
instances not strictly valid, it is useful to know that, for example, 0-p values will
always be lower p-p or RMS values for the same source or that a spectral value will be
substantially lower than a p-p value. Major confusion can occur if direct comparisons
are made between measurements made in air and those in water. Decibel figures for air
are calculated for a reference pressure of 20 µPa (as opposed to 1 µPa in water).
Furthermore,the acoustic impedence of air and water are very different. This means a
sound pressure in air will be 62 dB (re 20 µPa) lower than the dB figure for a signal of
the same power in water (Gausland, 2000).
Table 1: Approximate conversion of different measures of sound intensity. This table
is based on figure used for impulsive sources (airguns) and the figures will vary with
the pulse shape. They are intended only as a guide to the direction and order of
magnitude difference between the different methods of quoting sound energy.
Unit from
To unit
Conversion
Typical values
Zero-to-peak
RMS
add
3 dB re 1 µPa
Zero to peak
Peak to peak
add
~9 dB re 1 µPa
Spectral level (dB
re 1 µPa2/Hz at 1m) 
Peak to peak
Add (not physically
valid)
~40 dB re 1 µPa
Sound pressure in
air
Sound pressure in
water with the
same power
Add 
62 dB re 1 µPa
7
Transmission Losses 
The propagation of sound in the oceans is complex and the subject of much study. A
more detailed review is available in Richardson et al. (1995) and in texts such as Clay
and Medwin (1977). Precise calculation of transmission loss can be very complicated
and the appropriate model varies from area to area. In the absence of studies in most of
the Antarctic region, a simplistic model can be used to provide conservative estimates
for sound levels at distance from a given source. More realistic models require field
studies and will tend to reduce the estimates of sound levels.
In the deep ocean, sound energy from a point source spreads out much like light from a
light source. Consequently the energy density (or intensity) drops off according to a
1/R2 relation (Figure 3, which means that the sound pressure reduces according to a
1/R relationship (as I ~ P2).
E
R
r
r
E
4   r
π
2
E
4   R
π
2
23/09/347
Figure 3 Spherical spreading of sound. The same energy is spread over a 
larger area that varies as the square of the distance.
From the definition of the decibel scale for sound pressure, it is easy to see that the
attenuation of sound pressure with distance is equal to 20log10R, where R is the
distance from the source, and is subtracted from the value in dB determined at a
distance of 1 m from the source. The “sonar equation” is (Clay and Medwin, 1977):
SPL = SL – 20 log10 (R/R0)
-SPL is sound pressure level at distance R
SL is source level at reference distance R0 
For each doubling of the distance (R), SPL decreases by 6 dB (6 dB ~ 20log102) (Clay
and Medwin, 1977).
In shallow water, the surface and seabed boundaries effectively channel the sound
energy in the water into a horizontal direction. In this situation cylindrical divergence
applies with a lesser attenuation equal to 10log10R . A similar situation applies when
8
the sound energy is trapped within a thermal layer or sound channel. In the case of
airgun arrays, and most ship mounted echo sounders, the maximum sound levels are
directed in a vertical direction.  Amplitude levels emitted horizontally are typically 20-
40 dB lower than those emitted vertically so smaller amounts of energy can make its
way into a sound channel produced by surface stratification.
Attenuation Losses.
Besides losses due to spreading, losses due to absorption, scattering and interaction
with the bottom also occur.
Absorption involves the conversion of acoustic energy into heat and can occur by a
number of processes. Experimentation has shown that temperature, the concentration
of magnesium sulphate in seawater and in particular the frequency of the sound wave
are the key factors. Richardson et al. (1995) suggest that an empirical equation for the
absorption coefficient for seawater under range of conditions is:
   A = 0.036f1.5
where f is the frequency in kilohertz and A is absorption in dB/km.  
This equation can be used to illustrate the importance of frequency in sound
propagation. At 12 kHz, absorption is 1.49 dB/km and reaches around 3.2 dB/km for
sounds at 20 kHz. Clay and Medwin (1977) give similar calculations that show
absorption in the range of 10 dB/km for frequencies above 100 kHz. When compared
to spherical spreading, for frequencies >5 kHz, absorbtion is important at ranges > 10
km.  For frequencies <1 kHz, it is not significant for ranges < 40 km (Richardson et al.,
1995). 
Scattering occurs when sound strikes objects in the water and is reflected. These
objects can be boundaries (surface, bottom and shores), bubbles, and suspended solid
and organic particles, marine life and changes in the thermal structure of the ocean.
Sound reflected from the ocean floor usually suffers a significant loss in intensity. The
amount of energy lost varies with the bottom composition, sound frequency and
striking angle of the sound wave. In general bottom loss will tend to increase with
frequency and with angle of incidence. Soft bottoms such as mud are usually
associated with high bottom loss, hard bottoms such as smooth rock and sand produce
lower losses. In some circumstances, sound may refract through the sea bed as head
waves. McCauley et al., (2000a) found that these may be important additions to noise
levels on shallow shelves.
Regional variations in Transmission Losses
While it is possible to derive equations that will compute precise values of these losses,
ocean characteristics are so variable that little is gained in doing so. Regional
variability is such that, if the losses need to be known for a particular area, it is
probably better to conduct a specific survey to measure them. Other wise, a simple
calculation using spherical or cylindrical divergence will give a conservative
approximation. For example, a number of results can be found in submissions to the
United States Environmental Protection Agency for conducting seismic surveys. The
USGS uses an overall transmission loss (TL, transmission and attenuation losses)
equation of:
TL =  nlog10R
9
Where R is the distance from the source. A number of experiments have produced a
range of values for n. In certain areas they have observed n as high as 43 (Santa
Barbara Channel) and 29 (Puget Sound). Sodal, (1999) conducted a rather detailed
experiment in deep ( 4000 m) and shallow ( 40 m) water. In the deep water it measured
n = 50 which is twice that expected from spherical spreading and in the shallow water
measured  n= 20 which is the rate for spherical spreading, when a rate closer to
cylindrical spreading was expected. McCauley et al., (2000a) measured transmission
losses from a 3-D seismic array where n = 34.3536 in Exmouth Gulf, Western
Australia, (water 5 – 200 m depth, mixed carbonate hardground, carbonate mud and
sand sea floor).
Predicting survey radius of impact
In the absence of pre-survey data for most Antarctic waters, some method of
estimating the sound levels at distance from a survey is needed. Theoretically, in water
that has depths greater than the sound wavelength, spherical spreading transmission
loss should apply whereas for depths near or smaller than the wavelengths, cylindrical
spreading transmission loss should apply. This means that for frequencies of a few
Hertz, wavelengths are in the hundreds of meters, so quite deep water should be treated
as “shallow”. High frequencies, in the kiloHertz range, have wavelengths <1.5m so
most water is “deep” (Richardson et al., 1995). However, the empirical studies
mentioned above demonstrate that that Transmission Losses in even quite shallow
water are commonly higher than that predicted using the spherical divergence. On the
other hand, stratification of the water column may produce conditions in deep water
where cylindrical spreading is a better description. 
The differences between models become greater with distance from the source. Gordon
et al. (1998) illustrate that a range of possible models produce estimates of the radius at
which a particular sound level will be reached differ by hundreds of meters for
estimates of sound levels near a high powered source. At greater distances and lower
sound levels, the different models produce estimates that differ by hundreds of
kilometers (Table 2). These uncertainties in estimating sound propagation make it
highly desirable that there be studies of sound propagation in Antarctic waters.
Accurate estimates of propagation or actual measurements of sound levels would be
particularly important in studies of animal behaviour at larger distances.
Table 2  Ranges (km) for different received levels with different propagation models (from Gordon et al., 1998)
Received level dBp-p re. µ Pa
Model 1 (km)1
Model 2 (km)2
Model 3 (km)3
Model 4 (km)4
220
0.03
0.10
0.02
0.03
210
0.10
0.46
0.04
0.10
200
0.32
2.2
0.10
0.32
190
1.0
10.0
0.25
1.00
180
3.2
46.4
0.63
10.
170
10.0
215
1.6
100
160
31.6
1,000
4.0
1,000
150
100.
4,641
10.0
10,000
140
316.
21,544
25.1
100,000
1Model 1: transmission loss = 20 log(r) (spherical spreading)
2Model 2: transmission loss = 15 log(r)
3Model 3: transmission loss = 25 log(r) 
4Model 4: transmission loss = 10 log(1000) + 10 log(r) (spherical spreading to 1,000 m, then cylindrical spreading).
10
Noise sources and levels in the ocean
The sea is a noisy place with background noise generated by physical processes as well
as biological agents. Wind generated waves, sea ice and sediment movement can all
produce sound pressure levels up to 180 dB re 1 µPa-m (Richardson et al., 1995, Harris
et al., 1991). The level of wind-generated noise is an indirect function of sea state and
peaks in the 1 kHz range (Richardson et al., 1995). Noise from sea ice deformation is
strongest in the infra sound range. Both wind and wave noise and sea ice noise form at
the surface so ambient sound levels decrease with depth. Sounds produced by animal
groups will be discussed below in the appropriate sections.
Injury by sound
Non-auditory injuries
There is no published research on impulsive injuries by non-explosive sound sources.
There is a small amount of work relating to chemical explosives which have a shorter
rise time than other sound generators. Richardson et al., (1995) review studies that
found blast injury to be less likely with increasing size. Although there are various
factors that influence the potential for injury from a shock wave, there are some
estimates of maximum pressures for animals and humans in water. Marine
Technologies Directorate (1996) recommend for humans in water a maximum Peak
Pressure of 170 kPa for a single exposure, which translates into 224 dB re 1 µPa.
Experiments on terrestrial animals in water quoted in Richardson et al. (1995) found
low incidence of injuries including eardrum rupture below levels of 216 dB re 1 µPa
and no injuries at 210 dB re 1 µPa.
These figures suggest that non-auditory injuries  would only occur close to the most
powerful sound sources, however, anecdotal evidence from divers (Marine
Technologies Directorate, 1996) and examination of beaked whales affected by
military sonar (Balcombe and Claridge, 2001) suggest that animals and humans can be
injured by resonance effects in body cavities. Research into this problem is at an early
stage but it is likely that it would be most pronounced for continuous or long sound
pulses. Gordon et al., (1998) quote theoretical studies that suggest sounds may induce
bubble growth in the blood stream of a diving animal. Sound pressure levels above 190
dB re 1 µPa would be required to induce this effect if it takes place. McCauley et al.,
(2000) take the view that animals must be able to cope physiologically with their own
sounds, concluding that whales can cope with levels of 188-192 dB re 1 µPa. (p-p).
However, animals generally project sounds forward and may have mechanisms for
blocking transmission of potentially harmful sounds into the inner ear (D. Ketten, pers.
Comm, 2002).
Auditory damage
The thresholds of auditory damage in marine animals is difficult to assess and the
subject of ongoing research and will be reviewed with the different animal groups.
Richardson et al. (1995) and Gordon et al., (1998) review the problem. They note that
damage is more likely and thus thresholds are lower for repeated exposure. They come
up with thresholds for auditory damage from as low as 178 dB re 1 µPa for 100 long
(>200 ms) pulses in sensitive species to 244 dB re 1 µPa for a single short (25 µs)
pulse for insensitive species. However they are at pains to point out that the lack of
data makes such conclusions highly speculative. 
11
ACOUSTIC TECHNOLOGY
MARINE SEISMIC SURVEYS
Seismic reflection and refraction surveys are used by geophysicists and geologists to
image the arrangement of sediments and basement beneath the sea floor. The method
can also be used on land and has been used to measure ice thickness on the Antarctic
Ice Sheet as well. Seismic reflection methods are one of the most important tools for
imaging the earth’s crust and are used world-wide in research into almost all aspects of
marine geology and geophysics and for providing images of the subsurface for
engineering works. It is also an important tool in petroleum exploration. For these
applications, seismic surveys vary in areas covered and most importantly, in the size of
the seismic sound source employed. This review will discuss the basic tools of seismic
surveys and the differences in survey design and the likely variation in potential
impacts in Antarctica of different survey designs.
Basic Survey Design
Marine seismic systems consist of a sound source towed behind the vessel within a few
meters of the surface that produces sound pulses at a controlled frequency range at set
time intervals. The sound pulse travels through the water column and penetrates the sea
floor. Sound is partially reflected and efracted by each change in acoustic properties it
encounters. These waves return and are recorded by hydrophones towed further behind
the vessel in a streamer or seismic cable or by seismic recorders deployed on land or
temporarily placed on the sea-floor (ocean-bottom seismographs). The vessel travels in
a straight line at constant speed so the same point in the seabed can be measured
repeatedly and the signals added during post-survey processing. Seismic lines are shot
usually in intersecting groups so reflectors can be traced from line to line. 
Line spacing for reflection will depend on the purpose of the survey. In Antarctica,
where lines are surveyed exclusively for research purposes, lines are generally many
kilometers apart, producing  widely spaced, two dimensionals images of ”slices”
through the earth’s crust. These are normally known as 2-D surveys. In petroluem
provinces, 2-D surveys tend to have closer line spacing or 3-D surveys are carried out
where a relatively small area is crossed by two sets of parallel seismic lines several 10s
of meters apart. Such 3-D surveys are unlikely in Antarctic waters in the foreseable
future because of their very large cost and ellaborate techonlogical requirements. 
The survey collects data at individual,evenly spaced shot points along the survey lines
so to give the section through the earth’s crust, the vessel moves forwards at a fixed
rate. The rate of movement depends on the purpose of the survey. Deep surveys require
longer times for reflections to return from depth so shots occur at intervals of 9-20 or
even 30-60 seconds for refraction surveys and the vessel will move at speeds around 4-
5 knots. Shallower surveys will move faster and have faster shot rates but speeds much
faster than 10 knots produce so much ship noise and turbulance along the hydrophone
streamer that the data become degraded.
Sea Ice and timing of surveys
Environmental conditions are major factors in the execution of seismic reflection
surveys in the Antarctic. Seismic surveys require the towing of electronic and
compressed air devices behind the ship so it is difficult to survey with large scale
equipment in sea ice. Some surveys using equipment towed in the wake of an ice
breaker have been successful (e.g. O’Brien et al., 1995) however seismic reflection is
12
largely restricted to open water. Therefore, such surveys are mostly carried out during
the minimum sea ice period, from early January to March, depending on local
conditions. Wind and swell noise also degrades seismic data so bad weather also halts
surveys.
Sound sources – Basic types
Seismic surveys use different sound sources depending on their purpose. For imaging
shallow sediments in great detail, a survey will use a small, higher frequency source
and a short hydrophone streamer. The source could be one or two small air guns or
electrically driven sparker or a swept frequency echo sounder (chirper). For imaging
deeper in the earth, several larger airguns are used and with longer streamers. Sparkers
are becoming quite rare because of their difficulty of use and low power, particularly in
deep Antarctic waters so the discussion of  sources will concentrate on air guns and air
gun arrays. Chemical explosives have not been used for seismic surveys for many (25-
30) years because of their danger, unreliability, high environmental impact and poor
signal quality. 
AIR GUNS AND AIR GUN ARRAYS
An air gun is a mechanical device that stores high pressure air in a chamber and
releases it suddenly through ports in response to an electrical trigger. When the air
escapes, part of the energy is released as sound, which travels into the subsurface and
is reflected back. The pulse rise time is of the order of a few millseconds. Air guns
typically vary from 10 cu in (0.16 litres) to 500 cu inches (8.21 litres) in volume of air
discharged. Large-volume airguns especially designed for seismic refraction work can
be up 60 litres.
The vertical, downgoing acoustic signal from firing an airgun is termed its pressure
signature and is shown in Figure 2. The main features of this signature are the initial
impulse produced when the airgun’s ports first open. The source “ghost” is the
reflection of the initial impulse from the sea surface is of opposite polarity to it (see
Figure 4), and the bubble pulses which are produced by the over-expansion and
collapse cycles of air-bubbles produced by the airgun, as they rises to the surface. The
ghost production creates a sound shadow near the surface where the direct pulse and
the surface reflection interfere destructively. The source radiates predominantly
downwards. This interference effect with the sea surface reflection is also known as the
Loyd Mirror Effect and occurs with most underwater sound sources and is important in
considering safety. A diver or animal at the surface will experience much lower sound
levels than one at depth (Marine Technology Directorate, 1996).
Sea surface
Zone of destructive
interference
Surface reflected
pulse or ghost
Signal pulse
Final signal
source + pulse
Source
23/09/348
 Figure 4. Mechanism for producing the source ghost and Loyd Mirror effect.
13
A signal from a single airgun such as shown above is of limited use as it differs
substantially from the ideal impulse. In particular the bubble pulses are essentially
secondary sources of low-frequency acoustic energy that result in unwanted signals
being returned from subsurface reflectors and interfering with reflections of the initial
impulse. The strength and period of bubble pulses depend upon the size of the guns,
depth of the guns in the water and air pressure used. 
This has led the seismic industry to deploy numbers of different sized airguns triggered
simultaneously in “arrays” in order enhance the initial impulse through coherent
addition, whilst suppressing the bubble pulses through destructive interference. Figure
5 shows how six different sized airguns fired simultaneously can be utilised to give a
resultant signature far closer to an impulse than that resulting from a single airgun. The
various seismic contractors have established their own “tuned airgun arrays”
depending on the equipment and seismic vessels they have at their disposal. Figure 6
shows the lay out of an array used for 2-D seismic. Guns are deployed in parallel
strings 15.2 m apart with single guns spaced every 2.5 m along each string. Thus the
sound is produced over an area 12.5 m by 15.2 m, rather than a point source. As ice
flows could cause damage on the airguns and their umbilicals, arrays or airgun clusters
of smaller dimensions are often used in Antarctic waters.
150
250
350
450
Tuned
Residual bubble pulses
Time (s)
23/09/349
Acoustic pressure
40
60
80
100
150
250
Gun volume (in  )
3
Figure 5. Principle of a tuned array where several small guns generate a large far-field
signal  with a suppressed bubble pulse (Dragoset, 2000).
The simple summation of the individual gun signatures to yield an overall signature is
an oversimplification. If the individual guns are sufficiently close together, their
bubbles can coalesce and result in quite complex signatures. Such guns are said to
“interact”. Even for guns that are sufficiently separated to not interact, the resultant
signature has a directional dependency depending on the placement of the guns in the
array, and the computations can be quite complex especially when dealing with
positions within the array.
14
NAV REF POINT
SOURCE
12.5
GUN TOW
35.0
TO STERN 51.2
SOURCE
DEPTH
 7.0
SOURCE
WIDTH
15.2
2.5
GUN DEPTH
0.25
0.90
BUOY ROPE
DEPTH TRANSDUCER
0.35
BUOY
1800 CUBIC INCH GI GUN SOURCE ARRAY
2 GUN STRING SUB-ARRAYS
12 GUNS IN TOTAL
6 GUNS PER SUB-ARRAY
150 CUBIC INCHES PER GUN AT NOMINAL 1800 PSI
6 HYDROPHONES AND 6 DEPTH TRANSDUCERS PER SUB-ARRAY
ALL SUB-ARRAY GUNS ARE SUSPENDED FROM ONE SAUSAGE BUOY
GUNS ARE HUNG IN THE WATER HORIZONTALLY AND IN-LINE
SIDE VIEW
PLAN VIEW
SUB-ARRAY LAYOUT
FRONTAL VIEW
ENERGY SOURCE ARRAY DETAILS
KEY
BR
HP
DT
BR
HP
DT
2.5
2.5
BR
BR
HP
DT
GUN 1
GUN 5
GUN 6
EACH GUN HAS A GENERATOR (45 Cu In) AND AN INJECTOR (105 Cu In)
THE INJECTOR IS FIRED 32MS AFTER THE GENERATOR
BR
HP
DT
GUN 2
2.5
2.5
BR
GUN 3
BR
HP
DT
GUN 4
HYDROPHONE
DISTANCES SHOWN IN METRES
AFT
FWD
HP
DT
HP
DT
5.85
7.0
Figure 6: Lay out of an airgun array. Guns are towed behind the ship on cables and fed
by air hoses and control wires. Total signal is produced over the area of the array.
In order to give some standard measure to compare arrays and sources, the notion of a
“far-field signature” was developed. This involved measuring the signature at some
distance (300 –500 m) from the source array using a calibrated hydrophone. In order to
remove directional effects this needs to be done vertically below the array and is
typically carried out in the deep ocean or in a quiet fiord. The resultant far-field
signature yields amplitude values which are then scaled back to what would be
observed at a distance of 1 metre (assuming a 1/r spreading loss – simple spherical
spreading) from the source.
15
Considerable work has also gone into numerical modelling of airgun array signatures
(one does not want to have to conduct an expensive marine survey every time one
changes the array configuration). The comparisons with actual field observations are
moderately good.
The far-field signatures that are supplied for guns and arrays show the signatures that
would be observed vertically below the source and at some distance (> 300 m) from
the source, but with the pressure units scaled back to those of a corresponding point
source at the cntre of the array with units of MPa (megaPascals) at 1m from the source
or in bar.m (bars at 1 m). One bar is equivalent to 10 -1 Mpa. However it must be kept
in mind that the array is NOT a point source so, the “back-calculated” values obtained
are for a “notional” point source. Dragoset (2000) and Caldwell & Dragoset (2000)
show that the values obtained for the notional source are never actually encountered at
close distances (ie within the airgun array). In fact the pressures encountered are
substantially less. Dragoset (2000) suggests that the maximum pressure levels within
an array will be found between the two largest adjacent airguns. This level can be
estimated by calculating the pressure produced by each of the two guns at that point,
using the spherical divergence calculation, then adding the two pressures. This
produces a theoretical maximum that is seldom reached in a real array.
The advantage of the far-field signature display is that the specifications are relatively
easy to obtain, are easy to visualize and understand and are standard for the seismic
industry. One can readily determine the zero-to-peak (0-P), peak-to-peak (P-P)
amplitudes and the peak-to-bubble ratio (P/B) and these are usually supplied by the
gun manufacturers and array modellers. The disadvantages are that the total energy and
spectral content are not known and the source strength measure can be misleading
without proper specification of the recording bandwidth.
For these reasons, it is also usual to supply an amplitude spectrum for the source (or
array). Because of the large range of amplitude values versus frequency it is
convenient to display the amplitudes in decibels (dB). The reference amplitude used is
1 µPa at 1m. The advantages of describing the seismic sources in this domain are that:
1. Absolute values of energy for the total passband and for specific frequency
components are readily obtainable,
2. The resolution and penetration capabilities of a seismic source can be
estimated,
3. It is a common display used for most noise analyses and allows one to
compare with other sources of acoustic energy (ships, echosounders, etc),
and
4. During processing of the seismic data, phase information can be readily
determined.
Figure 7 shows the two complementary displays for a fairly typical gun array used in
the exploration industry (Dragoset, 2000).
16
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
50
100
150
200
55
33
11
-11
-33
-55
210.8
198.8
186.8
174.8
162.8
150.8
Time (m/s)
Acoustic pressure Bar-metres
Frequency (Hz)
Amplitude spectrum dB re 1   Pa/Hz at 1m
µ
23/09/350
Tow depth = 6m
Peak amp = 50.9 Bar-m
Figure 7. Two complementary displays of source signature and amplitude spectrum
for a fairly typical gun array used in the exploration industry (Dragoset, 2000).
Airgun Source Levels
Airguns as small as 10 cu in are used for shallow surveys requiring high frequencies.
Such guns have a source levels of 210-220 dB re 1 µPa-m (p-p). Larger airguns which
have been used extensively in intermediate resolution surveys in the Antarctic (e.g.
Shipp and Anderson, 1997, O’Brien et al., 1995) have source levels, in the order of 220
dB re 1 µPa-m (p-p) but the energy is more concentrated in lower frequency ranges (10
Hz- 1 kHz) and the main pulse is only a few milliseconds in duration. Caldwell and
Dragoset (2000) state that arrays used in petroleum industry surveys typically have far
field source levels in the range of 240-246 dB re 1 µPa-m (p-p) for vertical propagation
but 10-30 dB re 1 µPa-m (p-p) lower for horizontal propagation. Gulland and Walker
(1998) illustrate an array where the maximum sound levels are found in a roughly
conical region beneath the array with an apex angle of 90o. It should be remembered
that these are signatures of the notional point source with the same far field signature
and that closer to the array, the sound levels do not reach as high as the notional point
source. The small guns used in high resolution work are fired from every 7 sec. to as
rapidly as every 0.25 sec. Large arrays are designed to image deep into the earth’s crust
and so fire every 8 to 19 sec.
17
TRANSDUCER-BASED EQUIPMENT
TRANSDUCERS
Active sonars including echo sounders use transducers that are most commonly blocks
of piezoelectric materials that expand, contract or change shape when electrical
voltages are applied and generate voltage when they vibrate in response to impinging
sound waves (Clay and Medwin, 1977). Most transducers are made of ceramic material
so they can be shaped to produce the desired beam pattern and respond preferentially
to sound coming from the direction of interest. Shaped sound reflectors have also been
used much in the same way as mirrors to focus the outgoing and incoming sound.
Transducers are constructed of multiple elements to produce omnidirectional, focussed
or wide beams depending on the application. 
Commonly used devices that use transducers are: Echo sounders, multibeam echo
sounders, sidescan sonars, Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers, acoustic releases,
positioning transponders and positioning beacon.
ECHO SOUNDERS
Echo sounders emit a short pulse of sound and listen to reflected energy from the sea
bed or things in the water column such as schools of fish or plankton. Every large
vessel has an echo sounder directed vertically downwards to measure depths under the
keel. This is essential for safe navigation so echo sounders are the most commonly
used acoustic technology. Sonars are used for applications requiring higher frequencies
than those used in seismic reflection, usually higher than 1 kHz, although there is a
continuum of applications. Lower frequency sonars can be used for high resolution
sub-bottom profiling. Their frequency range is higher than airguns so they can resolve
thinner beds but absorption of the signal is much higher so penetration is limited. 
Echo sounder frequencies vary depending on their use. For fine-scale imaging of
shallow subsurface sediments, frequencies around 3.5 kHz are used, although better
subsurface images are obtained if the transducer sweeps through a range of
frequencies, such as 1.5-11.5 kHz or 0.4-8 kHz depending on the make, model and
application. These swept frequency units are known as chirpers because of their
“chirp” sound rather than the typical “ping” of a single frequency unit. Twelve kHz
units are commonly used for ocean-depth echo sounders and some subbottom
profiling, although the higher frequencies do not penetrate far into sediments. Depth
measurements are made with units up to 36 kHz but the higher frequency units are
used in shallow water. Higher frequencies still are used for detecting scattering from
plankton and fish and are therefore important in studying their distribution. Table 3
summarises the range of frequencies needed to detect different components of the
oceanic biomass (Medwin and Clay, 1977). 
18
Table 3. Elements of the marine biomass, their equivalent diameters and their range of
detection frequencies (modified from Clay and Medwin, 1977).
Plants or animals 
Equivalent
diameter
Detection
frequency range
Whales and sharks
2-6 m 
3 – 250 Hz
Large nekton &
largest plankton
0.2-2 m 
10 – 2500 Hz
Small nekton &
larger plankton
2 – 20 cm 
100 Hz – 2.5 kHz
Megaplankton (e.g.
krill)
2 – 20 mm 
1 kHz – 250 kHz
Macroplankton 
0.2 – 2 mm 
10 kHz – 2500 kHz
Microplankton 
20 – 200 µ 
100 kHz – 25 MHz
Single beam echo sounders
Transducers can produce a variety of beam patterns. The most common is a single
beam. A single square transducer produces a main lobe of maximum intensity at right
angles to the transducer surface (Fig. 8, Clay and Medwin, 1977). For example, in the
transducer tested in Figure E-1, intensities propagating at 15o away from the axis of the
main lobe are 20 dB less than the main lobe (Clay and Medwin 1977). By 60o from the
main lobe axis, intensities are nearly 40 dB lower. This falls even further parallel to the
transducer face. The aim of transducer design for echo sounding is to reduce the side
lobes to a minimum because they could produce spurious echos.
30°
60°
30°
60°
0dB
-10dB
-20dB
-30dB
-40dB
a = Half beam width
Transducer
kW= 33
23/09/351
-3dB
a
Figure 8: Polar plot of the beam pattern for a 26 cm square transducer at 30 kHz (Clay
and Medwin, 1977). The response is plotted in decibels relative to the axial
(maximum) value. Beam width is given by the angle at which beam power is 75% of
the axial value (-3 dB), in this case about 6o.
19
Transducers are described in terms of beam angle which is the angle between the
points at which the beam is 3 dB less than maximum power. Beam width is partly a
function of frequency with higher frequency transducers having narrow beams.
Advertised beam widths for commercial transducers vary from as low as 1.5o to 50o
(e.g. Grant and Schreiber, 1990). “Virtual end-fire” or “parametric” arrays make use of
non linear propagation effects to generate very narrow beams of lower frequency
sound by superimposing two high frequencies to generate another, lower frequency
signal with the narrow beam width of the high frequencies (Clay and Medwin, 1977).
The low frequency signal is generated only in the main beam, meaning that side lobes
are quickly attenuated or virtually non-existant (Grant and Schreiber, 1990). This
principle is used in the Atlas Parasound system to give a single, 5o beam for subbottom
profiling.
Echo sounder power is usually quoted in kilowatts because the actual source level will
vary with water salinity and temperature however some manufacturers do quote
maximum source levels for transducers. Full ocean depth sounders have maximum
source levels from 200-230 dB re 1 µPa.m (0-p). Shallow water units and navigational
echo sounders have lower source levels. Because of beam shaping in modern
transducers, this level applies only to the main beam. Levels may be much lower away
from the main beam so there is a very small horizontal radius of influence for most
modern echo sounders. Sound pressure levels can still be estimated in the main beam
using the spherical spreading approximation but the higher frequencies of many echo
sounders means that the absorption term should be included. For sound levels outside
the main beam, the initial source level will be lower depending on the side lobe pattern. 
Area of influence
The area influenced by an echo sounder depends on the beam width and frequency as
well as the source level. Because absorption is a function of frequency, it becomes
significant for higher frequency transducers. Beam focussing means that horizontal
source levels around a vertically-directed echo sounder may be 40 dB lower than the
main beam so the area of high sound pressures around a ship will be quite small. The
zone of maximum intensity will be given by the beam width. A 5o beam width will
mean that the area of +75% intensity will be a circle of radius 8.7 m in 100 m of water
(240 m2). For beam width of 2o, this falls to a circle of 3.49 m radius (38 m2). This
means that the zone of influence of most single beam echo sounder will be a small
region below the ship.
MULTI BEAM ECHO SOUNDERS AND SIDESCAN SONARS
Single beam echo sounders map virtually a point beneath the ship as it passes. To get
greater areal coverage, sidescan and multibeam echo sounders are used. These units
direct sound pulses and receive echos from transducers pointing sideways from the
ship or towed body. The pulses are transmitted at regular intervals then the echos
recorded against time so echos from an object near the ship are displayed ahead of
those further out. The result is an acoustic image analogous to an aerial photograph of
the sea floor, albeit with distortions caused by changes in angle of the beam and other
effects. These images can be used for studying seafloor geology, benthic habitats,
finding lost ships and aircraft and foundation studies for offshore structures. 
20
Conventional sidescan sonars use 1 or 2 beams with reasonably large widths on either
side of a towed body or vessel. Figure 9 shows the beam geometry for the long range
sidescan GLORIA (Searle et al., 1990).  GLORIA is the largest of this type of unit in
use, mapping swath widths in the order of 45 km, depending on water depth. Most
conventional sidescans are used to map much smaller swaths, in the order of 1 km or
less. Frequencies used in GLORIA and deepwater sidescans are in the range of 6-7
kHz. Higher resolution units in common use employ frequencies from 36 kHz to 500
kHz. Outputs are usually quoted in watts, like echo sounders, however some
manufacturers quote maximum source levels of 228 dB re 1 µPa.m (0-p).  Beam
widths fore and aft vary from maximum values of 2.7o to as low as 0.3o (Belderson et
al., 1972 and manufacturers technical data sheets).
2.7∞
23/09/352
140∞
a
2.7∞
FORE
AFT
SINGLE
SECTION
FULL
ARRAY
0
5 3 
1
2
4
STBD
PORT
35∞
20∞
20∞
MAIN LOBE
6.3kHz
FIRST
SIDE LOBE
6.8kHz
FIRST
SIDE LOBE
6.3kHz
MAIN LOBE
6.8kHz
1.0 
1.0
23/09/353
b
Figure 9. a. Diagram of a sidescan sonar mapping survey. Sonar is in a towed body
behind the ship. Ship moves forward and the sonar sweeps the sea floor, recording
echos from a wide swath (Searle et al., 1990).
b. Beam pattern of the GLORIA sidescan system. Main lobes are projected 20o from
the horizontal. Individual seam widths are 35o normal to the ship’s track and 2.7o fore
and aft. Side lobes are very small (Searle et al., 1990).
Multibeam systems
Multibeam echosounders perform a similar function to sidescan sonar except they use
transducers that produce a fan of pre-formed beams (Grant and Schreiber, 1990,
Pohner and Hammerstad, 1991, Hill et al., 1995). The fan can vary from 45o to up to
150o depending on the unit (Fig. 10). The returns from these beams can be processed
with GPS position information and ship motion compensation to give bathymetry as
well as the backscatter information that is obtained by conventional sidescans. A single
21
ship’s track can map a swath between 2 and 7.4 times water depth, depending on the
system. Beam widths fore and aft vary between 1.5o and 4.5o depending on the system.
               Receive beam-width
           athwartship
      3.5∞ (inner) to
5.0∞ (outermost beams)
Receive beam-width
   along ship
F1 = 12.67 kHz
F2 = 13 kHz
F3 = 13.33 kHz
Transmit beam-width
20∞
1.8∞
F1
F1
F1
F1
F2
F2
F2
F2
F2
F3
23/0A/702
150∞
TOTAL OF 162 BEAMS
    3 beams
common 
    5 SECTORS
Starboard
   5 SECTORS
Port
Figure 10. Beam pattern for a hull mounted multibeam echo sounder from Hill et al.
(1995).
Multibeam systems operate with frequencies above 12 kHz with deep water systems
using frequencies below 20 kHz. Source levels for the largest deep water systems are
quoted as maximums of 236-238 db re 1 µPa.m (0-p). Systems for shallower water are
both higher frequency and lower power, down to small systems deployed on launches.
Survey design and area of influence
Single beam echo sounders commonly run port to port with data being logged
continuously on most research cruises. Likewise, navigational echo sounders run
continuously on most ships. Therefore the area affected will be a region beneath the
vessel where ever it goes. The size of the area affected by a single beam echo sounder
will depend on the power, frequency and beam pattern of the sounders and the duration
of ensonification will depend on ship speed. Hull mounted echo sounders can operate
in ice. Thus the area of impact will vary depending on the individual cruise plan and
equipment. Because of the high frequencies used and the highly directional nature of
most echo sounders, the area affected will be quite small.
Multibeam surveys have a footprint up to 7.4 times water depth wide and 1.5o wide.
Such a system mapping in 1000 m of water would ensonify a moving area 7.4 km wide
by 50 m. Multibeam surveys typically work in parallel tracks with some overlap
between swaths and move at speeds up to 12 knots (6 msec-1). At this speed, a point
1000 m away from the ship would experience sound levels >50% beam strength for
<10 seconds. The systems are designed to minimise the size of side lobes so the sound
levels outside the swath are much lower than within. 
22
ACOUSTIC DOPPLER CURRENT PROFILERS
Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCPs) provide a continuous measurement of
water movement within a certain range of the instrument. Ocean-going ADCPs are hull
mounted transducers that project four beams into the water column (Fig. 11). The
instrument records backscatter from the water column and compares the Doppler shift
between the 4 beams to resolve a water velocity profile and may also provide sediment
concentration information. 
Advertised ADCPs range in frequency from 38-150 kHz. Output is quoted in Watts, in
the range of 1 kW, but the instruments aim to gather data out to a maximum of 1000 m
so source levels will be low compared to deep water echo sounders. Beam angles are
very narrow, quoted as less than 1o and units aim to measure scatter from cells < 25 m.
Figure 11. Diagramatic beam arrangement of an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler.
Picture from RD Instruments web site, www.rdinstruments.com, reproduced with
permission.
Acoustic releases
Acoustic releases are devices that attach floating instruments to a mooring. They
communicate with a shipboard transponder via a digital signal that gives a range from
the transponder so the vessel can locate the mooring. The sending of a digital code
from the ship then causes the devices to release the instrument package from the
mooring. Acoustic releases work at frequencies from 7 - 15 kHz, have source levels up
to 192 dB re 1 (Pa.m (0-p) and are omnidirectional. They are activated by the
shipboard unit only when it is time for the mooring to be recovered and so emit sound
for only a few hours maximum.
Positioning transponders and beacons
Positioning transponders and beacons are used to locate submarine equipment or for
dynamic positioning of vessels. They operate at frequencies from 7 to 54 kHz and have
source levels from 180 dB re 1 (Pa.m (0-p) to 205 dB re 1 (Pa.m (0-p). They can be
omnidirectional or have focused conical beams (60o). This sort of equipment is used
for the duration of an activity. In the case of dynamic positioning, for the time a vessel
is on station. The Ocean Drilling Program has used such beacons in the Antarctic but
only for a maximum of 15 days in one location.
23
Passive sonars
Passive sonars are listening devices, (hydrophones) that determine the presence,
characteristics and direction of submarine noise sources. This sort of equipment makes
no sound and therefore has no potential to disturb marine life.
24
CETACEANS
CETACEANS IN THE ANTARCTIC
Cetaceans are generally widespread in the Antarctic region. All species of large
whales, except Bryde’s whale, are known to have populations that migrate from winter
breeding grounds in the tropics to summer feeding grounds in the Antarctic
(Kasamatsu, and Joyce, 1995, Kasamatsu et al., 2000). Migrating whales seem to
arrive in the region in December and depart around mid to late Febraury although
beaked whales are known to be present in October (Kasamatsu and Joyce, 1995).
Their distribution could depend on the distribution and abundance of prey species
(Kasamatsu et al., 2000). High productivity areas in Antarctic waters are found in areas
of oceanic front, eddies and upwellings, the marginal sea ice zone and in coastal
waters. Various studies have found concentrations of balleen whales in such areas
(quoted in Kasamatsu et al., 2000).  
Kasamatsu et al., (2000) attempted to define the spatial structure of whale populations
in the Antarctic and found that it was possible to make a few generalisations:
1. Krill-feeding species concentrate in the zone of maximum krill concentration. This
tends to be the retreating ice edge in spring and early summer and about 60 nm
seaward of the continental shelf edge later in the season for large parts of the
margin but covers a wider belt in the South Atlantic (Fig. 18, Nicol et al. 2000).
2. Killer whales are widespread but tend to concentrate near the ice edge.
3. Minke whales show the highest densities near the ice edge.
4. Sperm whales and Ziphiids (beaked whales) have low densities on the Antarctic
continental shelf, concentrating on the continental slope, rise and in the ocean
basins.
5. Fin whales are most common far from the ice edge.
These relationships probably reflect prey distribution with killer whales preying on
minke whales, seals and penguins and so follow the ice edge whereas sperm whales
and ziphiids prey on squid that are found in deep water. 
There is some evidence for longitudinal peaks in whale abundance. Kasamatsu and
Joyce, (1995) noted peaks in sperm whale abundance in areas bounded by 62o-66oS
and 090o-120oE and south of 66o, 150o-180oE. They also comment on high encounter
rates with beaked whales between the Southern Atlantic (90oW) and the eastern Indian
Ocean (120oE). Ichii (1990) documents some longitudinal variation in minke whale
catch locations around East Antarctica, more or less reflecting the distribution of krill.
The most concentrated regions are along the shelf edge and the ice edge.
Sensitive areas
Whales are distributed widely in Antarctic waters so that there are some whales are
likely to be present in most areas with little or no ice cover. The areas in which whale
concentrations are likely to be highest are zones of high krill abundance (Fig. 18). This
zone is also favoured by deep-diving sperm and beaked whales which are potentially
more vulnerable to surface noise sources (Gordon et al., 1998).
25
CETACEANS AND SOUND
BALEEN WHALES
Baleen whales produce a rich and complex range of underwater sounds ranging from
about 12 Hz to 8 kHz but with the most common frequencies below 1 kHz (McCauley
1994). This combined with studies of their hearing apparatus suggests that their
hearing is also best adapted for low frequency sound (McCauley, 1994, Richardson et
al., 1995). Baleen whales make individual sounds that last for up to 16 sec.
(Richardson et al. 1995) and can “sing” for long periods. These sounds are thought to
be used in social interaction and communication between individuals and pods.
Richardson et al. (1995) summarised published Baleen whale sound characteristics.
Table 4 lists the estimated source levels, frequency ranges and dominant frequencies of
baleen whale calls. The individual papers from which these figures are obtained are
listed in Richardson et al (1995), Table 7.1. It can be seen that some species produce
quite high sound levels. Likewise, McCauley et al. (1998) report Humpback and
Southern Right whale song components reaching 192 db re 1 µPa2 (p-p) as well as
levels of 180-190 db re 1 µPa2 (p-p) for humpback flipper slapping and breaching
sounds.
Species 
Frequency (Hz) 
Dominant frequ ency 
Estimated Source Level
(dB re 1 µPa.m)
Southern right 
30 - 2200 
50 - 500 
172 - 192
Pygmy right 
300 + 
60 - 135 
165 - 179
Humpback 
25 - 8200 
25 - 4000 
144 - 192
Fin 
10 – 28,000 
20, 1500 - 2500 
155 - 186
Blue 
12 – 31,000 
16-25, 6000-8000 
130 - 188
Bryde’s 
70 - 950 
124 - 900 
152-174
Sei 
1500 - 3500
Minke 
60 – 20,000 
60 – 12,000 
151 - 175
Table 4. Sounds produced by baleen whales found in the Southern Ocean (Richardson
et al., 1995, McCauley, et al., 1998). Source levels are likely back calculated from far
field levels.
The dominant frequencies of marine seismic surveys and lower frequency echo
sounders coincide more or less with the range of frequencies used by baleen whales for
communication and other purposes. The rise of whale watching and the presence of
whale populations in areas of active oil exploration has led to studies of both their
reaction to vessel noise and to marine seismic surveys. Controlled experiments with
airguns have been carried out (e.g. McCauley et al., 2000a,b). Observations of whale
reactions to echo sounders have also been reported. The following summary relies on
more extensive ones published in Richardson et al., (1995), McCauley (1994) and
McCauley et al., (2000a,b)  and the review of Popper et al., (2000). Most work relates
to whale species that migrate through or use regions of active hydrocarbon exploration
and are sufficiently numerous to be studied. There is little or no information on rare
species even though they may visit the same regions.
Responses to Seismic surveys
Whale responses to seismic noise described in Richardson et al.,(1995) and McCauley
et al (2000a) are mostly based on studies with grey, bowhead and humpback whales
and fall into the following categories: 
26
• Startle response where a resting or slow moving whale commences rapid
movement away from the source or changes surfacing-dive-respiration behaviour.
• Avoidance where the animals change course or speed to maintain a minimum
distance from the source. Whales tend to alter course to maintain sound levels in
the range 140-180 dB re 1 µPa mean squared pressure (McCauley et al., 2000a,
Table 34). 
• Follows where a whale swims directly towards the source up to a certain stand off
distance. McCauley et al. (2000a) observed what they presumed to be male
humpbacks that were attracted to a single operating airgun. They suggest that the
similarity of the sound level and frequency content of the airgun to a breaching
event caused the whales to approach to investigate. They speculate that this
behaviour may account for an increase in sightings of whales > 3km from a
commercial seismic vessel with array firing compared to when the array was off.
• Changes in calling. Some whales change their calling patterns in response to echo
sounders however Richardson et al., (1995) cite only one study which found that
fin and blue whales continued calling in the presence of airgun noise. Popper et al.,
(2000) report that total humpback song levels continued unchanged through
periods when the ATOC experiment sound source was switched on. This source
emits pulsed sound at 190 dB re 1 µPa  (broadband) and 60-90 Hz. The received
levels experienced by the whales is unknown. There are also instances of seismic
survey data quality being degraded by whale calling. Hutchinson and Lee (1989)
concluded from the whale calls recorded on a survey in the Gulf of Maine that the
whales calls came from all directions. This suggests that the passing of the survey
vessel did not cause the whales to become silent.
This wide range of sound levels at which avoidance behaviours are observed reflects
the fact that whales respond differently to sound levels depending on their activity at
the time. Observations of humpbacks on the North-West Shelf of Australia (McCauley
et al., 2000a,b) and studies of humpbacks, Bowhead and Grey Whales (quoted in
Richardson et al., 1995) indicate that the whales are less responsive when migrating or
feeding than when suckling, resting or socialising. There are also variations between
individuals in populations. Richardson et al., (1995) quote a study which found ~10%
of migrating grey whales showed avoidance at 163 dB re 1 µPa  and ~50% at 173 dB
re 1 µPa. Popper et al. (2000) report a study that found grey whales were more or less
inclined to divert around a sound source depending on its location in their migratory
path. In areas of the North-west shelf where humpbacks were not migrating, sexually
active males swim rapidly around the area and are less reactive to airguns unless they
follow the vessel, sometimes circling it before swimming off, receiving a maximum
sound level of 165 dB re 1 µPa2.s (equivalent energy, ~190 dB re 1 µPa p-p). 
McCauley et al.(2000a) found in their study that humpback cows with young calves,
which exhibited avoidance behavior at sound levels of 126-129 dB re 1 µPa2.s
(equivalent to 156-159 dB re 1 µPa p-p) (McCauley et al., 2000a), were the most
sensitive to air gun noise.
Response to echo sounders and other transducers
Richardson et al, (1995) review literature that indicates whales react to lower
frequency echo sounders, sometimes showing strong avoidance behaviour. Baleen
whales seem to react to frequencies up to 28 kHz but do not react to pingers, acoustic
tags and echo sounders at 36 kHz and above. The review does not include information
on transducer source levels, levels received by the animals or whether the devices used
27
were omnidirectional or focused. It is thus hard to assess the significance of the
observations. The observation of normal behaviour from whales with attached acoustic
tags suggests that these high frequency tools have no influence on them. The only case
of whales around acoustic beacons in Antarctic waters known to the authors took place
on ODP Leg 188 in January to March 2000. While drilling, the vessel uses a beacon to
control its dynamic positioning system. On 2 of the 15 days on site 1165, pods of
humpback whales swam around and under the vessel for about 1 hour. Several
individuals indulged in “spy hoping” within 30 m of the vessel and commenced
breaching displays before departing. 
Possible Impacts
Injury
Very little is known about the sound levels at which hearing damage or physical injury
to whales could take place (Richardson et al., 1995, Popper et al., 2000). Examination
of whales probably killed by sound pulses have all involved animals found near sites of
chemical explosions. McCauley et al. (2000a) suggested that whales must cope
physiologically with the highest level sound produced by whales themselves (192 dB
re 1 µPa p-p) while singing or breaching. Thus, for a 220 dB re 1 µPa.m (p-p) airgun, a
whale would not receive sound levels higher than 192 dB re 1 µPa (p-p) unless it were
closer than 25 m to the gun. For airgun arrays, the distance will vary from array to
array depending on array design and power. McCauley et al. (2000a) found that the
industry array (2678 cu in., ~240 dB re 1 µPa, p-p) they studied produced sound levels
of 192 dB re 1 µPa, p-p out to 1.4 km abeam. For focussed echo sounders, such sound
levels will be found in the narrow main lobe immediately below the transducer. 
The most likely scenario for injury of an animal by acoustic equipment would be if the
equipment were turned on full power while the animal was close to it. In many
jurisdictions, seismic surveys are required to “soft start” or “ramp start” by gradually
increasing gun numbers and pressures over a period so that animals have time to swim
away before sound reaches dangerous levels. Popper et al. (2000) describe this as a
“common sense” measure but note the lack of any actual studies to verify that it works.
Gordon et al. (1998) point out that the “soft start” assumes animals will respond
appropriately by swimming away from the sound source.
 
Disturbance
The effects of disturbance on whale activities is still uncertain. However, Popper et al.
(2000) concluded that the studies on the effect of the ATOC experiment which uses a
high intensity, low frequency sound source found “no evidence of short term
catastrophic effects in the area such as strandings or mass desertion”. Concerns relate
to persistent displacement of animals from important, localised habitats and masking of
acoustic cues interfering with socialisation and breeding. Persistent displacement of
cows and young calves could make the calves vulnerable to exhaustion and predation
(McCauley et al., 2000a,b). Major displacement of prey species could also pose a
threat (see below). 
For humpback whale populations in Australian waters, McCauley (1994) made the
point that the population on the west side of the continent that had been exposed to
intense industry seismic activity for several decades had  the same annual rate of
28
growth as that on the eastern side. The eastern population is not exposed to seismic
surveys, suggesting that seismic activity poses little threat to humpback whales. This is
not to say that an increase in the number of surveys and a change in survey design in
certain key areas might not pose a problem in the future.
Even though little is known about the many whale species that frequent Antarctic
waters during the austral summer, feeding on zooplankton is likely to be a major
activity except for Sperm, beaked and killer whales. Stewardson and Child (1997) lists
most baleen whales as breeding in temperate waters to the north of Antarctica.
Therefore the amount of time and area of a survey in the zone of maximum krill
concentrations will likely be important in assessing its impact. Thus, the impact of a
survey will depend on how much of this area is affected and how much time in the
spring to summer season is affected. Experience with humpback whales suggests that
feeding is one activity where the whales are relatively insensitive to acoustic
disturbance (McCauley pers. comm. 2001). Likewise, calves are presumably older and
stronger by the time pods reach Antarctic waters, making short term displacement less
of a problem compared to the whale breading areas in the north. These things suggest
that humpback whales are possibly less sensitive to disturbance in the Antarctic than in
their wintering areas.
McCauley and Duncan (2001) discuss the risks posed to blue whales by petroleum
exploration seismic surveys off southeastern Australia and summarised their
conclusion in a table (Table 5).
Event 
Blue whale
(from McCauley and Duncan 2001)
Behavioural
effects direct
Subtle changes to tens km, local avoidance from 3 to 20
km depending on animals sensitivity and behavioural state
at time of exposure 
Pathological
effects
Possible but unlikely, very low risk and animals need to be
at less than 1 km to be at any risk
Geographical
Scale
Relatively small at scale of individual signal but larger
when considered through time.  Single air-gun vessel can
work any one region so easily by-passed 
Timing/duration
of action
Depend on the activity
Cumulative effect
of action
unknown
Table 5. Risk assessment for blue whales and seismic surveys on the southern
Australian continental margin (McCauley and Duncan, 2001).
29
TOOTHED WHALES
Toothed whale sounds
Toothed whales produce a wide range of whistles, clicks, pulsed sounds and
echolocation clicks. Table 6 summarises the frequency and source levels for Southern
Ocean species reported in Richardson et al., (1995). The frequency range of toothed
whale sounds excluding echo location clicks are mostly <20 kHz with most of the
energy typically around 10 kHz, although some calls may be as low as 100-900 Hz.
Source levels range from 100-180 dB re 1 µPa, (Richardson et al., 1995). The sounds
produced other than echo location clicks are very complex in many species and appear
to be used for communication between members of a pod in socialising and
coordinating feeding activities.
Species
Call frequency
(kHz)
Dominant
frequency
(kHz)
Source level
(dB re 1
µPa.m)
Echo location
frequency
(kHz)
Eco location
source level
(dB re 1
µPa.m)
Sperm
0.1 - 30
2-4, 10-16
160-180
Pygmy sperm
60-200
120
Killer
0.5-25
1-12
160
12 - 25
180
False killer
4-9.5
25-30, 95-130
220-228
Long-finned
pilot
1-18
1.6-6.7
6-11?
Short finned
pilot
0.5-20
2-14
180
30-60
180
Common
dolphin
2-18
23-67
Bottlenose
dolphin
0.8 - 24
3.5-14.5
125-173
110-130
218-228
Table 6. Sounds used by toothed whales found in the Southern Ocean (Richardson et
al., 1995). Long-finned pilot whales produce clicks like echo location clicks of other
species.
Echo location has been demonstrated in a number of toothed whales. The animals
project pulsed sound of high intensity and frequency ahead of them. Pulse timing and
intensity are adjusted by the animal to optimise performance in the prevailing
conditions. Pulse lengths are short, typically 50-200 µsec. and spaced depending on the
range to the target. Frequencies are typically high. Some species may use pulses as low
as 2 kHz but most use pulses in the range 20-130 kHz. The sound is produced in a
directional beam with the angle between maximum intensity and levels 3 dB lower
being in between 6o and 12o (Richardson et al., 1995). Source levels are very high in
some species reaching up to 220-230 dB re 1 µPa.m (p-p), although being of short
duration, their energy content is low compared to many anthropogenic sounds.
Richardson et al., (1995) note studies which found instances where odontocetes seem
to avoid direct echo location pulses from neighbouring animals of the same species.
Response to seismic surveys
Although most of the energy in airguns is in frequency ranges below the optimum
hearing of toothed whales, airguns still produce sufficient high frequency noise to be
heard by them. Richardson et al. (1995) comment on the paucity of systematic data on
the reactions of toothed whales to seismic surveys even though anecdotes of dolphins
30
near operating airguns are common in the seismic industry. Sperm whales seem to
react by moving away from surveys and ceasing to call even at great distances from a
survey (Richardson et al., 1995). The Northern Gulf of Mexico has been one of the
most intensely surveyed areas on earth for about 40 years. The fact that there are still
studies of sperm whales’ response to seismic surveys in the northern Gulf of Mexico
taking place suggests that seismic surveys do not produce permanent displacement of
sperm whales from an area or that it requires a level of activity unlikely ever to be
reached in Antarctic waters. 
Response to echo sounders and other transducers
Richardson et al. (1995) found more observations of reactions to echo sounders and
other transducers that produce sound in the animals’ optimum hearing range. Sperm
whales stop calling when exposed to sounds in the 6-13 kHz range at quite low
intensities in some instances but the reaction varies with different studies. Continuous
pulsing from an echo sounder seemed to produce less reaction compared to short
sequences of sound pulses followed by longer pauses. Reaction thresholds in dolphins,
porpoises and Delphinids can be as low as 110-130 dB re 1 µPa.m but  responses
diminish with time even for levels as high as 170 dB re 1 µPa.m (Richardson et al,
1995). This variation may be caused by habituation or changes in whales’ behaviour
state, as seems to occur with baleen whales. The authors have observed Antarctic killer
whales approach and swim alongside vessels operating echo sounders at 12, 18, 38,
120 and 200 kHz. Field observations and anecdotes lack information about echo
sounder source levels and beam patterns, making conclusions very difficult.
An area that is being investigated is the possible affect of military sonars. Popper et al.
(2000) quote source levels of +230 dB re 1 µPa.m and frequencies of 2 – 5kHz and
refer to a US Navy system that broadcasts at 100-500 Hz and a NATO system that
broadcasts simultaneous signals at 450-700 Hz and 2.8-3.3 kHz at just below 230 dB re
1 µPa (figure not fully quoted, presumed 0-p). The NATO system emits the sound for
4 seconds, a very long time compared to most scientific echo sounders. Siwecki and
Neal. (1993) describe a towed 600-750 Hz system with an adjustable “spotlight” beam
size.
There has been great concern caused by recent cases of stranding of beaked whales in
the Bahamas and Mediterranean Sea (Balcomb and Claridge, 2001). Although military
sonars are not known to be in use in Antarctic waters, what is known of these systems
and their use and the stranding events may provide some indication of potential risks in
the use of scientific equipment. The Bahamas stranding event is reviewed in Balcomb
and Claridge (2001). Providence Channel is a narrow seaway between 35 and 80 km
wide and  >3000 m deep at its oceanward end, shallowing westwards to <1000 m and
surrounded by the Bahama Banks and islands. The incidents involving naval echo
sounders suggest that equipment with potential for injury would be powerful, mid
frequency echo sounders and airguns.  The naval echo sounders involved in the
Bahamas strandings had similar source levels and frequency to some scientific echo
sounders. The main differences were number of vessels, vessel speed and the beam
pattern. The naval exercise had the effect of ensonifying a large area to high levels
whereas scientific single beam echo sounders ensonify a circular region vertically
below the vessel and  multibeam units sweep a narrow fan below the vessel.
The vessels transited for the deep ocean end in the east through to the shallow western
end (Balcomb and Claridge, 2001, Anonymous, 2001).The NOAA-US Navy review
31
reports that the region featured surface conditions that produced a surface duct 120 to
150 m thick that gave enhanced sound propagation. Subsequent investigations by
NOAA and the US Navy concluded that the whales were injured by active sonars
(Anoymous, 2001). Two types of echo sounders were involved, one with centre
frequencies from 2.6-3.3 kHz and source levels of 235 dB re 1 µPa-m or higher and the
other operated at 6.8, 7.5 and 8.2 kHz and source levels of 223 dB re 1 µPa-m. The
echo sounders have beam widths of 30o to 40o and are oriented horizontally. Multiple
echo sounders (3 or more) were operating with pings staggered so there would be the
only a few seconds between pings. Sound pressure levels are unknown in this incident
apart from being higher than 160 dB re 1 µPa. over much of the Providence Channel.
Subsequent investigations by NOAA and the US Navy concluded that the strandings
likely were a consequence of the sonar exercises, but that the animals would have
survived had they not beached themselves.
Possible impacts
Injury
Again very little is known about the sound levels at which hearing damage or physical
injury to toothed whales could take place (Richardson et al., 1995, Popper et al., 2000).
The wide variety of sizes, body shapes and presumably hearing apparatus in toothed
whales suggest that it will vary considerably with species. The levels of sound
produced by toothed whales (Richardson et al., 1995, tables 7.2 and 7.3) reach maxima
of 180 dB re 1 µPa.m for general sounds and 228 dB re 1 µPa.m (p-p) for echo location
clicks. Echo location clicks should not be taken as a maximum allowable peak to peak
level because of their short duration compared to man-made sounds.  Gordon et al.,
(1998) review studies that have observed temporary decreased sensitivity in dolphins
exposed to sound pressure levels of 192-201 dB re 1 µPa. at 0.4, 3, 10, 20 and 75 kHz.
Experience with human hearing suggests that similar but prolonged exposure would
produce permanent hearing impairment.
Balcomb and Claridge (2001) report evidence of internal bleeding in chambers in the
skulls of some of the beaked whales stranded in the Bahamas. They suggest that such
damage may be caused by resonance in the chambers. However, the tissue damage
found in the whales that died and were necropsied could have been a consequence of
disease as well as exposure to the sonar or other sounds (D. Ketten, pers.comm. 2002).
Gordon et al., (1998) raise concerns over the potential vulnerability of deep-diving
animals such as beaked and sperm whales. They point out that deep-diving animals are
committed to a tight energy budget and specialised physiological adaptations, limiting
their avoidance options and making it harder for them to move laterally to avoid an
approaching source. 
Disturbance
The potential for disturbance of toothed whales also is poorly understood. It seems to
vary with species, their behaviour state and degree of habituation (Richardson et al.
1995). Sperm whales seem to cease calling or move away from noise sources at quite
large distances in some instances. Other studies found that they seem to adapt to echo
sounders. The AOTC experiment near Heard Island found that Sperm whales ceased
calling during transmission and there was some inconclusive evidence for avoidance of
the area around the source. Hourglass dolphins did not avoid the area (Bowles et al,
1994, quoted in Richardson et al., 1995). 
32
Risk assessment
Cetaceans may be displaced by powerful, low frequency sound sources and there is
now a documented case of injury to whales from multiple, mid frequency military echo
sounders. At the same time, some whale populations co-exist with commercial seismic
exploration surveys, maintaining population growth while experiencing some
displacement. Clapham et al. (1999) regard ship strikes and fishing gear entanglement
as posing a higher risk to cetaceans. 
The equipment with the highest risk potential are airgun arrays and low frequency,
high power transducers with wide beam angles. The working group felt that the risk
was not so high as to justify a ban on such equipment in Antarctic waters,
however, mitigation strategies should be used to reduce the risk to cetaceans in
the Antarctic. Also, though the Providence Channel strandings are still being
investigated, they seem to point to a set of circumstances that should be avoided. The
mitigation strategies in use elsewhere are:
1. Use of the minimum source level to achieve the result.
2. Use of  “soft starts” whereby power is increased gradually.
3. Care should be taken with line lay outs to avoid blocking animals’ ability to a avoid
the source.
4. Equipment should be shut down if cetaceans are observed within a distance of the
vessel defined by the source power, directionality and propagation characteristics. 
Further research is need to assess whether these measures work and to better monitor
the proximity of whales to a vessel (Gordon et al., 1998).
33
PENGUINS
There is very little known about the risks to penguins from underwater sound. The
submission comprises:
• A summary of the information available on the hearing abilities of penguins, and their
sensitivity to pressure in air and water,
• Regional maps of penguin colonies around the Antarctic continent, the Antarctic
Peninsula, the South Shetland Islands, the South Orkney Islands, but excluding the
South Sandwich Islands, South Georgia, the Falkland Islands and South American
breeding localities,
• A brief summary of the breeding timetables of the penguins that breed in the
nominated areas.
The maps, census data tabulation and breeding timetables will permit an assessment of
where and when, and in what numbers, breeding penguins are present in colonies south
of 60°S each year.
Hearing abilities of penguins
Hearing in birds is a complex ongoing topic (see e.g. Dooling 1992, Necker 2000) with
most recent work in this area being conducted on pigeons. Despite the obvious
complexities in penguin ears that must function at least in air and possibly also under
high pressure in water, relatively little has been done on penguin ear morphology
(Anisimov 1977, Ilichev 1977) and the capacities of penguins to perceive sound.
Penguin hearing capacities can be partially alluded to by consideration of bird
behaviour. For example, many penguin displays are based on voice recognition (three
types recognised according to Jouventin (1982): contact, agonistic and sexual). On land
it is known that penguins use sounds extensively for intraspecific communication
including mate and chick recognition (Jouventin 1972, Jouventin et al. 1979, Aoyanagi
1981, see Williams 1995 for review). The sound range used for this varies between
about 0.3 and 3 kHz (Williams 1995). These contact calls may be heard up to 1km
from the originating bird(s).
However, only contact and agonistic vocalisations are likely to occur at sea, the
agonistic cases being unlikely to be used extensively. Contact calls may be used
extensively in some species although these have been primarily recorded for birds at
the surface (e.g. Broni 1985). There is, however, some limited evidence that some
species of penguins may vocalize underwater (Markov 1974, 1977). If underwater
vocalisation involves beak opening, recent data collected using beak angle sensors in
free-living Magellanic Penguins Spheniscus magellanicus indicate that this species, at
least, does not communicate underwater (Wilson et al. in press, unpublished data).
Clearly more work is needed in this area to determine whether Antarctic penguins may
communicate with each other while underwater. Studies also are needed to determine if
any of the prey species produce sounds that can be detected and used by penguins to
locate prey such as krill swarms by other than random searching.
34
The in-air hearing abilities of penguins have been examined and reviewed by Jouventin
(1982), and are summarised here:
Species
Frequency range
(Hz)
Maximum intensity
freq (Hz)
Auditory range
(Hz)
Emperor Penguin
500 – 6000
2000
30 – 12,500
Adélie Penguin
800 – 5000
2000 - 5200
No data
Chinstrap Penguin
500 – 4000
2000
No data
Gentoo Penguin
400 – 4000
2000 - 3000
No data
Macaroni Penguin
1000 – 8000
1000 - 3800
No data
Rockhopper Penguin
1000 – 8000
800 - 3000
No data
The auditory range for Emperor Penguins is the only species that has been
investigated, and clearly exceeds the frequency range of recorded calls.
Sensitivity to noise levels by penguins
Only one study has quantified the noise from aircraft operations within a breeding
colony of Emperor Penguins (Giese & Riddle 1999). Noise levels were measured using
a Cesva SC-2 sound level meter mounted on a tripod approximately 50m to the side of
the aircraft flight line. The meter calculated a frequency weighting incorporating signal
frequency and amplitude [dB(A)]. Significant changes in the behaviours of the penguin
chicks in response to the overflights were reported (Giese & Riddle 1999). There are
no other empirical data available, and there are no empirical data on the sensitivity of
penguins to pressure in air or water.
30
40
50
60
70
morning flight
dB (A)
Phases of an over-flight
Before
During
After
afternoon                               
flight
Figure 12. Results from a study of the impacts of helicopter overflights on Emperor Penguin chicks that
recorded noise levels [db(A)] from helicopter overflights with 10kn katabatic wind (morning data) and
in the absence of wind (afternoon flight). The helicopter was a Sikorsky S76, twin engine aircraft that
flew at 1000m altitude at 60kn air speed. The heavy lines are running means (3 * 5–sec intervals). From
Giese & Riddle (1999), used with permission of the authors.
35
Potential impact of marine acoustic surveys on penguins.
This review does not cover direct tissue damage resulting from high intensity sounds
produced by underwater blasting (see e.g. Cooper 1982, Brown and Adams 1983) since
such damage is expected to be similar for most species. Instead, it briefly assesses the
extent to which penguins use sound, considers their sensitivity to it and the extent to
which they are likely to be affected by marine acoustic surveys.
It is to be expected that species using underwater sonar would be particularly sensitive
to sounds produced during marine acoustic surveys. Following work using Humboldt
Penguins Spheniscus humboldti in a purported light-tight tank, Poulter (1969)
suggested that these birds use sonar to detect their prey underwater. This work was
followed by examination of cochlear potentials in the conspecific African Penguins
Spheniscus demersus where no evidence of enhanced acoustic capabilities (either in
terms of intensity or frequency) was found that might suggest that these birds could use
sonar. Indeed, compared to other birds (Necker 2000), African Penguins were
considered to be relatively insensitive to sounds both in terms of frequency and
intensity (Wever et al. 1969). Excellent vision (e.g. Sivak et al. 1987) and perhaps an
ability to determine prey whereabouts by smell (see Nevitt et al. 1995, Wilson in press)
may explain Poulter’s (1969) findings rather than the use of sonar. Despite the
apparent insensitivity of penguins to sound (Wever et al. 1969), these birds are known
to respond to underwater vocalisations of predators (Frost et al. 1975) and, as such
cannot be disregarded in marine acoustic studies.
Maps of penguin colonies
Figures 13-18 show the distribution of Emperor, Adélie, Chinstrap, Gentoo, Macaroni
and Rockhopper Penguin colonies around the Antarctic continent, the Antarctic
Peninsula, the South Shetland Islands, the South Orkney Islands, but excluding the
South Sandwich Islands, South Georgia, the Falkland Islands and South American
breeding localities. The species’ breeding populations south of 60°S have been
mapped; their breeding localities north of 60°S have not. Full details of breeding
populations are presented in Woehler (1993) and Woehler and Croxall (1997).
A 300nm buffer has been drawn around each colony to indicate the estimated maximal
foraging range of breeding penguins from each colony. It should be noted that this
300nm buffer is a conservative estimate – there are insufficient data on foraging ranges
based on satellite tracking studies to describe accurately the at-sea ranges of breeding
individuals of the species reported here. Further, their non-breeding ranges at sea are
largely unknown and will extend substantially further north than the 300nm buzzer
zone mapped.
There is one map of the entire Antarctic continent (Fig. 13), then a series of four
overlapping maps to provide detailed regional information. An approximate indication
of the size of the breeding population at each colony is provided by the size of the
symbols. The maps are supplemented by a tabulation of breeding population data
extracted from Woehler (1993) and Woehler and Croxall (1997). It is clear that
virtually the entire Antarctic continental margin is within foraging range of penguins.
However, the maps do serve to indicate which areas have the likely highest density of
birds. For example, the number and size of colonies in the northern Antarctic Peninsula
36
or western Ross Sea make it more likely that penguins will be encountered in those
regions than in the Bellinghausen Sea.
37
#
##
#
#
###
###
#
#
#
##
#
#
###
##
##
######
#
#
##
##
############
###
#
#
##
#
#
##
## #
##
###
##
#
#
#######
#
##
###
##
########
####################
#########
#########
########
##
#######
###
###
#####
#####
#################
########
###
###########
##
##############
#
#
#
#
##
#
#
#
###
#
##
#
#
#
###
##
#
#
##
##
#
##
###
#
#
#
###
###
##
##
#
##
########
#
##
###
##
#
#
####
##
#
####
##
##
###
#
#
####
#
########
##
#####
##
###
##
####
#
#
######
######
#####
###
#
##
###
###
####
#
#######
##
####
##
####
#########
#######
#######
##
# ##
#####
####
##
###
##
#
##
###
##
#
##
##
# ##
##
#
####
########
#####
##
###
##
###
#
#
#
#
###
####
####
##
##
####
###
####
#
####
#
##
##
###
###########
#
#####
##
#####
######
#
#
#####
##
###
######
#
###
##
##
###
########
####
###
#
##
#
###
##
#
#
######
###
###
##
##
###
##
##
######
##############
##
######
####
#
#
###
##
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
##
##
####
####
#
#
###
#
#
#
##
#
#
#
###
#
#
#
#
##
###
####
#
##
#
#
####
#
##
##
##
###
###
######
###
###
##
###
##
####
###
####
#######
#
##
##
##
######
#
##
###
##
#
#
#####
##
##
###
#
##
###########
#########
#
#######
###
###
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
###
#
#
#
#
#
90°E
90°W
180°
0°
60°S
Projection: Polar Stereographic
True Scale at 71°S
Penguin Colonies
Produced by the Australian 
Antarctic Data Centre,
August 2001.
#
Adélie
#
Chinstrap
#
Emperor
#
Gentoo
#
Macaroni
#
Rockhopper
300 Nautical Mile Buffer
# <1000
# 1,000 - 10,000
# 10,000 - 100,000
# >100,000
Number of breeding pairs
0
500
1000
1500 Kilometres
Figure 13. Distribution and size of penguin colonies around Antarctica.
38
#
###
#
##
#
#
#
###
##
#
#
##
#
#
#
##
#
#
#
#
#
#
###
#
##
##
##
#
##
########
#
##
###
##
#
#
####
##
#
#
# #
#
#
#
# #
#
##
#
#
## ##
#
###
#####
##
#####
##
###
##
####
#
#
#####
#
######
#
####
####
##
###
###
####
#
#######
##
###
#
##
####
#########
##
#####
#
##
####
##
#
#
#
#####
####
#
#
##
#
#
#
#
# #
###
##
#
# #
##
#
#
#
##
###
#
#
##
#
#####
#####
##
###
##
###
#
#
#
#
###
####
# ###
##
##
####
###
#
####
##
##
#
##
##
###
#########
##
#
#####
##
#####
######
#
#
####
#
##
###
######
####
# #
##
###
########
####
###
#
#
#
#
###
#
#
#
#
######
###
###
##
##
###
##
#
######
#
##############
##
##
####
####
#
#
###
##
#
#
#
#
#
##
##
###
###
#
####
#
###
###
##
###
##
#
###
###
####
#######
#
##
##
##
# # ####
#
##
###
##
#
#
#
###
#
#
#
##
#
##
#
#
#
#
####
#
####
#
#########
#
##
#
####
#
##
###
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
## #
#
#
#
#
#
90°W
0°
60°S
Projection: Polar Stereographic
True Scale at 71°S
Penguin Colonies
Produced by the Australian 
Antarctic Data Centre,
August 2001.
0
500
1000 Kilometres
#
Adélie
#
Chinstrap
#
Emperor
#
Gentoo
#
Macaroni
#
Rockhopper
300 Nautical Mile Buffer
# <1000
# 1,000 - 10,000
# 10,000 - 100,000
# >100,000
Number of breeding pairs
Figure 14. Distribution of penguin colonies, Bellinghausen Sea, Antarctic Peninsula
and the Weddell Sea. 300 nautical mile foraging range shown.
39
##
#
#
###
###
#
#
#
##
#
#
###
##
##
### ###
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
##
##
####
####
#
#
###
#
#
#
90°E
0°
60°S
Projection: Polar Stereographic
True Scale at 71°S
Penguin Colonies
Produced by the Australian 
Antarctic Data Centre,
August 2001.
0
500
1000 Kilometres
#
Adélie
#
Chinstrap
#
Emperor
#
Gentoo
#
Macaroni
#
Rockhopper
300 Nautical Mile Buffer
# <1000
# 1,000 - 10,000
# 10,000 - 100,000
# >100,000
Number of breeding pairs
Figure 15. Distribution of penguin colonies, Longitude 000o to 090oE. 300 nautical
mile foraging range shown.
40
#
#
##
##
##
##########
##
#
#
#
##
#
#
##
##
#
##
###
##
#
#
#
##
####
#
##
###
##
########
######
####
#####
#####
####
#####
######
###
########
##
#######
###
##
#
#####
#####
#################
########
###
#
##########
##
##############
#
##
#
#
#
###
#
#
#
#
##
###
####
#
##
#
#
####
#
90°E
180°
60°S
Projection: Polar Stereographic
True Scale at 71°S
Penguin Colonies
Produced by the Australian 
Antarctic Data Centre,
August 2001.
0
500
1000 Kilometres
#
Adélie
#
Chinstrap
#
Emperor
#
Gentoo
#
Macaroni
#
Rockhopper
300 Nautical Mile Buffer
# <1000
# 1,000 - 10,000
# 10,000 - 100,000
# >100,000
Number of breeding pairs
Figure 16. Distribution of penguin colonies, Longitude 090o to 180oE. (Shackleton Ice
Shelf to western Ross Sea). 300 nautical mile foraging range shown.
41
#
#
#
#
##
#
#
#
######
##
90°W
180°
60°S
Projection: Polar Stereographic
True Scale at 71°S
Penguin Colonies
Produced by the Australian 
Antarctic Data Centre,
August 2001.
0
500
1000 Kilometres
#
Adélie
#
Chinstrap
#
Emperor
#
Gentoo
#
Macaroni
#
Rockhopper
300 Nautical Mile Buffer
# <1000
# 1,000 - 10,000
# 10,000 - 100,000
# >100,000
Number of breeding pairs
Figure 17. Distribution of penguin colonies, Longitude 180o to 090oW. Ross Sea to
Amundsen Sea. 300 nautical mile foraging range shown.
42
Approximate arrival and departure times for breeding penguins at their colonies. These
dates are generalisations only – for most species there are latitudinal gradients, with
breeding birds generally arriving later at colonies further south than at more northerly
colonies, and departing earlier at southerly colonies than at northerly colonies. Also,
environmental conditions can introduce substantial inter-seasonal variability.
Table 7. Breeding timetables for Antarctic penguins. 
Species 
Arrival at colony 
Departure from colony
Emperor Penguin 
March 
December
Adélie Penguin 
October 
March
Chinstrap Penguin 
October 
April
Gentoo Penguin 
August 
May
Macaroni Penguin 
October 
March
Rockhopper Penguin 
August 
March
Non-breeding penguins are not constrained to remain in proximity to colonies, and
generally could be expected to be more widely distributed at sea. All penguins,
breeding and non-breeding, are required to moult annually; this typically occurs at the
end of the breeding season and may not occur at colonies.
Risk assessment
Overall, it would seem that although penguins are not as liable to be impacted by
marine acoustic surveys disturbance as much as cetaceans, these birds do use acoustics
underwater and as such may disturbed by such surveys. There is a clear need for
further research in this area but, for the present, penguins be ranked on a susceptibility
scale comparable to humans.
Breeding timetables
43
SEALS
Seals are a conspicuous part of the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic environments. Seven
species inhabit the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic. Many aspects of their biology are
fairly well established however there are still much to be learned about their foraging,
migration and other aspects of their behaviour. The reaction of Antarctic seals to
underwater anthropogenic noise is still to receive much attention anywhere in the
world. 
In considering the risk posed to seals by acoustic technology, their distribution and
sensitive periods in their breeding cycle should be considered. We regard the pupping
season as a critical period because displacement of females may interfere with mother-
pup bonding. Other critical periods in the year are harder to identify. Anthropogenic
sound could interfere with foraging by mothers with pups and affect the quantity and
quality of milk available to and the survival of the pups.  Similarly interference with
feeding during the post-pupping and implantation period could cause decreased
survival and productivity of adults. Another period may be the period when weaners
leave breeding beaches and first go foraging. 
Distribution
Weddell seal, Leptonychotes weddellii
Circumpolar in fast ice around the coast of Antarctica, ranging as far south as the bay
of Whales and the Filchner Ice Shelf at  78OS; a disjunct resident population at South
Georgia. 
Leopard seal, Hydrurga leptonyx
Pack-ice zone around the Southern Ocean, south to the shores of Antarctica including
the Ross and Filchner ice shelves at 78OS; year round populations at Palmer Peninsula,
South Shetland Islands, South Orkney Islands, South Sandwich Islands, South Georgia,
Bouvetoy, Heard Island and Macquarie Island.  
 
Crabeater seal, Lobodon carcinophaga
Circumpolar throughout the pack-ice zone of the Southern Ocean, south to the shores
of Antarctica, including the Ross and Filchner ice shelves at 78OS.  
Ross seal, Ommataphoca rossii
Circumpolar in pack-ice zone of the Antarctic Ocean, south to Ross and Filchner ice
shelves at 78OS during the austral spring and summer while breeding and moulting.
Moving north to the open water north of the pack ice in the austral autumn and winter.  
Southern elephant seal, Mirounga leonina
Circumpolar in Southern Hemisphere, mainly in the sub-ataractic zone.  Rookeries and
hauling grounds mostly on oceanic islands in three sectors of the Southern Ocean:
South Atlantic sector, Indian Ocean sector and western South Pacific sector.  In South
Atlantic sector there are or were rookeries on Peninsula Valdez in Argentina, the
Falkland Islands, South Georgia, the South Sandwich Islands, the South Orkney
Islands, the South Shetland Islands, Tristan da Cunha, Gough Island and Bouvetoy,
Peterson Island on the coast of Antarctica.  In the Indian Ocean sector, rookeries are
located on Prince Edward Island, Marion Island, Iles Crozet, Iles Kerguelen, Heard
44
Island and McDonald Island.  In the western South Pacific sector rookery sites are on
Macquarie Island, Campbell island and Antipodes Island.
Antarctic fur seal, Arctocephalus gazella
Primarily Antarctic Zone of South Atlantic, Indian, and western South Pacific sectors
of Southern Ocean.  Rookeries, historical or present, on islands mainly south of the
Antarctic Convergence: South Georgia, South Sandwich islands, South Orkney
Islands, South Shetland Islands, Bouvetoy, Marion Island, Iles Crozet, Iles Kerguelen,
Heard Island, McDonald Island, and Macquarie Island.  
Subantarctic fur seal, Arctocephalus tropicalis
Primarily Subantarctic Zone of South Atlantic, Indian and western South Pacific
sectors of Southern Ocean.  Rookeries, historical or present on islands mainly north of
the Antarctic Convergence: Tristan da Cunha, Gough Island, Prince Edward Island,
Marion Island, Iles Crozet, Heard Island, Ile Amsterdam, Ile St. Paul and Macquarie
Island.
Breeding timetables
Weddell seal, Leptonychotes weddellii
Pupping is from September to early November with later dates at more southerly
locations.
Leopard seal, Hydrurga leptonyx
Pupping is from late October to mid November (Laws 1984; Siniff and Stone 1985).
Crabeater seal, Lobodon carcinophaga
Pupping is from October and early November (Laws 1979b; Bengtson and Siniff 1981)
Ross seal, Ommataphoca rossii
Pupping is from November based on few observations mostly in the South Pacific
Ocean (Tikhomirov 1975).
Southern elephant seal, Mirounga leonina
Pupping is from September to October (Laws 1979a; Carrick et al. 1962)
Antarctic fur seal, Arctocephalus gazella
Pupping is from November-December.  At Heard Island 90% of pups born over a 26
day period with 11 December the median date of birth (Shaughnessy and Goldsworthy
1990).  At Macquarie Island the median date of birth of a mixed colony of A. gazella
and A. tropicalis was 10 December (Shaughnessy et al. 1988)
Subantarctic fur seal, Arctocephalus tropicalis
Pupping is from November to January. At Macquarie Island the median date of birth of
a mixed colony of A. gazella and A. tropicalis was 10 December (Shaughnessy et al.
1988)
Seals and Sound
There has been no measurement of the hearing of Antarctic seals and a small amount
on captive seals from the northern hemisphere (Richardson et al., 1995, Thompson et
al., 1998). 
45
The phocid or true seals are divided into two subfamilies, the phocinae (the northern
phocids) and the monachinae (the monk, elephant and Antarctic phocids).  The
phocinae phocid seals tested (harbour, ringed, harp and gray seals) had consistent
frequency response between 1 kHz and 40-50 kHz with sensitivity dropping rapidly
above 50 kHz. 
From the subfamily monachinae which includes all the Subantarctic and Antarctic
phocids (the Weddell, crabeater, Ross, leopard and Southern elephant seal) there have
been two species studied, the Hawaiian monk and Northern elephant seal.  The
Hawaiian monk seal study (Thomas et al. 1990) involved only one study of a single
individual. It found that the monk seal tested had narrower best frequency range than
the phocinids tested and a high frequency cut off of about 30 kHz. The studies with the
Northern elephant seal have also involved only the one individual. Their sensitivity is
best between 3.2 and 45 kHz, with greatest sensitivity at 6.4 KHz (58 dB re 1 uPa) but
that they are more sensitive to low frequencies (below 1 kHz) than any other pinniped
tested (Kastack and  Schusterman 1998, 1999; Southall et al. 2000).  
Otariid seals (fur seals and sea lions) seem to have worse hearing than phocids below 1
kHz, similar to slightly worse hearing between 1 kHz and their high frequency cut offs
at 36-40 kHz. (Richardson et al., 1995, Thompson et al., 1998). Their high frequency
cut off is 10-15 kHz below that of phocids.
Antarctic seals are quite vocal underwater (Table 7). Weddell seals produce a variety
of calls from 0.1-12.8 kHz with source levels of 153-193 dB re 1µPa. The calls are
quite directional (Richardson et al., 1995). Calling rate is lowest in winter, rising to a
peak in spring.  Leopard seals produce a variety of calls with frequency range from 0.1
to 5.9 kHz (Richardson et al., 1995) and there has been some detection of ultrasound
produced by leopard seals up to 163 kHz with peak energy at 50-60 kHz. Leopard seals
use low frequency sound for socialising over ranges up to 20 km. Crabeater seals
produce low frequency groans with harmonics to > 8 kHz.. Ross seals make a sound
that sweeps between 0.1 and 4 kHz. Fur seals and sea lions are known to bark
underwater and make clicks with most energy below 4 kHz. (Richardson et al., 1995). 
Response to tranducers
There is very little published information on the response of seals to transducer-
generated sound. Richardson et al. (1995) report 3 studies. One found that harp seals
altered swimming patterns when they encountered a 200 kHz echo sounder. However,
they comment that the transducer probably produced lower frequency sound as well,
that would be audible to the seal. The other studies note that ringed and Weddell seals
were apparently unaffected by 60-69 kHz acoustic tags fixed to them. Unpublished
observations of 20 instrumented Weddell seals in Drescher inlet, a 1-2 km wide, 25 km
long re-entrant in the Riiser-Larsen Ice Shelf, found no difference in diving behaviour
between days when a vessel was operating in the inlet and those when it was not (J.
Ploetz, unpublished). The vessel operated bathymetric and fisheries echo sounders (12-
150 kHz). 
Response to seismic
Again there is little published information on the response of seals to airguns.
Thompson et al. (1998) refer to one published paper and unpublished data in which
harbour and grey seals showed avoidance reaction to small airguns at ranges of around
2 km. These seals returned to the area from which they had been displaced quite
46
quickly after shooting ended. In contrast, Richardson et al. (1995) report a paper which
observed no reaction by grey seals to seismic surveys and another report that found
that air guns were ineffective in scaring South African fur seals away from fishing
gear. This accords with geophysical industry experience that South African and
Australian fur seals swim near operating seismic equipment and consistently damage it
by biting. This may be related to their relative insensitivity to sound below 1 kHz and
their tendency to swim at or near the surface, exposing them to reduced sound levels. 
Other sources
Other studies of seals and loud noises involve attempts to frighten them away from
fishing activities (Richardson et al., 1995). Most cited examples found rapid
habituation to the sounds, possibly because the animals rapidly associate the noise with
food. Australian fur seals have colonised oil production facilities in Bass Strait
suggesting they habituate to a certain amount of noise. Recording of leopard seal calls
in Prydz Bay in 1998 illustrate the difficulty of interpreting calling behaviour in terms
of disturbance (T. Rogers, unpublished data). Leopard seals ceased to call when
mechanical breakdown suddenly ended mechanical and icebreaking noise from a
vessel, suggesting animals react to change rather than noise as such.
Risk assessment
Injury to seals other than hearing damage is only likely close to powerful sources
(Table 8). Sound levels at which seal hearing may be damaged are not known. From
what is known about their hearing, they are most at risk from transducers with outputs
below 50 kHz. At high frequencies, absorption is important and most scientific
equipment tends to have narrow beam widths so regions of potential hearing damage
will be relatively small. Therefore the equipment with most potential risk would be
lower frequency echo sounder used for sub-bottom profiling. Seismic sources also
have potential risk because of the very high source levels. 
Any risk to pack ice seals from seismic surveys is likely to be reduced because seismic
surveys trail equipment behind the vessel and so cannot operate easily in ice. This also
means that most Antarctic marine seismic surveys take place from late December to
March and so avoid the breeding seasons of pack ice seals. High risk areas would be
near Subantarctic breeding colonies during the spring and the times when weaners
leave the beach. Possible displacement effects require study. The small amount of
available information on short term displacement suggests that some species are more
likely to be displaced than others. 
Table 8.   Sounds used by seals found in the Southern Ocean.
Signal
type
Frequency
range kHz
Dominant
frequency
kHz
Estimated
Source
Level
DB re 1
upa.m
Occurrence
Seasonal
Occurrence
Behavioural
context
Reference
Weddell seal
34 
+ 
call
types
0.1 - 12.8
153 - 193
Frequent
Nov - Jan
Territorial
maintenance/s
exual
advertisement/
agonstic
behaviour
Thomas & Kuechle 1982: Thomas et
al. 1983; Thomas & Stirling 1983
Leopard seal
Trills
Broad-band 
Ultrasonic
0.1 - 5.9
0.04 - 8.0
up to 164
140 - 165
120 - 140
Frequent
Rare events
Rare events
Nov - Jan
Year round
Unknown
Territorial
maintenance
& 
sexual
advertisement
Agonistic
behaviour
Chasing 
fish
in dark
Stirling & Siniff 1979; Rogers et al.
1995; Rogers unpublished data
Rogers et al. 1995, 1996, Rogers
unpublished data
Thomas 
et 
al. 
1983, 
Rogers
unpublished data
Crabeater seal
Groan
0.1 - 8.0
0.1 - 1.5
Rare events
Unknown
Unknown
Stirling & Siniff 1979
Ross seal
Trills
Siren
0.25 - 1.0
Common
December
Unknown
Watkins 
& 
Ray 
1985, 
Rogers
unpublished data
Southern 
Unknown
47
48
elephant seal
Antarctic 
fur
seal
Unknown
Sub-antarctic
fur seal
Unknown
Table 9.  Risk assessment for Antarctic and Subantarctic seals and seismic surveying
Event
Leopard seals
Weddell seals
Ross seals
Southern elephant
seals
crabeater seals
fur seals
Behavioural effects
direct
Subtle changes,
likely avoidance.
Subtle changes,
likely avoidance.
Subtle changes,
likely avoidance.
Subtle changes,
likely avoidance.
Subtle changes,
likely avoidance.
Subtle changes,
likely avoidance.
Pathological effects
Possible but
unlikely, very low
risk as animals
likely to move
away and animals
need to be at less
than 1 km to be at
any risk
Possible but
unlikely, very low
risk as animals
likely to move
away and animals
need to be at less
than 1 km to be at
any risk
Possible but
unlikely, very low
risk as animals
likely to move
away and animals
need to be at less
than 1 km to be at
any risk
Possible but
unlikely, very low
risk as animals
likely to move
away and animals
need to be at less
than 1 km to be at
any risk
Possible but
unlikely, very low
risk as animals
likely to move
away and animals
need to be at less
than 1 km to be at
any risk
Possible but
unlikely, very low
risk as animals
likely to move
away and animals
need to be at less
than 1 km to be at
any risk
Geographical Scale
Relatively small at
scale of individual
signal but larger
when considered
through time
depend on activity
Relatively small at
scale of individual
signal but larger
when considered
through time
depend on activity
Relatively small at
scale of individual
signal but larger
when considered
through time
depend on activity
Relatively small at
scale of individual
signal but larger
when considered
through time
depend on activity
Relatively small at
scale of individual
signal but larger
when considered
through time
depend on activity
Relatively small at
scale of individual
signal but larger
when considered
through time
depend on activity
Timing/duration of
action
Depend on the
activity
Depend on the
activity
Depend on the
activity
Depend on the
activity
Depend on the
activity
Depend on the
activity
Cumulative effect of
action
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
PREY SPECIES
Introduction
A significant number of studies have addressed the effects of seismic surveys on fish.
These studies have looked at either injuries to caged fish (McCauley et al., 2000) or the
effects on fishing success (e.g. Engås et al. 1993).  There are few studies on crustacean,
benthic molluscs and cephalopods (Hirst and Rodhouse, 2000) and there has been no
study of the effects on krill. There has been a little research work on fish eggs and
juveniles which could provide an indication of effects on other zooplankton.
Fish and sound
Some fish species make use of sound for communication. The review by Myrberg
(1981) found 35 families of marine and freshwater fish that were known to produce
noise. Of these the best known are the Croakers, members of the Scianidae, are the
most vocal and widespread (Harris et al., 1991). These fish make noise by rapidly
contracting muscles attached to their swim bladders and have been recorded making
sounds in the range of 350 Hz to 1.5 kHz with levels of 140 dB re 1 µPa (0-p?, Harris
et al., 1991). Their sound production varies during the day with feeding behaviour,
with peak sound production in the evening. Many other noises have been recorded in
the ocean that may be attributable to fish and identification and study of the sources of
these sounds is ongoing. 
Effects of transducer based equipment
Nothing has been published on effects of transducers on fish, plankton or cephalopods.
Given that echo sounders with frequencies > 12 kHz are used to locate fish and
plankton, for fishing and research, it seems unlikely that any displacement or
measurable response would have gone unnoticed.
Effects of airguns
Injury
Hirst and Rodhouse (2000) state that studies of caged fish indicate that received sound
pressure levels > 180 dB re 1 µPa. from air guns and explosives produce significant
physiological damage to fish, ranging from ear and eye damage to swim bladder
rupture and death although studies found variation in the level at which injury is
severe. Some studies that found minimal damage up to levels as high as 231 dB re 1
µPa (Weinhold and Weaver, 1973, Dalen and Knutsen, 1987). Gausland (1993) claims
that damage is confined to a radius of 2-3 m around an airgun but does not provide
source levels. Both Gausland (1993) and Hirst and Rodhouse (2000) observe that fish
with swim bladders are more likely to be killed at greater distances than those without
because the rarefaction part of the wave following the initial pulse can rupture the
bladder. McCauley et al., (2000a,b) report modelling studies of fish otoliths and
examined otoliths of fish that had been exposed to a single airgun and concluded that
extreme movement of the otoliths would take place a received sound pressure levels
>171 dB re 1 µPa. rms. Hirst and Rodhouse (2000) question whether longer term
increases in mortality rates have been missed by short term studies of caged fish.
However, Gausland (1993) quotes a study of the effects of explosives on cod that
found that no deaths in addition to those caused by the initial explosion occurred in the
49
50
sample population over a 6 month period after exposure. These studies suggest that
injury to fish will be limited to the immediate region around a powerful source.
Behavioral effects
Studies of caged fish  have found that startle responses in the form of C-turns and
diving to the bottom take place at received sound levels >156-161 dB re 1 µPa. rms
(McCauley et al., 2000a,  Gausland, 1993). Behaviour changes seem to produce the
observed declines in fishing success in areas that have experienced an industry seismic
survey. Hirst and Rodhouse (2000) quote 8 studies that found catch reductions of
between 17% and 83% for trawl and longline vessels in surveyed areas. They also
quote one study that found a major increase in catch associated with a seismic survey
suggesting that the fishing method is important and therefore the effect is caused by
displacement and possible changes in feeding behaviour. Engås et al., (1993)
concluded that a the differences observed between longline catches and trawling
resulted from the fact that longlines can only measure the number of fish up to the
number of hooks deployed. They concluded that a seismic array produced a
“ploughing” effect whereby fish were displaced laterally and downward from the
ship’s track. This concentration of fish fleeing the affected area may account for the
occasional increased catches observed. The durations of the observed catch reductions
are in excess of 5 days in some studies reported in (Hirst and Rodhouse, 2000),
however Engås et al., (1993) concluded that fish were returning to the survey area
within one day of the end of shooting.
Although these effects clearly cause problems for fishing activities, McCauley et al.,
(2000b) point out that they may not necessarily cause problems for viability of the fish
populations. Avoidance responses would tend to reduce the risk of injury. Even though
diving to the bottom may increase the sound exposure in areas of shallow water where
significant energy is transmitted through the bed, such behaviour would remove the
fish from close proximity to the guns and the zone of possible injury.
Many studies have pointed out the long term effects of displacement by seismic
surveys is unknown. Observations of slow return on the scale of days to surveyed areas
are not surprising because there is probably no external stimulus to cause a rapid return
once fish have moved. This effect will probably vary depending on food availability
and whether the fish are migrating (Engås et al., 1993). The longer term effects are
difficult to address because many of the areas of intense seismic surveying are also
area of active fishing so distinguishing between the effects of seismic surveying and
fishing practices is very difficult. Given that this debate is still taking place over areas
such as the Norwegian continental shelf which has seen more than 100,000 line
kilometers of industry seismic shot per year for several decades suggest that any effect
must be small (Gausland, 1993).
Squid
Little is known about the hearing ability of cephalopods. The few papers on
cephalopod hearing suggest that their hearing is less sensitive than most fish and that
the most sensitive frequencies are between 10 and 200 Hz. (Packard et al., 1990)
however, Japanese squid boats use a sound at 600 Hz to attract some squid (Hanlon
and Budelmann, 1987). 
Squid are important prey species for toothed whales and seals. Most is known about
squid in the Subantarctic because of the fishery in the area (Rodhouse et al., 1990,
51
1994, 1995). In this region, squid spawn and hatch in the period April-early November
and so those important parts of their life cycle are outside the optimum weather/ice
window for seismic surveys. 
Injury
Only one paper on the lethal effects of seismic shots on squid was found (Norris and
Møhl, 1983). They report short term tolerance of sound levels to 260 dB re 1 µPa by
one species but lethal effects at levels of 246-252 dB re 1 µPa for another. If confirmed
by further work, these levels would suggest that squid would only be killed within a
few meters of individual, large airguns. This would still apply for arrays because sound
levels within arrays are at maxima around the individual guns or at particular places
between guns depending on array design (see above).
Behaviour 
We have only two studies of squid reaction to airgun noise. McCauley et al., (2000a)
report the reactions of caged squid to an airgun. They found alarm responses at 156-
161 dB re 1 µPa. rms. and strong startle response at 174 dB re 1 µPa. rms involving ink
ejection and rapid swimming. The caged squid also moved to use the sound shadow
near the surface to reduce the sound pressure levels. Hirst and Rodhouse (2000) quote
a study that found no change in squid catch for trawling in an area exposed to < 149 dB
re 1 µPa. The observed alarm response suggest that squid would likely move outside
the lethal range of a sound source. Any possible effects on squid mortality produced by
extra swimming caused by the alarm response are unknown.
Eggs and larvae
Dalen and Knutsen, (1987), Kostyuchenkov (1973) and Kosheleva (1992) described
studies of the effects of airgun shots on fish eggs and juveniles. The lowest sound
pressure level for which lethal effects can be demonstrated is 220 dB re 1 µPa. No
lethal effects were observed at 214 dB re 1 µPa. If this is a reasonable indication of the
situation, the injury radius for eggs and juveniles will be a few meters around large
airguns. This will also apply in an array, where the total source level is a far field sum
of the total number of guns. Such a radius would be comparable to that of a ship’s
propeller. The volume of water affected by an airgun array and hence the number of
eggs and juveniles would be similar to a ship’s propeller because the propeller runs
continuously whereas the array fires at intervals of up to 20 seconds (Gausland, 1993).
Gaulsand (1993) estimated the effect on plankton of the guns on the 100,000 line
kilometers of industry seismic shot per year in Norwegian waters as equivalent to the
feeding of 30 whales. In the case of large, ship-mounted transducers with outputs in
excess of 220 dB re 1 µPa, lethal effects would be confined to a similar range as the
turbulence around the ship’s hull. Thus, the magnitude of effects would be determined
by the miles of trackline in areas where eggs and larve are present.
Krill
Distribution
Krill are the most important prey species in Antarctic waters. Their distribution and
abundance is fundamental to many other animals therefore their areas of highest
concentration will also be areas of high concentrations of other animals (Ichii, 1990)
As a broad approximation, krill concentrate along the retreating ice edge in spring and
early summer and in a zone 60 nautical miles seaward of the shelf break for large parts
of the Antarctic margin (Fig. 18, Ichii, 1990, , Nicol, et al., 2000). More detailed
descriptions of krill density and swarming patterns are evolving with further study. 
52
0-20
20-40
40-60
No data
Krill density g m -2
(DMSP data 1998)
September
sea ice
February
sea ice
23/09/354
Figure 18. Distribution and density esitmates of krill (Euphasia superba) from Nicol et al. (2000).
Effects of sound
There have been no studies specifically on the effects of noise on krill. Crustaceans are
thought to be insensitive to sound which they detect through mecahnoreceptors. Hirst
and Rodhouse (2000) suggest that most invertebrates would only detect seismic shots
within about 20 meters. Likewise, transducers are unlikely to be detectable over large
distances by crustaceans. Snapping shrimps must be able to withstand there own sound
production that reaches sound pressure levels of 200 dB re 1 µPa (0-p?) (Harris et al.,
1991). Hirst and Rodhouse (2000) found only two studies that observed catch levels of
shrimp and lobster in areas surveyed with airguns. Both studies reported no change
during surveys.
Assuming that krill will be affected in a similar way to fish eggs and juveniles (see
below), there will be increased mortality in an area a few meters in radius around an
operating low frequency, high energy source. An argument similar to that of Gausland
(1993) can be made that the effect of acoustic surveys on krill in Antarctic waters will
be very small compared to predation and fishing, especially with the low level of
activity in the Antarctic. The importance of krill is that they attract predators which are
more likely to be adversely affected by acoustic equipment. Also, track lines through
or near krill swarms may cause the swarms to separate or disperse or to coalesce,
making the krill more or less vulnerable and available to predators
Risk assessment
Pathological effects are probably confined to close proximity to airguns or the largest,
low frequency transducers. The effect on the total populations of prey species is
probably small given the low level of activity in Antarctic waters. There seems to be
clear evidence of displacement of fish by large airgun arrays. There is insufficient
53
evidence to say if this is also the case for squid. The effects of fish displacement on
higher predators is not known. 
ISSUES IN EVALUATING SURVEY IMPACTS
The variety of issues and uncertainties involved in assessing the impact of acoustic
technology on the Antarctic environment make it impossible to make hard and fast
guidelines as to the impact of any survey without considering the individual
characteristics. Therefore, the workshop decided that the best approach was to
highlight factors that should be considered in evaluating any survey. The following
issues should be taken into account 
Equipment characteristics
Source level
The output of the equipment in terms of maximum sound pressure is a key
consideration. Although it is not clear from this review what constitutes “safe” levels
for different animals, equipment with an output of  < 190 dB re 1 µPa (0-p) produce
sound levels similar to natural source. Outputs of 190-210 dB re 1 µPa (0-p) will
produce levels above most natural sources in a small area (1-10s of meters radius).
Above 210 dB re 1 µPa (0-p), sound levels could be above natural levels over large
areas. The area affected by a survey will vary with source level and sound propagation
characteristics.
We suggest that for powerful sources, mitigation strategies in use elsewhere in the
world should be adopted. Such as:
1. Surveys should be planned to use the minimum source level necessary to achieve
the required result.
2. Powerful sources should have there output increased slowly at the start of a line.
Theoretically, such “ramped” or “soft” starts should allow animals time to avoid
the equipment. Further research is needed to see if such measures really work.
3. Shut down zones around the source should be considered to minimise the exposure
of animals that do not avoid the source.
Frequency
The dominant frequency and the band width of the equipment determine the sensitivity
to animal hearing and the degree of propagation of sound. Sound sources such as
airguns produce more noise in the hearing range of baleen whales than low frequency
echo sounders which produce more noise in the ranges used by seals and toothed
whales. Sounds above 50 kHz are inaudible to most animals or have very high
absorption levels making them a very low risk to animals.
Pulse shape and length
The energy of the pulse is a time integral over the pulse duration so longer pulses
impart higher energy than shorter signals of the same peak source level. Pulse rise and
fall times are also important. Chemical explosives are much more dangerous than
airguns because of their very short rise and fall times.
Directionality
Omni-directional or wide beam sources will affect a much larger area than focussed
beam equipment with the same source level. Most scientific transducers are focussed.
Exceptions are acoustic beacons and fish-finding sonars which tend to be relatively
54
low power and high frequency. Ocean depth, multibeam echo sounders sweep a swath
up to 7 times water depth and so affect a wide area, although the beams are narrow fore
and aft. Airguns arrays are the least-focussed apparatus used in Antarctic waters.
Duty Cycle
The proportion of time that the source is actually emitting acoustic energy. Continuous
sound has more potential to disrupt animal communications than pulsed or intermittent
signals. Continuous noise is more damaging to human hearing than pulsed sounds so a
similar effect is possible in animals (Richardson et al., 1995).
Survey Region
Survey area geography
The area affected The morphology of the sea floor and any adjacent coast might
restrict the ability of animals to avoid high source levels. It may define a choke point in
animal migration paths so that high numbers of animals or a significant proportion of a
population are present. Close proximity to a breeding colony during the breeding
season is likely to expose more animals to a sound source than a survey removed from
the area. Sensitive areas such as regions known for prey aggregations should be
considered.
Sound propagation model
Sound propagation models vary with oceanography, sea floor morphology and
characteristics and sea ice coverage. This is particularly important in defining the area
over which sound levels will exceed a defined level. For the area close to the source,
this  is not as important with errors in the order of 100s of meters but for more distant
levels, errors can be substantial (see above).
Survey Design
Ship speed
The speed at which the ship moves plus duty cycle and beam shape of the equipment
governs the number of pulses of a given intensity a point in the survey area will
receive. Likewise it governs the ability of animals to avoid the noise.
Line spacing
The line spacing will determine the temporal dose level in the survey area and the size
of the survey area. 
Survey duration
The length of time a particular area is surveyed influences the degree of impact. 
Exposure levels
The combination of survey layout, source characteristics and survey area can be used
to determine an exposure level. This could be expressed as the number of shots per unit
area distributed over a survey area. Survey planning involving large sources should
consider whether there will be other vessels using similar sources in the region. Several
ships producing high sound levels in a region would make it harder for animals to
avoid exposure.
55
Survey direction
The direction in which a ship progresses during a survey may determine if it herds
animals into a bathymetric restriction or an embayment in fast ice. Care should be
taken to provide an “escape route” to allow avoidance. This particularly applies to
cetaceans that cannot haul out to avoid sounds.
Biological Issues
Sensitive times
The timing of surveys relative to important stages in the annual cycles of animals
should be considered. For examples, seal mating, pupping and the time of bonding
between mothers and pups are times when animals should not be disturbed. There are
also times when feeding is important in ensuring survival of cohorts of young seals or
penguins.
Proportion of population effected
Consideration should be give as to the proportion of the total or a local population of
animals that will be affected. A survey close to an occupied breeding colony will affect
a higher proportion of a population than one in the open ocean. Likewise a survey in a
migration path during migration will affect a higher proportion of animals. At present,
the distribution of animals at any time of year is poorly known. As knowledge
improves more sensitive areas will be identified as will areas of low animal density.
Proportion of the available habitat affected
A survey that occupies most of a foraging area that is important to a colony could have
significant impact. At the same time, a focused beam instrument may affect only a very
small part of the foraging area. 
Proportion of the season affected
The amount of a particular part of a season should be considered. A survey that
disturbs animals for a large part of a season could potentially have more effect than a
brief disturbance. Surveying a sensitive area may have a small impact if the visit is
brief.
Re-surveying interval
The number of times an area has been exposed to high sound levels at the same time of
year should be considered. The risk of long term, cumulative effects of disrupting a
key time of year could be minimised if surveys do not return to an area in consecutive
years. International coordination of seismic or multibeam surveys and data sharing
should be encouraged. The level of activity in Antarctica has been very low compared
to many other parts of the world and the best way of avoiding unforseen problems
caused by long term disturbance and displacement is to minimise repeat surveying and
ensure that areas are not subjected to surveys in consecutive years. Care should be
taken as to how the “area” is defined. It should be scaled with the power of the
source, directionality and sound propagation characteristics. For example
geographic terms such as “the Ross Sea” are not very useful as it is a very large area in
which several surveys might take place without overlap. Information on the survey
history of the Antarctic is available in the SCAR ANTOSTRAT Seismic Data Library
System and survey planners should consult this to minimise resurveying.
56
Assessing the biological impacts of acoustic technology in the Antarctic is still very
uncertain because of the many unknowns in animal hearing, acoustic propagation and
animal distribution and behaviours. Some uncertainty will always remain. The ideal
situation would be the development of quantitative risk analysis techniques so that the
risks posed by acoustic technology could be compared with risks posed by other
human activities and natural hazards and by human activities in other parts of the
ocean where the animals move. For the time being, qualitative risk definition and
classification methods should be considered in survey evaluation such as defining a
Likelihood-Consequences matrix (Standards Association of Australia, 1999, Table 9).
Table 10. Example of a qualitative risk analysis matrix (Standards Association of
Australia, 1999).
Likelihood 
Consequences
Insignificant 
Minor 
Moderate 
Major 
Catastrophic
A (almost certain)
B (Likely)
C (moderate)
D (unlikely)
E (rare)
Further quantification might be achieved by estimating the number of animals within a
radius of a source defined by the power of the source, the duration of the survey and
the duty cycle of the equipment, the propagation conditions, the safe level of sound for
the species and the density of animals in the region. Clearly further research is needed
to be able to define the last three of these parameters. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The meeting concluded that there was insufficient evidence to justify a ban on
marine acoustic technology in the Antarctic particularly given the importance of
such equipment in marine research. However, there was insufficient evidence to
suggest that all equipment and surveys were safe. Therefore, surveys and
applications need to be considered on a case by case basis.
2. High energy, low frequency sources have greater risk of impact than low energy,
high frequency sources.
3. For applications using high energy, low frequency sources, mitigation strategies
involving survey design, timing, ramping of source levels and shut down zones
should be used.
4. Mitigation strategies should be investigated to evaluate their effectiveness.
5. There should be a regular review of mitigation strategies and the progress of
research in the field to ensure that new research findings will be avalable to the
Antarctic community.
6. Research into the hearing and rection to noise of Antarctic animals should be
encouraged.
7. Research into sound propagation conditions arounnd Antarctica should be
encouraged.
8. Records of the locations, timing, duration, frequency, and nature of hydroacoustic
and other activities should be maintained to permit retrospective assessment of the
likely causes of any future observed changes in the distributions, abundance, or
productivity of the potentially affected species and populations.
Future work
57
REFERENCES
Anderson, J.B., 1991. The Antarctic continental shelf: results from marine geological
and geophysical investigations.  In Tingey, R.J. (editor), The Geology of Antarctica,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 285-334.
Anisimov, V. D., 1976. (The morphology of the middle ear in penguins) In Russian.
Vestn. Mosk. Univ. Ser. VI, Biol. Pochvoved 31: 16-19.
Aoyanagi, M., 1981. Vocal communications between parent and chicks of Adélie
Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae). New Zealand Antarctic Research, 3: 3-15.
Belderson, R.H., Kenyon, N.H., Stride, A.H., and Stubbs, A.R., 1972. Sonographs of
the sea floor: a picture atlas. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 185 pages.
Bengtson, J.L. and Siniff, D.B. 1981.  Reproductive aspects of female crabeater seals
(Lobodon carcinophagus) along the Antarctic Peninsula.  Canadian Journal of
Zoology.  59: 92-102.
Bowles, A.E., Smultea, M., Wursig, B.,  DeMaster, D.P. and Palka, D.,1994. Relative
abundance and behaviour of marine mammals exposed to transmissions from the
Heard Island Feasibility Test. Journal of the Acoustics Society of America, 93, 2469-
2484.
Broni, S. C. Social and spatial foraging patterns of the jackass penguin, Spheniscus
demersus, South African Journal of Zoolology, 20, 241-245.
Brown, C. R., and Adams, N. J.,1983. The effect of underwater explosions on
Rockhopper Penguins Eudyptes chrysocome. Cormorant 11, 68.
Caldwell, J. and Dragoset, W., 2000. A brief overview of seismic airgun arrays. The
Leading Edge, August 2000, 898-902.
Carrick, R., Csordas, S.E. and Ingham, S.E., 1962.  Studies on the southern elephant
seal, Mirounga leonina (L.) IV.  Breeding and development.  CSIRO Wildlife
Research 7: 161-197.
Clapham, P.J., Young, S.B. and Brownell, R.L. Jr., 1999. Baleen whales: conservation
issues and the status of the most endangered populations. Mammal Review, 29, 35-60.
Clay, C. S. and Medwin, H., 1977. Acoustic oceanography; principles and applications.
John Wiley and Sons, New York, 544 pages.
Cooper, J.,1982. Methods of reducing mortality of seabirds caused by underwater
blasting. Cormorant, 10, 109-113.
Dalen, J. and Knutsen, G.M., 1987. Scaring effects in fish and harmful effects on eggs,
larvae and fry by offshore seismic exploration. In Merklinger, H.M., (editor) Progress
in underwater acousrtics, Plenum Press, New York, pages 93-102.
58
Dooling, R. (1992). Hearing in birds. In. Webster, D. B., Fay, R. R., Popper, A. N.
(editors), The Evolutionary Biology of Hearing. Springer-Verlag, New York. Pp. 545-
599.
Dragoset, W. 2000. Introduction to air guns and air-gun arrays. The Leading Edge,
August 2000, 892-897.
Engås, A., Løkkeborg, S., Ona, E. and Soldal, A. V., 1993. Effects of seismic shooting
on catch and catch availability of cod and haddock. Havforskningsinstituttett, Fisken
Og Havet, Nr. 9, 117 pages.
Frost, P. G., Shaughnessy, P. D., Semmelink, A., Sketch, M., Siegfried, W. R., 1975.
The response of Jackass Penguins to Killer Whale vocalisations. South African Journal
of Science, 71, 157-158.
Gausland, I., 1993. Impact of offshore seismic on marine life. 55th Meeting of the
European Association of Exploration Geophysicists, Stavanger.
Gausland, I., 2000. Impact of seismic surveys on marine life. The Leading Edge,
August 2000, 903-905.
Giese M and Riddle M., 1999. Disturbance of emperor penguin Aptenodytes forsteri
chicks by helicopters. Polar Biology 22, 366-371
Gordon, J.C.D., Gillespie, D., Potter, J., Frantzis, A., Simmonds, M.P., and Swift, R.,
1998. The effects of seismic surveys on marine mammals. In Tasker, M.L. and Weir,
C., (editors) Proceedings of the seismic and marine mammals workshop, London, June
1998, pages 6.1-6.13.
Gulland, J.A. and Walker, C.D.T., 1998. Marine seismic overview. In Tasker, M.L.
and Weir, C., (editors) Proceedings of the seismic and marine mammals workshop,
London, June 1998, pages 2.1-6.36.
Hanlon, R.T. and Budelmann, B.-U., 1987. Why cephalopods are probably not “deaf”.
American Naturalist, 129, 312-317.
Harris, P.T., Baker, E.K. and Cole, A.R., 1991. Physical sedimentology of the
Australian continental shelf. Ocean Sciences Institute Report, 51, 500 pages.
Hill, P.J., Exon, N.F., and Royer, J.Y., 1995. Swath-mapping the Australian
continental margin: results from offshore Tasmania. Exploration Geophysics, 26, 403-
411.
Hirst, A.G. and Rodhouse, P.G., 2000. Impacts of geophysical seismic surveying on
fishing success. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 10, 113-118.
Hutchinson, D.R., and Lee, M.W., 1989. Processing and attenuation of noise in deep
seismic-reflection data from the Gulf of Maine:  Marine Geophysical Researches, v.
11, pp. 51-67.
59
Ichii, T., 1990. Distribution of Antarctic krill concentrations exploited by Japanese krill
trawlers and Minke whales. Proceedings of the National Institute of Polar Research,
Polar Biology, 3, 36-56.
Ilichev, V.D., (editor) (1977). Adaptatsii Pingvinov (Penguin adaptations). Moscow.
Nauka.
Jouventin, P., 1972. Un nouveau système de reconnaissance acoustique chez les
oiseaux. Behaviour, 43, 176-185.
Jouventin, Guillotin, M., Cornet, A. 1979. Le chant du manchot empereur et sa
signification adaptive. Behaviour, 70, 231-250.
Jouventin, P., Roux, P., 1979. Le chant du manchot Adélie (Pygoscelis adeliae). Role
dans la reconnaissance individuelle et comparaison avec le manchot empereur non
territorial. L’Oiseau et R. F. O., 49, 31-37.
Jouventin, P., 1982. Visual and vocal signals in penguins, their evolution and adaptive
characters. Advances in Ethology 24, 149pp.
Kosheleva, V., 1992. The impact of airguns used in marine seismic exploration on
organisms living in the Barents Sea. Summary of oral presentation at the 1992 Petro
Piscis II conference.
Kostyuchenkov, L.P.,  1973. Effects of elastic waves generated in marine seismic
prospecting on fish eggs in the Black Sea. Hydrobiology Journal, 9, 45-48.
Laws, R.M., 1979a., Southern elephant seal.  In Mammals in the seas.  Vol II. Pinniped
Species Summaries and Report on Sirenians.  FAO Fisheries Series No. 5, Food and
Agriculture Organization, Rome, p 106-109.
Laws, R.M., 1979b.  Crabeater seal.  In Vol II. Pinniped Species Summaries and
Report on Sirenians.  FAO Fisheries Series No. 5, Food and Agriculture Organization,
Rome, p 115-119.
Laws, R.M., 1984.  Seals. In Laws, R. M. (editor) Antarctic Ecology Academic Press,
London., Vol 2: 621-715. 
Markov, V. I., 1974. (Underwater acoustic signals of the crested penguins). In Russian.
Proc. 6th All Union Ornithology Conference Pt 1, 156-158.
Markov, V.I.,  1977. (The underwater sounds of the Macaroni Penguin). In Russian.
Ilichev, V. D. In: (editor) Adaptatsii Pingvinov (Penguin adaptations). Moscow, Nauka
Pp 111-121.
McCauley, R.D., 1994. Seismic surveys. In Swan, J.M., Neff, J.M. and Young, P.C.
(eds.), Environmental implications of offshore oil and gas development in Australia-
findings of an independent scientific review. Australian Petroleum Exploration
Association, Sydney, pages 19-121, 
McCauley, R.D., Fewtrell, J., Duncan, A.J. Jenner, C., Jenner, M-N., Penrose, J.D.,
Prince, R.I.T., Adhitya, A., Murdoch, J. and McCabe, K., 2000a. Marine seismic
60
surveys: analysis and propagation of air-gun signals; and effects of air-gun exposure on
humpback whales, sea turtles fishes and squid. Centre for Marine Science and
Technology, Curtin University of Technology, Project CMST 163, Report R99-15, 198
pages.
McCauley, R.D., Fewtrell, J., Duncan, A.J. Jenner, C., Jenner, M-N., Penrose, J.D.,
Prince, R.I.T., Adhitya, A., Murdoch, J. and McCabe, K., 2000b. Marine seismic
surveys-a study of environmental implications. APPEA Journal, 40, 692-708.
Myrberg, A.A., 1981. Sound communication and interception in fishes. In Tavolga,
W.N., Popper, A.N. and Fay, R.R. (editors) Hearing and sound communication in
fishes. Springer Verlag, New York.
Necker, R. (2000). The avian ear and hearing. In Whittow, G. C. (editor) Avian
Physiology. Academic Press, San Diego. Pages 21-38.
Nevitt, G. A., Veit, R. R., Kareiva, P., 1995. Dimethyl sulphide as a foraging clue for
Antarctic Procellariiform seabirds. Nature 376: 680-682.
Nicol, S., Constable, A.J. and Pauly, T., 2000. Estimates of circumpolar abundance of
Antarctic krill based on recent acoustic density measurements. CCAMLR Science, 7,
87-99.
Norris, K.S. and Møhl, B., 1983. Can odontocetes debilitate prey with sound?
American Naturalist, 122, 85-104.
O’Brien, P.E., Harris, P.T., Quilty, P.G. Taylor, F. and Wells, P., 1995. Post-cruise report,
Antarctic CRC marine geoscience, Prydz Bay, Mac.Robertson Shelf and Kerguelen
Plateau. Australian Geological Survey Record, 1995/29.
Packard, A., Karlsen, H.E. and Sand O., 1990. Low frequencey hearing in
cephalopods. Journal of Comparative Physiology, A 166, 501-505.
Penrose, J.D. and McCauley, R.D., 1998. Underwater character and horizontal
propagation of air-gun signals. APPEA Journal, 38,708-714.
Pohner,, F. and Hammerstad, E., 1991. Combining bathymetric mapping and seabed
imaging. Sea Technology, June 17-25.
Popper, A.N., Deferrari, H.A., Dolphin, W.F., Edds-Walton, P.L., Greve, G.M.,
McFadden, D., Rhines, P.B., Ridgway, S.H., Seyfarth, R.M., Smith, S.L. and Tyack,
P.L., 2000. Marine mammals and low-frequency noise: progress since 1994. National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C. (http:/www.nap.edu/openbook/030906886X/html).
Poulter, T. C., 1969. Sonar of penguins and fur seals. Proc. Calif. Acad. Sci. 36: 363-
380.
Rice D.,  1998.  Marine Mammals of the world systematics and distribution.  In
Wartzok, D., (editor) The Society for Marine Mammalogy, Special Publication
Number 4.
61
Richardson, W.J., Greene, C.R.Jr., Malme, C.I. and Thomson, D.H., 1995. Marine
mammals and noise. Academic Press, San Diego, 576 pages.
Rodhouse, P.G. and Hatfield, E.M.C., 1990. Dynamics of growth and maturation in the
cephalopod Illex argentius de Castellanos, 1960 (Teuthoidea: Ommastrephidae).
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B. 329, 229-241.
Rodhouse, P.G., Robinson, K., Gajdatsy, S.B., Daly, H.I. and Asmore, M.J.S., 1994.
Growth, agestructure and environmental history in the cephalopod Martialia hyadesi
(Teuthoidea: Ommastrephidae) at the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone and on the
Patagonian Shelf edge. Antarctic Science, 6, 259-267.
Rodhouse, P.G. Barton, J., Hatfield, E.M.C. and Symon, C., 1995. Illex argentius: life
cycle, population structure and fishery. ICES Marine Fisheries Symposium 199, 425-
432.
Shaughnessy, P.D. and Goldsworthy, S.D. 1990.  Population size and breeding season
of the Antarctic fur seal Arctocephalus gazella at Heard Island - 1987/88.  Marine
Mammal Science.  6: 292-304.
Shaughnessy, P.D., Shaughnessy, G.L. and Fletcher, L.  1988.  Recovery of the fur seal
population at Macquarie Island.  Papers and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Tasmania.  122: 177-178.
Shipp, S. and Anderson, J.B., 1997. Till sheets on the Ross Sea continental shelf. In In
Davies, T.A., Bell, T., Cooper, A.K., Josenhans, H., Polyak, L., Solheim, A., Stoker,
M. S. and & Stavers, J.A. eds. Glaciated continental margins, an atlas of acoustic
image. Chapman & Hall, London, pages 235-237.
Siniff, D.B. and Stone, S. 1985.  The role of the leopard seal in the tropho-dynamics of
the Antarctic marine ecosystem.  In Antarctic nutrient cycles and food webs.  Eds.
Siegfried, W. R., Condy, P.R. and Laws, R.M. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, p. 555-560.
Sivak, J. G., Howland, H. C., McGill-Harelstad, P., 1987. Vision of the Humboldt
Penguin (Spheniscus humboldti) in air and water. Proceeding of the Royal Society
London B 229: 467-472.
Siwecki, T.L. and Neal, E.H., 1993. S-3: Large active long range variable depth sonar.
Sea Technology, November 1993, 39-42.
Sodal, A., 1999. Measured underwater acoustic wave propagation from a seismic
source. IAGC/UKOOA Airgun workshop-Environmental. Institute of Petroleum, July
1999.
Standards Association of Australia, 1999. Risk management. AS/NZ4360:1999.
Stewardson, C.L. and Child, P.L., 1997. Mammals of the ice: Antarctic marine
mammals. Sedona Publishing, 183 pages.
Tikhomirov, E.A.  1975.  Biology of the ice forms of seals in the Pacific section of the
Antarctic.  Rapports et Proces-Verbaux des Reunions Conseil International pour
l’Exploration de la Mer.  169: 409-512.
62
Weinhold, R.J. and Weaver, R.R., 1973. Seismic air guns’ effect on immature salmon.
Society of Exploration Geophysicists, unpublished, 13 pages.
Wever, E. G., Herman, P. N., Simmons, J. A., Hertzler, D. R., 1969. Hearing in the
Black-footed penguin as represented by cochlear potentials. Proceedings of the
National Acadademy of Science, 63, 676-680.
Williams, T. D., 1995. The penguins. Oxford University Press.
Wilson, R. P. (in press). Movements in Adélie Penguins foraging for chicks at Ardley
Island, Antarctica; circles within spirals, wheels within wheels. Polar Bioscience.
Wilson, R. P., Steinfurth, A., Ropert-Coudert, Y., Kato, A., Kurita, M. (in press). Lip-
reading in remote subjects: An attempt to quantify and separate ingestion, breathing
and vocalisation in free-living animals using penguins as a model. Mar. Biol.
Woehler, E. J., 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic
Penguins. SCAR Cambridge, iv 76 pages.
Woehler, E. J. and Croxall, J. P., 1997. The status and trends of Antarctic and
Subantarctic seabirds. Marine Ornithology 25, 43-66
 
