XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-019 
Agenda Item:  CEP 4a 
UKRAINE 
Original: Russian 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 17 OF THE PROTOCOL 
ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY  
 
THE UKRAINE  
(2001) 
 
 
1. Notification pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
 
1.1. The legislation 
 
The Ukraine produced the documents According to Article 17 (1) of the Protocol: 
 
a) the Law of the Ukraine “On adherence of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” (N 2284-III) was signed in 22 February 2001. 
b) the Commission for the permission issue on physical and juridical 
Ukraine personnel activity in the Antarctic region was created.  
c) the Commission competence is review of the request for activity and 
preparation of the conclusions on character and level of possible environmental 
impact. 
d) the project of the Law of the Ukraine “On Antarctic Activity” is under 
consideration of the Cabinet of Ministries. The Law is defined the general 
principles of Antarctic activity under Ukrainian jurisdiction to guarantee the 
scientific, economical, domestic and normative activity according the Treaty 
(Article IX). 
 
1.2. 
Contingency plans in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol 
 
The contingency plans of activity at the extremely situations was 
recommended by Article 15 of Protocol to the Protocol is under preparation now. 
Activity of personnel in extremely situations at the Ukrainian Antarctic station 
Vernadsky is regulated under documents: ‘Instructions for the station personnel 
operation under principles of fuel transfer from ships and acting in the case of its 
leakage’, ‘Instructions for the personnel operation in fire emergency’.  
 
2. Annex I. 
 
In accordance with the Annex I (1, 3, 6) the documents for the EIA procedure are 
under development. The IEEs for the Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition on 
Vernadsky Station are producing. 
 
3. Annex III. 
 
The waste management at Ukrainian Antarctic Station is provided in 
compliance with Annex III (9). The detailed waste management plans are working 
out and will be realized within 2003–2004. 
In compliance with Annex III (8) the database for regions of former activity 
of the Ukrainian Antarctic Expeditions are under preparation till 2003. 
 
4. Annex V. 
 
No the ASPAs and ASMAs under responsibility of Ukraine in the Vernadsky 
station area.  
 
