 
 
 
 
Antarctic Historic Resources 
 
New Zealand  
Information Paper 
 
 
Purpose 
 
This paper provides information to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) 
about a major restoration project involving Antarctic historic sites in the Ross Sea 
region that New Zealand is currently undertaking.  New Zealand is aware of the high 
level of interest of other Parties in these historic sites.  Comments and ongoing dialogue 
is therefore invited from any Party with an interest in the restoration, protection and 
preservation of Antarctica’s human heritage. 
 
 
Background 
 
In 1961, at the first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), Parties 
recommended that action be taken to protect any tombs, buildings or objects of historic 
interest and that Treaty nations should consult together on their restoration and 
preservation.  Subsequent meetings have reinforced the importance of protecting the 
human heritage of Antarctica.  The Environmental Protocol (Annex V) recognises the 
importance of sites of recognised historic value. 
 
In 1997, at XXI ATCM in Christchurch, New Zealand, Scott's 1910-1913 hut at Cape 
Evans, Ross Island, was designated as a Specially Protected Area (SPA no. 25). 
Subsequently at XXII ATCM in Tromsø, Norway, the three remaining hut sites in the 
Ross Sea region - Shackleton’s 1907-09 hut at Cape Royds, Scott’s 1901-04 hut at Hut 
Point and Borchgrevink’s 1898-1900 hut at Cape Adare - were designated as SPAs nos. 
27, 28, and 29 respectively.  These huts are premier artefacts from the “heroic age” with 
recognised international significance. 
 
 
The New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust (AHT) 
 
In 1987 a charitable trust, the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust (AHT), was formed 
to provide a coordinated approach to addressing Antarctic heritage issues in the Ross 
Sea region.  The AHT has in practice undertaken responsibility for the restoration, 
preservation and protection of the historic sites of the Ross Sea region on behalf of the 
international community. AHT membership includes representatives of the 
Governments of the United States of America and Great Britain. 
 
AHT is recognised as a world leader in polar conservation practice.  AHT draws on a 
range of professional expertise to undertake work in Antarctica and on specialist 
knowledge from individuals across a wide range of conservation disciplines.   
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
Despite annual conservation work since its inception in 1987, AHT now concludes that 
this heritage is in a perilous state.  The Trust considers increased intervention is required 
for this heritage to survive for future generations.  Professional reports, commissioned 
by AHT, have identified recurring moisture problems inside the huts and the poor state 
of a high percentage of the artefact collection.  Independent scientific reports over the 
last two years have recorded the significant deterioration to the historic huts of the Ross 
Sea region, and the presence of unique wood destroying fungi and moulds growing in 
the buildings.  Increased human visitation and the age of these structures are taking their 
toll.  In 1994 and 1995 when management plans for the historic huts were drafted, 
visitation was estimated at approximately 1000 persons annually per hut at Ross Island. 
Since that time, detailed visitation records have been kept.  Over the three seasons 
between 1998/99 and 2000/01 the average annual number of visitors have been 1069 for 
Hut Point, 1513 for Cape Evans, and 1193 for Cape Royds.  
 
 
Heritage Restoration Project 
 
The Trust has launched an international fund raising appeal for £10 million stg to 
safeguard the remaining hut sites in the Ross Sea region and their unique collection of 
artefacts.  The appeal is intended to fund a comprehensive restoration project that is 
spread over a planning stage and implementation stage. 
 
Planning stage 
Comprehensive, conservation plans will be prepared, consistent with international 
heritage conservation principles, by a world-class project team for each of the four huts 
in the Ross Sea region. 
 
The scope of each plan will embrace not only the structure and shell of the huts, but the 
full artefact collection internally and externally at each site.  Some plans will include a 
greater emphasis on restoration including elements of reconstruction of physical fabric 
of the buildings and replication of artifacts where original relics need to be removed for 
conservation treatment and/or to halt serious deterioration. 
 
The first of the conservation plans, Shackleton’s Hut at Cape Royds, is being prepared 
by a multi-disciplinary team and will be completed and is expected to be available for 
comment internationally by interested parties in September 2002. Plans for the other 
huts will be commenced later in 2002.  
 
New Zealand requirements for environmental impact assessment (in accordance with 
Annex I of the Environmental Protocol) will be met and associated documentation will 
also be available for comment internationally. 
 
Implementation stage 
A multi-year, multi-stage physical works will be scheduled to implement the physical 
works programmes envisaged by the conservation plans.  Work will be implemented in 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
stages to match funding.  New Zealand and AHT are currently seeking financial and 
non-financial support for the Heritage Restoration Project. 
 
 
Comments and Further Information 
 
New Zealand and AHT would like to encourage comments and requests for further 
information about the Project from any Party with an interest in the issues associated 
with the restoration, protection and preservation of Antarctica’s human heritage: 
Contact details are set out below. 
 
The Executive Director 
 
 
or 
Head, Antarctic Policy Unit 
Antarctic Heritage Trust 
 
 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Trade 
Private Bag 4745 
 
 
 
 
P O Box 18-901 
Christchurch  
 
 
 
 
Wellington 
New Zealand  
 
 
 
 
New Zealand 
Fax : 64 03 358 0211  
 
 
 
Fax : 64 04 494 8507 
Email: aht@antarcticanz.govt.nz 
 
 
Email:trevor.hughes@mfat.govt.nz 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
Blanchette, R. A., B. W. Held, R. L. Farrell. 2002. Defibration of wood in the 
expedition huts of Antarctica: an unusual deterioration process occurring in the polar 
environment. Polar Record 38:313-322. 
 
Clayton S. 1998. Field Report to Antarctic Heritage Trust. Unpublished. 
 
Held, B.W., R. A. Blanchette, J. J. Jurgens, S. Duncan and R. L. Farrell. 2002. 
Deterioration and conservation issues associated with Antarctica's historic huts. 
Proceedings of Art, Biology and Conservation 2002: Biodeterioration of Works of Art. 
June 13-15, 2002, The Metropolitan museum of New York. In press. 
 
Mason, G. 1999. Modelling Mass Transfer inside Scott’s Hut, Cape Evans, Antarctica 
Unpublished Masters of Engineering thesis, University of Canterbury, New Zealand 
 
Waterhouse, E (Ed). 2001. Ross Sea Region 2001: A State of the Environment Report 
for the Ross Sea Region of Antarctica. New Zealand Antarctic Institute, Christchurch, 
New Zealand. 
 
 
