2001/2002 Chinese Antarctic Environmental Report 
 
1.Introduction  
1.1 Location of the Chinese Antarctic Station 
China has two wintering Antarctic stations. Their locations are: 
Great Wall station: W 58゜57’52”;  S 62゜12’59” 
Zhongshan station: E 76゜22’40”;  S 69゜22’24” 
 
1.2   2001/2002 main activities in Antarctica 
The 18th Chinese National Antarctic Expedition (2001/2002) was composed of 157 Chinese 
persons, including 12 wintering people at Great Wall station and 16 wintering people at 
Zhongshan station. 
Several scientific research projects and logistic work were carried out at Great Wall station: 
l GPS international collaborative observation, 
l Study of impact of human activities on the ecology of bird in King George Island, West 
Antarctica, joined by Sino-German scientists. 
l Study of the movement and dynamics of the lithosphere and icecap inland 
l Study of lacustrine sediment and environmental event 
l Biological environment study  
l Meteorology study 
l Updating the meteorological observing system 
l Repairing and maintaining of generators and vehicles 
l Setting up a generator building 
 
The following projects were conducted at Zhongshan station: 
l Geological event study 
l Study of the icecap environmental change in Lasemann Hills 
l Study of the lacustrine sedimentary environment 
l Meteorology study 
l Ozone observation 
l Upper atmosphere physics study 
l Magnetic observation 
l GPS international collaborative observation 
l Sea-surface monitoring 
l Updating the meteorological observing system 
l Repairing and maintaining of generators and vehicles  
l Setting up a living building  
 
The following scientific projects were carried out during the voyage of the vessel “Xuelong”. 
l XBT/XCTD observation in the Indian Ocean and the Wedell sea. 
l Upper ocean-meteorology study in the South Ocean 
 
2. The environmental impact assessment 
According to the Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol, all Chinese Antarctic activities are 
requested to provide an EIA report before the projects are proceeded in Antarctica. All the EIA 
reports, except the two reports about setting up the new buildings, which projects would be carried 
out in 2001/2002 Antarctic season were evaluated and the activities were classified as “less than a 
minor or transitory impact” on the Antarctic environment. So, they can be conducted in Antarctica 
without IEE or CEE requested. 
 
3.Protection of flora and fauna in Antarctica 
All the persons are asked to avoid disturbing birds and animals whether or not they proceed their 
work at station and in the field. The driver must drive the vehicle on the existing road and avoid 
damaging the flora on the ground. The scientific research activities should take care of the 
animals’ breeding and resting area. Waste foods are prohibited to expose outside building in case 
they could become the comestible supply to the birds. 
 
4.Waste management 
4.1 The solid waste materials were divided into 4 catalogues and treated in different ways at the 2 
stations. 
l Combustible materials were not permitted to store in the station for a long time. They were 
burned in the incinerator after being recorded. The remains were put in case and would be 
transported back to China. 
l Metal, plastic and other non-combustible materials were collected and piled to be transported 
back to China; 
l Glass materials were smashed into pieces and put into cases to be transported back to China 
l Battery useless was collected into cases and would be transported back to China. 
 
4.2 The daily domestic liquid waste was treated in the sewage treatment system and then 
discharged into the sea. 
 
4.3 No radioactive materials were used at the stations in 2001/2002 Antarctic season. 
 
5. Prevention of marine pollution 
All the wastes on the vessel “Xuelong”, including the daily domestic liquid waste and the solid 
waste, were treated according to the related regulations of the IMO. 
 
6. The function of the equipment 
Sewage treatment system and incinerator are installed at the two stations respectively. The sewage 
treatment system can automatically function 24 hours per day. After the sewage outlet water is 
treated, it is discharged into sea at Great Wall station and on the shoreline at Zhongshan station. 
The incinerator at the two stations runs well. It uses two burners. All harmful emissions from the 
incinerator are reduced to maximum extent practicable. 
 
7. Protection measures to be taken 
7.1 The environmental officers were appointed at two stations, who are charge of the 
environmental management in the Antarctic stations. 
7.2 Before going to Antarctica, all the members of the expedition were trained on the 
environmental protection in Antarctica. The operators were trained how to manipulate the 
incinerator and the sewage treatment system. 
7.3 The maintaining and repairing of the vehicles and generators were done in the buildings. All 
the useless spare parts were collected to be stored for transporting back to China. Useless oil 
was concentrated in the drum. 
7.4 All the people working in the field outside the stations were asked for taking back the rubbish 
to the stations. 
7.5 All the pipelines and valves were checked in order to protect the leakage of oil. 
7.6 The regulation is made out on the usage and management of meteorite. The regulation is made 
clear on the recovery, disposal, storage and scientific research of meteorite found in Antarctica. 
The meteorite found in Antarctica is forbidden to the commercial use. 
7.7 The oil spill contingency plan has been revised, and the absorbent materials and the oil 
dispersant were re-supplied at the two stations. 
 
8.Environmental Accident 
A leakage of 40kg fuel oil happened at Zhongshan Station, and proper measures were taken to 
clear up.  
 
9.IEE 
IEEs had been done before the two new buildings were established. One was “IEE for the New 
Generator Building Baosteel at Great Wall Station”, the other was “IEE for the Living Building at 
Zhongshan Station”. 
 
10. Future plan 
The old generator building at Great Wall station will be removed during the 19th expedition, and 
the preparation concerning the removal is arranged now. 
