XXV ATCM
Information Paper IP-084
Agenda Item 5b
ASOC
Original language: English



The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
The Antarctica Project
ASOC Secretariat
 1630 Connecticut Ave., N.W.
Washington, DC 20009 USA
Tel +1 202 234-2480
Fax +1 202 387-4823
antarctica@igc.org
www.asoc.org



Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 

(ASOC)

XXV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

10 – 20 September 2002
Warsaw, Poland

Report pursuant to Article III (2), under Agenda Item 5 (b)


In the period since XXIV ATCM in St. Petersburg, ASOC and member groups have continued to work across the range of issues concerning protection of the Antarctic environment.

ASOC maintains a Secretariat in Washington DC – and a central website: http://www.asoc.org. ASOC member groups and individuals are present in all ATCP states.

ASOC Regional Offices are located in: Asia (Seoul, South Korea), Europe (Amsterdam, The Netherlands and Madrid, Spain), Latin America (Santiago, Chile), and Southern Africa (Cape Town, South Africa).

ASOC National Offices are located in: India (New Delhi), Russia (Moscow), and Ukraine (Kiev).


Key Issues at XXV ATCM

    1. Protocol implementation

ASOC has tabled Information Paper 78, Reports under Article 17 and the Implementation of the Madrid Protocol.

This continues and develops themes presented in XII SATCM/IP22 (Evaluation of progress towards implementation of the Madrid Protocol) and XXIV ATCM/IP55 (Legal implementation of the five annexes of the Protocol)

The paper uses reports tabled under Art. 17 as a proxy indicator of compliance with Protocol requirements. ASOC notes that significant progress has been made towards implementation of the Protocol, but the data in this paper indicate many states are still lagging in implementation. Implementation by a majority of Parties continues to be inconsistent. ASOC notes that although Article 17 requires Parties to the Protocol to annually report on the steps they have taken to implement and comply with it, at CEP IV only 20 Parties did so. ASOC hopes that all Parties will report at this and future CEPs. 

ASOC hopes that Canada will, consistent with its statements at XXIV ATCM, be able to report substantial progress on its ratification of the Protocol.

    2. Annex I – Environmental Impact Assessment 

ASOC has tabled Information Paper 82, Strategic Environmental Assessment in Antarctica: A “stepping stone” to Madrid Protocol objectives

This continues and develops themes presented in XII SATCM/IP10 (Antarctic Strategic Environmental Assessment: Application to the growing Antarctic tourism industry) and XXIV ATCM/IP54 (Strategic needs and decision-making in Antarctica) 

ASOC’s IP explores the potential application of SEA to some Protocol implementation issues - in particular to situations where there is inconsistent use of implementation criteria by different operators, and as a better way to meet the requirements of Art. 2 of the Protocol. 

ASOC monitors and provides comments on national Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) processes. Although EIA application (at least for IEEs) is broadening, compliance with Protocol obligations remains patchy. EIA is still frequently conducted at a lower level than would appear required by the Protocol. For example, IEEs have been completed for deep-ice drilling projects, rather than CEEs, which would have been reasonable to expect under standard practise and Recommendation XIV-3; two snow runways were developed with only IEEs (for one, the IEE appears to have been carried out after the airstrip was in operation); an inland summer base was constructed without any EIA; and generally there are no records of some Parties ever producing – or making public - EIAs.

ASOC participated in the contact group on cumulative impact, and looks forward to continuing to work within this group to develop advice on coordination and conduct of studies directed to detecting and monitoring cumulative impacts in Antarctica.

    3. Annex II – Protection of flora and fauna

A review of Protocol annexes commences at this ATCM with a review of Annex II. Parties should resolve criteria for designating Specially Protected Species under its Appendix A. 

ASOC has tabled Information Paper 60, Antarctic wildlife in captivity and the Madrid Protocol, which examines the increased interest in taking Antarctic wildlife for exhibition. The paper recommends that the review of Annex II should lead to appropriate management measures and an Antarctic Treaty System-wide standard and process regarding the taking of Antarctic wildlife for exhibition.

    4. Annex III – Waste disposal and waste management

ASOC continues to be concerned about information on improper waste disposal contained in the official inspection reports submitted at XXIV ATCM in St. Petersburg. According to those reports, some Parties’ stations are seriously lagging behind in properly implementing Annex III of the Madrid Protocol.

    5. Annex V – Area protection and management

With the final ratification by India, Annex V has entered into force. Area Protection is an important tool for environmental protection and management, and ASOC hopes that Parties will now fully implement this Annex. This requires a substantial commitment to identifying and designating, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, areas meeting the criteria mandated by Article 3.2 of the Annex. 

Many existing management plans require revision to conform to Annex V standards. A number will be reviewed at this meeting. ASOC reviewed and provided comments on the draft management plan for the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA. This is a site with high scientific, environmental, wilderness and aesthetic values. Here and elsewhere, managing human activities to minimize conflict is critical to avoiding impairment of these values.

ASOC continues to argue that Annex V should be applied across the major regime boundary within the ATS, i.e., to areas that transcend the largely terrestrial focus of the Protocol and Antarctic Treaty on the one hand, and the essentially marine focus of CCAMLR on the other.

Deception Island ASMA

ASOC participated in the international expedition to Deception Island in January-February 2002, organized by Argentina, to help develop a management plan for Deception Island under the Protocol. ASOC would like to thank Argentina for hosting the Expedition and transporting the ASOC team to Deception Island, and IAATO for arranging transportation from the Island. 

To date the human impact on Deception Island appears to be comparatively minor, transitory, and concentrated at the most accessible parts of the island where most human activities take place. However, in these, areas, human impact is relatively widespread, chronic, and cumulative. 

In addition, there may be a conflict of interest between science and tourism activities at one site (Pendulum Cove) and between environmental protection goals and tourism activities at another site (the largest penguin rookery on the island, Baily Head). ASOC contends that visitation to the latter site should be closed to visitors other than those conducting research in order to comply with Annex II of the Protocol and Arts. 2 and 3 of the Protocol, at least until there is sufficient information that enables prior assessment of, and informed judgements about, the possible impact of tourism activities on this location.

Despite its long history and present high level of human activity, Deception Island is an intrinsic part of the Antarctic wilderness. ASOC argues that the existing human impact on the Island’s environment should not be allowed to increase in intensity and area, but rather maintained at the existing levels or preferably minimized. ASOC hopes that Parties will take action in this regard.

    6. Liability

ASOC was encouraged by discussion of Liability at XXIV ATCM. However, it is now 11 years since the adoption of the Protocol, and Parties have not yet met the commitment in Article 16 to develop liability rules and procedures. While the draft annex proposed by the Chair of WG I is a promising basis for the first stage in a liability regime, work remains to be done on key elements. 

ASOC has tabled Information Paper 77, Liability, containing detailed comments on the Chair’s text, an identification of key textual and process issues, and a proposal for conclusion of a first liability annex – on Liability arising from Environmental Emergencies – at XXVI ATCM in Madrid in 2003.

A second ASOC Information Paper 81, On Worst Case Scenarios, is a contribution to the work in progress by Parties, COMNAP and others on “Worst case” and “Less-than-worst case“ scenarios for environmental emergencies.

ATS ISSUES

    1. Lake Vostok – Subglacial lake exploration

ASOC has been monitoring developments regarding subglacial lake exploration and is satisfied that research in this pristine environment is thus far following a process that includes environmental parameters rather than exclusively scientific needs or technology development agendas. This is in accordance with the objectives and principles of the Madrid Protocol and is a significant improvement in relation to the early stages of the discussion on penetrating Lake Vostok. 

The SALE GOS Workshop in 1999 in Cambridge agreed that subglacial lake exploration should be internationally coordinated, multi- and interdisciplinary, and that non-contaminating techniques and minimum disturbance should be fundamental considerations throughout the design and execution of the program. It would therefore be consistent with the overall approach of SALE GOS that all present and foreseeable future activities related to subglacial lake research be included within the overall subglacial research program and follow the principles as described above. This would apply particularly to research at Lake Vostok itself and to drilling activities, including the proposal to drill through an additional 50m of accreted ice in the existing Vostok borehole. 

Of particular interest is the discussion outlined in the SALE GOS November 2001 report to adopt Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) as the program’s environmental planning and assessment process. Subglacial lake research is an example where the existing EIA requirements of the Protocol should be complemented by a broader, more strategic type of impact procedure. ASOC is willing to contribute to a SEA process for subglacial lake research. 

    2. Secretariat

Now that the issue of where to house the Secretariat has been resolved, ASOC hopes that delegates will quickly agree to allow it to function, on an interim basis if needed, while resolving issues of functions, status, funding, etc. A functioning Secretariat will greatly enhance the implementation of the Protocol, and facilitate the operation of future ATCMs.

    3. Inspections

ASOC notes that Australia has tabled WP34, which lists all inspections conducted to date. Concurrently, ASOC is collaborating with UNEP in presenting this information in a suitable format to illustrate the location of inspections and the areas in which inspections have been lacking. The result of this work will be tabled at XXVI ATCM.

    4. Tourism

At XXIV ATCM, ASOC reopened the question of regulation of Antarctic tourism. As a major and growing industry it is necessary that this activity is regulated by the Antarctic Treaty System, and not left solely to supposed “self-regulation” by the industry itself.

Accordingly, ASOC has tabled a number of Information Papers relating to tourism at XXV ATCM.

Our Information Paper 52, ATCM Papers, Discussions & Recommendations relating to Tourism and Non-governmental Activities, attempts to identify the ATCMs papers, applicable Final Report text, Recommendations (subsequently Decisions or Measures), tourism industry participants and key focus of discussions of tourism and non-governmental activity, since the Protocol – with a briefer summary of Recommendations pre-Protocol. We hope this will be of practical use to Parties.

Information Paper 63, Port State Jurisdiction: An Appropriate International Law Mechanism to Regulate Vessels engaged in Antarctic Tourism, examines the capacity of this tool to improve regulation of vessels supporting Antarctic tourism. We submit that Port State Jurisdiction provides a potentially powerful tool for regulating in particular those vessels, and those expeditions organised and/or flagged in, non-Parties to the Protocol, or Contracting Parties that have not ratified the Protocol. This takes advantage of the fact that the key gateway ports for Antarctica are all located in Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. This paper includes a draft Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control.

Information Paper 76, Improving Awareness of Protocol Obligations Amongst Antarctic Yacht Operators, suggests better use of the Antarctic navigation guides or pilots produced by national hydrographic agencies to provide clear, unambiguous advice on obligations under the Protocol. As one of the few points of engagement between autonomous yacht operators, and State Parties to the Protocol, these guides have hitherto been under-utilised.

ASOC’s Information Paper …, Regulating Antarctic Tourism, aims to help inform the debate on how best to regulate tourism, building on our XXIV ATCM/IP 40, Antarctic Tourism. It reprises key issues from IP 40 and lists previous ASOC papers addressing specific aspects of Antarctic tourism. Regulating Antarctic Tourism counters arguments against taking action on tourism and outlines options open to Parties for its regulation. ASOC believes that the most appropriate options are regulation through one or more of: an additional annex under the Protocol, an Antarctic Treaty Measure, or a new Antarctic Treaty System instrument – a Convention for the Regulation of Antarctic Tourism.

ASOC participated in an informal workshop on Antarctic tourism, organized by the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators, in Aspen, Colorado, 29-30 April 2002.

    5. Meetings

ASOC participated at the III Conference on Contaminants in Freezing Ground in Hobart, Australia, April 2002. ASOC representatives delivered a keynote speech outlining the NGO perspective on contaminants in freezing ground, based on the operational experience of ASOC-member Greenpeace in Antarctica, and co-chaired some of the working groups that took place during the Conference. ASOC thanks the Organising Committee for facilitating their attendance at the Conference.

OTHER ISSUES

ASOC participated at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) (Johannesburg, 26 August – 6 September), presenting a vision paper to the broader global community concerning key environmental issues facing the Antarctic region. ASOC argues that the sustainability of the Antarctic ecosystem can only be achieved through long-term conservation of the entire region. 

Specifically, ASOC called on all government participants at the WSSD to (1) commit themselves to declare the marine area south of 60 South latitude a marine protected area, (2) agree to negotiate a regulatory regime for Antarctic tourism, (3) express support for a moratorium on Southern Ocean toothfish fisheries, and (4) agree to negotiate a legally binding High Seas convention under the auspices of UNCLOS to govern fishing vessel conduct on the High Seas, including the illegal pirate fishing now taking place in Antarctica’s Southern Ocean.


THREATS TO THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
 
    1. Southern Ocean Fishing

The continuing high level of illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing for toothfish, and associated seabird and other bycatch, continues at unsustainable levels. Recent events in the Southern Ocean highlight CCAMLR’s inability to effectively combat IUU fishing. Everyone seems to acknowledge this, yet CCAMLR continues to approve legal fishing permits, and CCAMLR Parties continue to import IUU toothfish. Meanwhile, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties continue to miss opportunities to stop pirate fishing by cooperatively using their collective satellite imagery, enforcement vessels, and various port-state enforcement options. However, ASOC congratulates those few Parties that are taking aggressive enforcement actions.

The Australian arrests of the pirate fishing vessels Lena and Volga, and the U.S. seizure of 33tons of IUU toothfish at its border, were important achievements. However, unless such enforcement actions are greatly increased, they will unfortunately have little impact on IUU fishing for toothfish due to the sheer number of vessels illicitly fishing for toothfish. Moreover, the Government of Uruguay’s decision to issue Dissostichus Catch Documents (DCD) for the Dorita and the Arvisa I – vessels photographed in an area where they are not authorized to fish - demonstrates that the Catch Document Scheme (CDS) alone is incapable of halting IUU fishing. This action, by an active member of CCAMLR, undermines the credibility of the CDS, and confirms that the current structure of the CDS cannot prevent IUU fishing.

ASOC encourage all nations – whether members of CCAMLR or not – to take the steps urgently needed to halt this activity and to effectively implement the toothfish Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS). ASOC has developed several trade and management solutions that would assist in the elimination of IUU fishing and thereby assist in the conservation of Southern Ocean marine living resources. These are not radical solutions. They have, in fact, been adopted by other international organizations faced with similar problems. These include (1) centralized monitoring and compliance, (2) increased enforcement and inspection powers including the adoption of an enforcement protocol, and (3) strengthening the CDS, including actions to be taken when Port States are presented with toothfish without a verifiable DCD or from unregulated waters.

We also call on all Parties to support the proposal to list Patagonian and Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) on Appendix II of CITES at the upcoming 12th Conference of the Parties (CoP 12) in November 2002. A CITES Appendix II listing is a necessary complement to the CCAMLR CDS that will reinforce and improve its effectiveness. The CDS suffers from CCAMLR’s limited membership in that its scope is restricted to just 36 member nations and to the CCAMLR Convention Area. CITES, with a much broader membership than CCAMLR, and stronger enforcement mechanisms, would extend the reach of the CDS. CITES includes all the states involved in toothfish trade as well as emerging markets, like China and Thailand. CCAMLR has 36 members, while CITES has 159. If toothfish were listed under CITES Appendix II, trade controls similar to the CDS could be enforced in CITES states.

Many ASOC member groups believe that CCAMLR must enact a short-term moratorium on the toothfish fishery while it develops the long-term measures needed to ensure a sustainable fishery. A moratorium will reveal the pirate trade - any toothfish that then appears on the market is by definition illegal. The moratorium may be lifted as soon as: IUU fishing is stopped; effective management measures are in place, including an Appendix II listing of toothfish by CITES to extend the reach of CCAMLR’s CDS to all countries participating in the toothfish trade; stock assessments and research on population structures, spawning grounds and recruitment verify that depleted toothfish populations are recovering; and seabird by-catch is essentially eliminated.

The CDS will only be able to track the trade in toothfish and assist states in closing markets to illegally caught toothfish if implemented by all states involved in the toothfish trade.

ASOC member Greenpeace conducted an anti-whaling expedition in the Southern Ocean during the 2001/2002 Austral summer.

    2. Climate Change

ASOC looks forward to early entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol, which all honest observers acknowledge is only the first step toward doing what is in the long-term best interests of the planet. ASOC also calls upon those few states that so far have not indicated support for the Kyoto Protocol to reverse course and begin doing their share to fight global climate change. ASOC regrets the failure of the WSSD meeting last week in South Africa to make targeted commitment to invest in renewables, as well as the continuing refusal of key nations such as the U.S. and Australia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. ASOC welcomes Russia's announcement that it will ratify the Protocol soon, thereby allowing it to enter into force and begin functioning.


CONCLUSION

ASOC looks forwards to working with delegates at this XXV ATCM and to the successful resolution of some of the most important issues mentioned above.
