 
1
XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-070 
Agenda Item: CEP 4 a 
CZECH REPUBLIC 
Original: English 
 
Information paper  
on drafting of Czech Act on the Antarctic 
 
Czechoslovakia acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 1962. The Czech Republic  succeded to all 
rights and obligations arising from the Treaty in 1993. The Czech Republic signed the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 1993 but to date has not yet 
ratified it. 
 
On October 22, 2001, the Government of the Czech Republic approved, by its Resolution No. 
1070, the concept of the Act on the Antarctic. Subsequently, the Ministry for the Environment 
of the Czech Republic drafted the Act on the Antarctic. 
 
The majority of obligations arising from the above Antarctic Treaty and Protocol on 
Environmental Protection are not of self-executing nature, i.e. are not so specified and 
addressing individuals as to provide for their implementation without relevant national 
legislative measures. The aim of the draft act is therefore the transposition of the international 
obligations arising from the Treaty and the said Protocol into Czech law. The draft act 
specifies in particular the rights and duties of natural and legal persons authorized to take part 
in Czech expeditions arriving in the Antarctic and provides for the relevant execution of state 
administration with the aim to ensure the overall protection of the environment in the 
Antarctic, and last but not least it creates conditions for the future development of systematic 
scientific work of Czech experts in the Antarctic. 
 
The Czech draft act on the Antarctic is subject to the standard legislative procedure in 
accordance with the Constitution of the Czech Republic and related acts: in particular it must 
be approved by the Government of the Czech Republic and the Parliament of the Czech 
Republic (both by the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate). 
 
The draft act was presented to the Government of the Czech Republic in June 2002 and has 
been  discussed in the working commissions of the Legislative Council of the Government 
(the Labour Law Commission and the Administrative Law Commission). The debate on the 
draft act in the Legislative Council of the Government and in the Government of the Czech 
Republic is expected in August 2002. The act is expected to enter into force on January 1, 
2003. 
