XXV ATCM 
Information Paper IP-016 
Agenda Item: CEP 4e 
ATCM 11 
RUSSIA 
Original :English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESULTS OF THE WASTE DISPOSAL PROJECT AT 
BELLINGSHAUSEN STATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 
Bellingshausen station is one of the first research stations founded by the Soviet 
Antarctic Expedition in 1968 on King George island (South Shetland Is.). During the next 
three decades of the station operations its infrastructure enlarged, including the construction 
of fuel storage and aluminium-panel buildings. The number and amount of waste dumps, out-
of-use equipment and  useless buildings. In spite of the steps taken by the administration 
anthropic environment impact  increased from year to year as well as  nearby regions view got 
worse. Such a situation could not remain unnoticed by numerous King George island visitors. 
The administration of both, station and Russian Antarctic Expedition was more than once 
addressed on account of environment condition of the region and environment protection 
measures to be undertaken. 
 
Beginning from 1996 an environmental team whose main goal was the repairing of fuel 
tanks and buildings, dismantling of old buildings and equipment, removal of dumps and 
cleaning up of the territory. Within the span of six years the station and territory adjacent were 
cleaned up and the waste was prepared for the removal. Due to the fact that the RAE ship 
Akademik Fedorov does not supply Bellingshausen station the waste removal from the station 
in the near future by the RAE was unlikely. The RAE considered different ways of waste 
removal out of Antarctica including cooperation with other organizations. 
 
The RAE had already got successful experience of joint project with government 
institution - Alfred Wegener Institute, Germany, on waste removal from Schirmacher Oasis, 
Novolazarevskaya station, Antarctica. 
 
The first experience of cooperation with non-government  organization (NGO) was 
acquired in 1995-96 summer season when the Canadian ecological NGO "View Foundation" 
worked at Bellingshausen station under the RAE management. The NGO volunteers were 
mostly involved in garbage collecting at the station. As a result of the project 20 fuel drums of  
small waste and 500 meters of old fuel hoses were removed out of Antarctica by one of the 
ships run by the  "Marine Expedition" Tour Operator. 
 
In 1998 its the services to improve environment situation of the area were proposed by 
NGO "Mission Antarctica", and the cooperation with it proved to be the mostly successful. 
The work was carried out in accordance with the RAE environment management plan and 
included dismantling of old buildings and equipment, aerologic waste disposal, removal of 
drums with fuel-lubricant waste, dumps removal and the territory cleaning up. 
 
"Mission Antarctica" provided 8 volunteers for summer seasons annually (those were 
mostly Russian citizens). The volunteers were supplied with equipment and consumables 
necessary for work. The NGO representatives at the end of each season supervised the activity 
of its volunteers and the work results. 
 
At the final project stage in 2001-02 summer season the Danish cargo vessel "Anne  
Boye" was chartered by NGO "Mission Antarctica" for transporting waste from Antarctica. 
For loading operations the following equipment was delivered onshore: two tractors, two 
pontoons, containers, pontoon towing boat, oil waste containers, gas cylinders, cutoff disc, 
bags etc. 
 
Within three weeks a total of about 800 tons of waste was loaded on board. The objects 
that significantly deteriorated the outer view of the area and had a potentially adverse 
environment impact such as scrap dump on shore and oil waste storage were removed. 
 
3
 
Apart from the Russian the metal scrap from the neighboring Artigas (Uruguay), Frei 
(Chile) and Arctowsky (Poland) stations was also loaded onboard the ship. 
 
In February Bellingshausen station was visited by Robert Swan, the Head of "Mission 
Antarctica". In the course of discussions it was expressed mutual satisfaction with the results 
of joint work that has allowed  a significant improvement of the environment condition at the 
station also proving that the environment problems are easier to deal with by joint efforts. 
 
In this way it was obtained a positive experience of international cooperation on 
cleaning up Antarctic territories which could be recommended to Antarctic community in 
order to draw additional fund sources to environment protection measures and to speed up 
their implementation. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Waste preparation on shore 
 
 
4
Fig.2. Delivery on board a ship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3. 20 December 2001, the beginning of the work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
 Fig.4. 13 February 2002, the end of the work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig.5. The station view after the project is over 
 
