GREENPEACE HISTORY IN THE ANTARCTIC

reenpeace began
campaigning for an
Antarctic World Park
in 1983. From 1986
onwards, Greenpeace ships
travelled to Antarctica each
summer to document and
publicise the
environmental abuses
occurring there — at the
time providing the only
real independent source of
information about
governmental activities on
the ice. During these trips
expedition staff carried out
environmental inspections
of over 40 stations and
documented evidence of
damage to the environment
and violations of the
Antarctic Treaty's
environmental regulations.
This information was then
published annually.

Greenpeace installed its
own environmentally
friendly station in 1987. In
a world first for an NGO,
Greenpeace established the
World Park Antarctic Base,
a small year-round base on
Cape Evans, Ross Island.

During this time,
Greenpeace and the
Antarctic and Southern
Ocean (ASOC)
campaigned actively
against the signing of the Convention on the
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource
Activities (CRAMRA), instead arguing that
Antarctica should be declared a World Park
and that mining should be banned. Greenpeace
was concerned that mining activities would
pose unacceptable risks to the unique
Antarctic environment and destabilise the
region politically. CRAMRA would have
established the property rights regime essential
for mining to proceed — and to that extent
actually increased the likelihood of mining.

In 1989, the Exxon Valdez oil spill in the
Arctic underscored the realities of oil drilling
in polar environments. Subsequently,
Australia and France led negotiations
amongst Antarctic Treaty members for a
comprehensive environmental protocol. In
1991, Antarctic Treaty members signed the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty.

The Protocol bans all commercial mining for at
least 50 years and requires prior assessment of
the environmental impact of all activities. The
technical annexes also institutes mechanisms
to set aside large protected areas, provides
legally-binding measures governing waste
disposal and marine pollution, and creates a
Committee on Environmental Protection.

Since the signing of the Protocol, Greenpeace
has continued encouraging Antarctic Treaty
nations to ratify the Protocol and to
implement its provisions. Further
expeditions have continued to highlight
threats to the Antarctic ecosystem such as
pseudo-scientific whaling and illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing.

GREENPEACE HISTORY

reenpeace is an
independent organisation
campaigning to ensure a
just, peaceful, sustainable
environment for future
generations. Our mission
and core values are based
on independence, non-
violence and bearing
witness.

Behind the scenes, we
campaign on many levels.

We use non-violent, direct actions to
expose global environmental problems
and force solutions.

Greenpeace International began in Canada
in 1971 and today has a presence in more
than 41 countries, and 2.65 million
supporters worldwide.

Greenpeace Australia was founded in
1977 and joined forces with Greenpeace
Pacific in 1998. Together, our 130,000
supporters are the backbone of
Greenpeace Australia Pacific.
Antarctica needs
Marine Protected Areas




                      A
ntarctica and its surrounding oceans
support a unique ecosystem, unusual in
that it relies heavily upon one krill
species, Euphausia superba. Recent
developments in the krill fishery indicate
a massive expansion of fishing is imminent. This
change threatens to impact heavily on the
Antarctic ecosystem.

Marine protected areas (MPAs) offer an important
opportunity to mitigate these threats and protect
foraging and breeding grounds of vulnerable
species. Annex five of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
has provision for declaring protected areas over
marine and terrestrial areas. If the protected area
encompasses a marine area, the management plan
must be approved by the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (CCAMLR).

                      The Antarctic ecosystem
is under threat. Krill
fishing is increasing, the
climate is changing. By
itself CCAMLR can't cope.
Antarctic waters need
Marine Protected Areas.

MPAs have been developed for Australian
national waters in the sub-Antarctic to protect
conservation values threatened by fishing
activities. One example, Heard Island, lies within
CCAMLR's boundaries. Yet no MPAs have been
declared within Antarctic waters. Instead,
Antarctic Treaty members have relied upon
CCAMLR to sustainably manage Antarctic waters.
However, this arrangement has failed due to
CCAMLR's inability to control fishing activities.
This has resulted in unsustainable impacts upon
target stocks and endangered species of seabirds.

This systemic failure, combined with the current
and potential impacts of climate change and
fisheries expansion, may threaten populations of
Antarctic fauna. Antarctic Treaty members should
develop MPAs under the provisions of annex five
in order to protect Antarctic fauna and mitigate
the impacts of fisheries management failures.

www.greenpeace.org.au
                                  GREENPEACE
