 
Antarctic meteorites and UK law 
 
Information Paper 
Submitted by the United Kingdom 
 
 
 
Background 
 
1. Resolution 3 (2001) urged “Parties to the Environmental Protocol to take such legal or 
administrative steps as are necessary to preserve Antarctic meteorites so that they are collected 
and curated according to accepted scientific standards, and are made available for scientific 
purposes”. 
 
 
Meteorites in Antarctica 
 
2. All meteorites have intrinsic value to science.  Those collected by scientists from national 
Antarctic programmes are lodged and catalogued in internationally recognised depositories.  
They are also made freely available to the scientific community for study.  However, Antarctic 
meteorites also have considerable commercial value.  Meteorites not collected by the scientific 
community may be retained in private hands or sold for considerable sums of money.  More 
significantly, the scientific community may be denied access to such material. 
 
3. In the view of the UK the commercial exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources in this way 
represents a direct contravention of the minerals prohibition of Article 7 of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
 
UK Law 
 
4. In UK law the question of mineral resource activities in Antarctic is held under Section 6 of the 
Antarctic Act 1994.  Mineral resources are defined in the Act as “any natural resource that is 
neither living nor renewable”.  Section 6 (1) of the Antarctic Act 1994 further states that “No 
UK national may in Antarctica: 
 
a) 
drill, dredge or excavate for mineral resources, 
 
b) 
collect any samples of mineral resources, or 
 
c) 
do anything for the purpose of identifying specific mineral resource occurrences or 
deposits, and where such occurrences or deposits may be found, except in 
accordance with a permit”. 
 
5. The Act further states that the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, shall 
not grant a permit for such activities unless he is satisfied that the activities will be undertaken 
“only for the purposes of scientific research”. 
 
 
6. When permits are issued under Section 6 of the Act for geoscientific research activities, 
conditions attached to the permit require the permit holder to ensure that all rock, macrofossil 
samples, etc, are curated according to accepted scientific standards and made available for 
scientific study only.  Permit conditions also expressly prohibit the sale, exchange, loan or 
removal from the permanent custody of the identified custodian. 
 
7. It is the unequivocal view of the UK that Antarctic meteorites fall under the provisions of 
Article 7 of the Environmental Protocol.  Further, UK law expressly prohibits the non-scientific 
collection of any mineral resources in Antarctica, including meteorites. 
 
 
Summary 
 
8. The prohibition of mineral resource activities addressed by Article 7, is a fundamental element 
of the Environmental Protocol. 
 
9. In the UK’s view it is important therefore to ensure a common understanding that mineral 
resource activity does encompass the collection of meteorites, and that a consistent approach to 
the collection and curation of Antarctic meteorites should be developed. 
