ATCM XXV 
Information Paper IP-110
Agenda Item ATCM 4b
CHINA
Original: English



POSITION OF CHINESE DELEGATION ON
COST-SHARING MECHANISM OF THE SECRETARIAT


    1. Venice compromise can not accommodate present day circumstances for reasons:
     1) There was never a consensus on equal cost sharing in Venice in 1992, instead the Meeting came to a compromise by agreeing that “for a period of three years after the establishment of the Secretariat, each ATCP shall make a contribution to the budget as specified in the footnote below” That footnote indicated each party shall pay 1/26 portion of the budget, thus deliberately evaded the expression of  “equal sharing” which could not be agreed as a principle. And the “elements for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat of the final report” went on to say, “during such period the ATCM shall consider, as a matter of priority and with a view to ensuring equitable sharing, contributions to the budget and make provisions accordingly.” So it is very clear that the essential principle agreed on the cost sharing of the Secretariat in the “Venice consensus in 1992” is “equitable sharing” not “equal sharing”.
    2) The 1/26 formula contained in the footnote was meant to facilitate the establishment of a permanent Secretariat in the immediate vicinity, not after many years, otherwise the formula would have been 1/X instead of 1/26. Now the number of Parties is no longer 26.
    3) In Venice in 1992 the understanding was what was going to be established was a permanent secretariat   from the very first day of its existence. Now we have a totally different approach of” two tracks”, and the interim secretariat in track number 1 will most likely be funded by voluntary contributions. Therefore the above mentioned 1/26 formula, which was supposed to be valid for the first three years of the secretariat’s existence, is no longer relevant.

    2. Our consistent position on the cost sharing of the secretariat has been a fair and proportional sharing or equitable sharing based on the financial capacity  (UN assessed scale) of and magnitude of activities in the Antarctica by the Parties.
    3. A clear cost sharing formula of the Secretariat has to be agreed upon before its establishment and it has to be spelt out in the Measure and the Decision as it is absolutely necessary for the approval of the States Parties.
    4. The Chinese delegation stands ready to participate with a very constructive approach in the discussion of this crucial issue with an aim to reach a practical agreement based on the principle of equitable sharing so as to facilitate the earliest possible establishment of the Secretariat of the ATCM.
