TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                                   ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                             XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                             XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                             BRUXELLES
                                                             1985
                                                             ANT/XIII/INF 10
                                                             10.10.1985.

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR HOLGER ROTKIRCH,
HEAD OF THE OBSERVER DELEGATION OF FINLAND ON 8.10.85
ANTARCTIC TREATY

XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Brussels,  7.-18. October 1985

Statement by Ambassador Holger Rotkirch, Head of the Observer Delegation of
Finland on 8 October 1985

On behalf of the Government of Finland, I wish to express our gratitude for
being invited as an acceeding party to the Antarctic Treaty to attend this
meeting of the Consultative States. I wish to extend the congratulations
of my delegation to you, Mr. Chairman on your election to conduct this
Meeting, which we hope will prove succesful.  I would also like to express
our thanks to the Government of Belgium for the facilities it has provided
for this Meeting. May I also take this opportunity to thank all those
delegations that have welcomed Finland's accession to the Antarctic Treaty.

This accession took place in May 1984. This is thus the first opportunity
for my country to attend a Meeting of the Consultative Parties.  I would
therefore like in a few words to explain my Government's basic position
and reasons for acceeding to the Treaty.  Further, I would like to make
some general comments on the Treaty's status today.

Finland's decision to accede to the Treaty was based on the belief that
in this way we can best contribute to the strengthening of the present
succesful Treaty system.  In any future efforts in Antarctica the Treaty
must be upheld and respected. Only in this way the international community
can ensure that future activities in Antarctica will be conducted in the
interest of maintaining peace and security, cooperation in scientific
research and protection and conservation of the fragile environment of
the continent and its surrounding sea areas.

The Treaty provides for the effective demilitarization of Antarctica. It
is indeed in the interest of all mankind, as stated in the Preamble of
the Treaty that "Antarctica shall continue forever to be used for
2

peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international 
discord". Finland considers this to be the cornerstone of the Treaty 
system and all future endeavours on the continent.

In additon to making the Antarctic Treaty area the largest demilitarized 
area in the world with an effective inspection system the Treaty 
guarantees freedom of scientific research all over the continent for the 
Contracting Parties. A corollary of this right is the provision that 
scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged 
and made freely available.

One of the basic prerequisites in making the Treaty work is that it 
provides a moratorium on territorial claims in Antarctica while the 
Treaty is in force.  This provision constitutes a fundamental element in 
the present Treaty System.

Lastly, the Treaty provides for the preservation and the conservation of 
the living resources in Antarctica.  This provision has been further 
strengthened by later agreements and conventions, in particular the 
Convention on the Conservation of the Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR), which entered into force in 1982.

It is widely known that a change in the climate conditions of Antarctica 
could dramatically and fundamentally influence environmental conditions 
throughout the world.  This extreme vulnerability of the Antarctic 
environment both on land and in the sea must be taken into account when 
any exploitation of existing natural resources, exploratory or other 
activity in the area is carried out.

Mr. Chairman,

Finland is situated in the subarctic zone and has a wide experience of 
coping with severe, cold climate conditions.  Consequently, Finland 
has both the interest and the capacity to contribute to the research 
activities in the Antarctic.  Technology developed in Finland for operations 
in the arctic regions, including ice-breakers and other special vessels
already used by various scientific expeditions, is equally applicable in 
the Antarctic region and have also been used by several Consultative 
Parties.

Having acceded to the Treaty we have surveyed the interest of our 
scientific community as well as our industry with a view to possibly 
undertaking active research in the Antarctic.  The response has been 
very positive and it seems that the scientific interest covers a wide 
spectrum including disciplines such as geomorphology, geology, ionospheric 
and magnetospheric studies, glaciogeology, permafrost, sedimentology, 
marine biology, sea ice, meteorology, medicine, biology, offshore 
activity as well as transport and research vessels.  It may be that 
in a few years time this interest will materialize in a scientific 
expedition to be sent to the Antarctic in cooperation with one or 
several other countries.

Mr. Chairman,

I would now like to comment on the status of the Treaty in a wider 
international framework.  The research undertaken by 12 States in the 
Antarctic during the International Geophysical Year in 1957-58 culminated 
in the convening of the Washington Conference in 1959 which adopted the 
Antarctic Treaty. Since then the situation has changed considerably 
both with regard to the composition of the international community of 
States and to the interest in the Antarctic continent and its resources. 
It is thus understandable that a Treaty system encompassing this vast area 
generates an interest reaching far beoynd the rather limited number of 
countries who are actively conducting research in the Antarctic.

It was therefore a welcome decision when the Consultative Parties at the 
XII Consultative Meeting in Canberra in 1983 invited the Non Consultative 
Parties (NCP) to attend the Meeting as observers.  The NCP's have been 
invited this year to attend the meeting of the Working Group on an 
Antarctic mineral Resources Regime as observers.  My country has 
participated in the meetings of the Working Group both in Rio de Janeiro 
and in Paris last week and we have been very satisfied with the
possibility for observers to participate actively in those deliberations.

Mr. Chairman,

Our discussion at this Meeting and the positions we take in different fora within the Antarctic Treaty system have a bearing beyond the scope of the 32 Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. We all know that the question of Antarctica is inscribed on the agenda of the 40th United Nations General Assembly, now for the third consequtive year.  In our view the discussion within the United Nations as well as the Secretary General's excellent report on the matter has clearly contributed to a wider and deeper understanding of the Antarctic Treaty system. Previously, little was actually known about the system by States outside the Group of Consultative Parties. The comprehensive study made by the United Nations Secretary General in 1984 provides a well documented description of all the different physical, legal, political, economic and scientific aspects involved.

The prospect of potential commercial exploitation of the vast Antarctic mineral resources has aroused widespread concern.  Through our participation in the Working Group on an Antarctic Mineral Resources Regime we have now a better understanding of the intricate questions involved. My delegation believes that if this Regime ever is to become viable and accepted by the community of States at large, it must be organized in a way which does not exclude the NCP's from the central institutions and organs of the Regime. The question of protection and conservation of the Antarctic environment is of paramount importance in this respect. It would therefore also be important to secure that interests representing environmental and scientific knowledge in the world community be taken into account in any decisionmaking.

It is important not to upset the present Antarctic Treaty system which has worked so succesfully since its inception.  New challenges have been met before and we are convinced that constructive solutions will be found in due time also with regard to the Mineral Resources Regime. We must continue to keep the Antarctic continent outside international strife and discord.
