TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                           ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                   XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                                   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                   XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

BRUXELLES
1985
7-18 octobre                                                  ANT XIII/INF 16
                                                             10.10.85

Item 11 of the agenda

U.S. POLICY ON PRIVATE EXPEDITIONS
TO THE ANTARCTIC

(Information Paper submitted by
the U.S. Delegation)
ITEM 11 of the Agenda

Effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the 
Antarctic Treaty area:
US Policy on Private Expeditions to the Antarctic

Information paper submitted by the US Delegation
US Policy on Private Expeditions to the Antarctic

The objectives and level of activity of the US Antarctic
Program  are set forth in President Reagan's directive of February
5, 1982.  Achievement of USAP objectives which center upon the
conduct of a balanced program of scientific research and include
cooperative activities with Antarctic programs of other governments
requires the full commitment of the operational and logistics
capabilities available to the USAP.  The US government is not
able to offer support or any other services to private expeditions,
US or foreign, in Antarctica.

In emergency situations the US is prepared to attempt in
accordance with international law and humanitarian principles, the
rescue of private expedition  personnel provided that there are no
unacceptable risks posed to US personnel and the rescue can be
accomplished within the means available to the US.  Such emergency
assistance would be limited to the rescue of private expedition
personnel and their evacuation would be undertaken in a manner
which, in the judgement of the US, offered the least risk to US
personnel, equipment and scientific programs.  Once such rescue had
been effected, the US would consider its assistance terminated and
would under no circumstances provide support for the continuation
of the expedition.

Private expeditions, therefore, should be self sufficient and
are encouraged to carry adequate insurance coverage against the
risk of incurring financial charges or material losses in the
Antarctic.  The National Science Foundation, as manager of the USAP
reserves the right to seek, in accordance with international and
domestic law, recovery of all direct and indirect costs of any such
emergency search and rescue:

The senior US Representative in Antarctica may authorize such
actions or activities that, in his judgement, best fit this
policy guidance under circumstances and conditions prevailing at
the time of application.
