TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                           XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                           XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

BRUXELLES
1985
7-18 octobre                                            ANT/XIII/INF 7
                                                        October 9, 1985

Item 9 : ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES

Discussion Paper submitted by the
United Kingdom
Information Document
Date: 9 October 1985

ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES

Discussion paper submitted by the
        United Kingdom
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES AND THEIR
APPLICATION TO ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES : SOME REFLECTIONS

Terminological note:     In the following paper the same
terminology is used as in Benninghoff and Bonner (1985)
Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment, SCAR/ICSU
Press, Cambridge.  That is Environmental Assessment (EA)
means the preliminary consideration of a  proposed
activity; Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) means
the procedures to be completed in cases where an EA
suggests that environmental impacts are likely to be
significant; Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is
used as an umbrella term to include EA's and EIS's.

Present Situation

1.   At Canberra we adopted a Recommendation (XII-3)
which, in its first two operative paragraphs, urged national
organisations responsible for Antarctic activities to apply
EIA procedures to their scientific and logistic activities
in the planning stage.  The penultimate preambular paragraph
noted that «a measure of comparability between such procedures
/ i.e. EIA procedures operated by national organisations7
might, in the future, become desirable».  The third operative
paragraph asked SCAR for advice regarding the «categories of
research and logistic activity ... which might reasonably be
expected to have a significant impact on the environment»,
and for advice regarding «the elaboration of assessment
procedures which may be applied by the relevant agencies
of the Consultative Parties, on an experimental basis,
with regard to research and logistic activity».

2.   SCAR's response to this request is set out in Man's
Impact on the Antarctic Environment, by W A Benninghoff and
W N Bonner, SCAR/ICSU Press, Cambridge, 1985.  The critical
elements of this overview are Table 5 on page 46 which
/responds
responds directly to the first request for advice on the
categories of activity likely to have 'significant impact'
and the advice set out in Chapter 3 on procedures (see flow
diagram attached reproduced from SCAR response, P. 33).

Action at XIIIth ATCM

3.    Recommendation XII-3 foreshadows the adoption of a
Recommendation which would set out procedures which might
be applied «on an experimental basis», by the relevant
national agencies.  The first questions that will face the
drafters of such a Recommendation are, firstly, «what
procedures?» and secondly, «to what  categories of research
and logistic activity should they be applicable?»

What procedures?

4.    The material immediately available to us for developing
a set of procedures is set out in paragraphs 17 - 19 of the
Report of the Canberra ATCM and in Chapter 3 of SCAR's
response.  There are no differences between these procedures
which are likely, in principle, to be irresolvable.  A
possible difficulty could arise from the need on the part of
some colleagues to avoid conflict between the provisions of
their relevant national legislation and the procedures
adopted for application to Antarctic activities.  On the
understanding that the Recommendation would be hortatory
rather than mandatory and would be  experimental in
the first instance, there ought not to be too much difficulty
on this score. The important thing is that the procedure
should be sensible on its face.

Categories of Activity

5.    At Canberra the UK delegation believed it important
'that SCAR should be asked for advice as to the sort of
activity that was likely to have a significant impact.
SCAR's advice is contained in the table on page 46 of
their response.  Some colleagues have already indicated
informally that it would give them difficulty if this
table were incorporated into a Recommendation as a
statement of the categories of activity which would
/trigger
trigger the compilation of EIS's.  Other colleagues asked, for example, whether there really would be a significant impact if one person were added to a station of nine.  Others have been concerned that such a list might come to be looked upon as exclusive and that it might then become a defense against a charge of not having done an EIS that the activity in question was 'not on the list'.

6.    Let us stand back a moment and take a broad look at what we are trying to do and, also, what we are not trying to do.  As the UK sees it, our purpose here is to ensure that forethought is exercised with respect to the environmental impacts that scientific and logistical activities might have in Antarctica.  Our purpose is not to provide that any activity which is likely to have a significant adverse impact should not go ahead for that reason alone.

7.    All human activities in the Antarctic have an impact. The impact of most activity is transitory and insignificant.  For such activities it is enough that some thought should be given to each activity with a view to confirming that a reasonable person would be of a similar view as to its transitory and insignificant impact.

8.    At the other end of the spectrum there is activity, such as establishing a new station on a coastal site, where the impact will be significant and will not be transitory.  Such an activity would demand a full EIS so as to be sure that the advantages to be gained from the station outweighed the environmental disadvantages.

9.    Thus much is reasonably clear.  The problem comes in between, where there is room for legitimate doubt as to whether the impact from a particular activity is going to be significant or not.  It is here that the environmental assessment (EA) stage is of vital importance. Its purpose is not to prevent the activity in question
/from
from proceeding.  Its purpose is solely to go through a procedure which will, in a more formal sense, decide whether or not the preparation of an environmental impact statement (EIS) is necessary.

10. It is possible to conclude from this that the vital question is not so much to ask what are the categories of activity that are likely to have a significant impact but, instead, to ask what are the sorts of activity which should lead to the preparation of EAs.  Considered in this light the SCAR list in table 5 on page 46 of the SCAR response becomes much less forbidding.  The list can thus be looked upon as being illustrative of the sort of activity which should give rise to serious thought as to whether an EA should be prepared.  In the majority of cases the environmental assessment will be the end of the matter and the activity will proceed.  In a minority of cases the EA will lead to the preparation of an EIS.
Need for activity 
identified

Activity defined

ENVIRONMENTAL                Reference to 
ASSESSMENT                   baseline data and 
                             records of change 
                             in past

No signif.cant                  Potential significant 
impact                          impact

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
a. Description of activity and alternatives
b. Description of initial state
c. Estimation of consequent changes
d. Estimation of significance of changes

DECISION

abandon                      proceed
                             Identification of 
                             unavoidable impacts

IMPLEMENTATION              MITIGATION 
                             procedures

MONITORING 
and comparison with 
predicted changes

33
