TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                                ANT/XIII INF  14
                                                                October 10, 1985
BRUXELLES                                                      Original : French

1985
7-18 octobre

Belgian programme of scientific research
concerning the Antarctic

(Information document submitted by
the Belgian Delegation)
SCIENCE POLICY OFFICE
PRIME MINISTER'S SERVICES
8 Rue de la Science - 1040 Brussels


 
BELGIAN PROGRAMME ON ANTARCTIC
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH                  September 1985
- 1 -

I.  INTRODUCTION

For some years interest in the Antarctic has been growing in
the international Scientific Community, and more particularly
within the Antarctic Treaty System.

This interest takes the form of a considerable expansion of
scientific research activities concerning this region.

Belgium is aware of the need to improve scientific knowledge
about the Antarctic continent and the surrounding ocean and is keen to contribute to the international research effort in
this field.

On a proposal by the Minister for Science Policy the Belgian
Government has therefore approved the implementation of a
research programme with a planned duration of three years.
The programme will take the form of a specific national action,
incorporating individual and coordinated scientific studies.

This programme has been drawn up to take account, on the one
hand, of the considerable progress made since the first
expeditions, on both the scientific and logistic fronts -
which has led to more sophisticated means being used and a new
approach to research objectives and strategy.  On the other
hand, Belgium's participation must comply with the priorities
of national and international science policy and keep within
limits which are compatible with the budgetary resources of
our country.

In this connection it should be noted that the economic
application of the results of research activities concerning
the Antarctic does not represent a feasible objective today
for a country of Belgium's size.

The national priorities, objectives, content and method of
implementing the programme have been determined in accordance
with the Belgian State's overall R & D Policy, the principal
aims of which are to ensure that its support for research teams
active in key areas is both coherent and directed at specific
objectives.

../2
- 2 -

The objectives.of the Belgian contributions to furthering scientific knowledge about the Antarctic are set out below:

a) to enlarge on the nucleus of competence and expertise in Belgium so that our country can participate in the scientific activities at international level to study the Antarctic, in keeping with the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty;

b) to focus the main research effort on two main areas for which there is a broad international consensus that priority development is required because of the scale of their practical implications and taking into account the state of knowledge.  These two areas are the ecology of plankton, a key link in the entire marine food chain, and glaciology in relation to its climatological implications. These are two of the areas in which Belgium possesses a scientific potential of great value;

c) to contribute scientific "added value" to the research currently being carried out by a number of excellent university teams (notably working on international R & D programmes and programmes of "concerted research actions"). By means of appropriate management and coordination it will be ensured that their research activities at international level have an impact in areas of tangible interest to Belgium (such as oceanology, climatology and remote sensing).

The management and coordination of the programme will be provided by the Science Policy Office (SPPS).

The follow-up of the research activities will be the responsibility of a support committee set up by the Government and comprising of representatives from the following departments : Economic Affairs, Agriculture, Foreign Affairs and Development Cooperation, Public Health and the Environment, Public Works, National Defence and Science Policy Office.

../3
- 3 -

The research is being carried out by teams from Belgium's six
full universities and one Public Service research unit.

For the purposes of this programme it is planned to integrate
some of the research with programmes organized by other
countries, by taking up spare places on their ships or at their
bases. The resources for this purpose have been earmarked in
the programme budget.

II. DESCRIPTION OF THE FIELDS AND TASKS OF RESEARCH

The Antarctica is the last vast region of the planet which has
been virtually untouched by the activities of Man.  It there-
fore constitutes a particularly suitable place for establishing
reference levels for contamination and for increasing knowledge
of the "natural" operation of ecosystems.  The comparison and
extrapolation of the results of such studies may contribute to
laying the necessary scientific foundations for combatting
pollution and for the rational management of some natural
resources in industrial areas.

The regional dimension of such studies should not in any case
be disregarded.

Indeed the Antarctic environment is probably very vulnerable
to pollution which could constitute a direct or indirect threat
if there should be an increase in the activities of Man or
ocean-borne and atmospheric impacts, the mechanisms and
effects of which are as yet little-known.

The Antarctic and the ocean surrounding it play an important
role, moreover, in regulating the Earth's climate.  The way
in which this develops in the long term depends in particular
on the dynamics and end result of exchanges between ocean,
ice, and atmosphere, the effects of which are exported on a
global scale.  To be able to predict this evolution scientific-
ally implies understanding the mechanisms of these phenomena
at present and in the past.

.../4
- 4 -

In the light of the research strategy defined in the Introduction
above, the field and subjects of research adopted in the
programme are as follows:

1.      Plankton Ecology :

1.1     Biochemistry of the nutrition of phyto- and bacterioplankton.
1.2     Biochemistry and ecodynamics of zooplankton.
1.3     Plankton ecotoxicology and activity.

2.      Marine Geochemistry :

2.1     Biogeochemistry of barium.

3.      Marine Geophysics :

3.1     Seismic stratigraphy and clay dynamics.

4.      Glaciology and Climatology :

4.1     Isotopic composition of regelated ice.
4.2     Sea ice modelling.
4.3     Ice cap dynamics.
4.4     Ocean-ice-atmosphere interactions.

The details of the research tasks are set out below.

FIELD 1 - PLANKTON ECOLOGY

Belgian oceanography has developed a considerable body of
knowledge in the area of marine living resources.  This
probably represents one of the most tangible areas of
economic potential in the Antarctic.

In this respect it would be useful to examine the suitability
of methods and general applicability of concepts acquired in
the North Sea at other sites affording more favourable hydro-
logical and physico-chemical conditions for conducting and,
above all, interpreting ecological observations.

.../5
- 5 -

The Antarctic waters lend themselves well to these purposes,
notably by offering a broad spectrum of nutritive conditions
ranging from extreme oligotrophy to nutrient-rich levels
similar to those encountered in the North Sea coastal zone.

Over the last ten years  oceanographic research in marine
environments has revealed the existence of complex food chains
in which planktonic bacteria and microzooplankton play a key
role in the utilisation of organic matter produced by phyto-
plankton.  This discovery thus overturns the established
belief in a single linear food chain : phytoplankton --> zoo-
plankton --> fish. An understanding of the trophic structure
of a marine environment therefore calls for an understanding
of the mechanisms of formation and utilisation of organic
matter in the first links of the food chain (phytoplankton,
zooplankton and planktonic bacteria).

The dynamics of the environment must, however, be taken into
account as well.

It has, for instance, been shown that when zooplankton is
subjected to fugacious feeding conditions they store substantial
quantities of lipids, the biochemical nature of which depends on
hydrological and trophic conditions.

Furthermore, the understanding of the structure and operation
of the marine food chain presupposes knowledge of some of the
flows associated with planktonic respiration and real net
primary production.

Far-removed from the activities of Man, the Antarctic also
offers an opportunity to establish baseline levels of
contamination by pesticides and heavy metals with a view to
assessing contamination observed in industrialised regions.
Similarly, it is to be hoped that this will lead to a better
understanding of the ways in which marine  organisms are
poisoned by studying an environment such as the Antarctic for
the reasons already outlined.  This aspect is closely linked
to an understanding of the metabolism of lipids in so far as
pesticides are concerned.
- 6 -

The research conducted in this field forms a coherent whole with the aim both of contributing to a better understanding of how the bottom of the food chain operates in the Antarctic marine environment, and of acquiring more general concepts on the ecology of the plankton.  This knowledge could be used in an endeavour to clarify various problems relating to the food chain observed in the North Sea and to the nature of the factors governing the operation of the food chain.  This will assist in defining how and to what extent plankton are poisoned in various ecosystems.

The field relating to plankton ecology can be sub-divided into 3 themes which differ in the methodologies applied and the segments of the food chain under consideration, but which are complementary with regard to the concepts developed:

1.  Biochemistry of the nutrition of phyto- and bacterio-plankton (Dr. BILLEN, ULB):

Characterisation of chemicals metabolised by phytoplankton in response to the supply of nutrients and light and definition of the role played by planktonic bacteria in the recycling of organic matter.

2.  Zooplankton biochemistry and ecodynamics (Dr. HECQ. ULg):

Study on the evolution of the properties and storage of potentially utilizable lipids in the segments of the plankton chain in terms of time, space and environmental parameters, from nutrient-enriching sources.

3.  Plankton ecotoxicology and activity (Dr. JOIRIS, VUB):

Definition of reference contamination levels and identification of the transfer mechanisms of organochlorine residues and mercury in various marine subsystems (water, plankton, etc); determination of the respiration of total plankton and phytoplankton and evaluation of real net primary production.

                                                                             .../7
- 7 -

FIELD 2 - MARINE GEOCHEMISTRY

Rational management of the marine environment presupposes a 
knowledge of the nature and the rate of all the reactions 
controlling the concentration and the retention time of 
chemical elements and their compounds in the various compart-
ments of this environment.

This knowledge allows models of geochemical cycles to be 
constructed, particularly of biogeochemical cycles which have 
extensive applications in the prevention of and the fight 
against all kinds of pollution.

The Antarctic circumpolar waters constitute one of the largest 
oceanic reservoirs of living matter and a zone of substantial 
exchanges with all the oceans.

Little is yet known about the behaviour of numerous chemical 
elements in this area.

The construction of models of specific cases of biogeochemical 
cycles is useful in the development of concepts essential for 
improving this knowledge.

In this respect, the biogeochemical behaviour of barium is 
open to methodological extrapolations, especially with regard 
to the use of radium 226 as a tracer of the ocean circulation.

It is therefore proposed to attempt to throw light on the role 
played by the remineralization of organic matter in controlling 
the content of particulate barium in the surface waters of the 
circumpolar region, in order to obtain a better knowledge of 
the biogeochemical cycle of this element.

The purpose of the research to be conducted by the team led by 
Dr. DEHAIRS (VUB) will be to evaluate the part played by the 
remineralization of organic detritus in the phenomenon of 
barium production in the upper part of the water column in the 
subtropical convergence zone and in the Antarctic convergence 
zone.
~8~
- 8 -

To this end, high-resolution vertical profiles of barium
concentration will be achieved.      These data will be inter-
preted within the context of the geochemistry of barium and
with more general reference to trace elements in the marine
environment.

FIELD 3 - MARINE GEOPHYSICS

The continental shelf of the Antarctic partly consists of
sedimentary wedges the formation of which is linked to plate
tectonics.

Investigation of prisms in the western part of this shelf has
revealed the existence of thick sedimentary series, which it
is suppósed must theoretically have similarities with known
series in the adjacent continents ("counterparts" linked to
the continental drift).

These latter series contain mineralized levels, some of which
are mined commercially.

There are still large gaps in our knowledge of the nature and
origin of the sediment of peri-Antarctic wedges.  It would
therefore be interesting to study these characteristics with
a view to attempting to establish lateral equivalences between
potentially mineralized geological layers and to confirming
the dynamic effects due to plate tectonics.

Of the different geophysical methods, the seismic method has
proved to be particularly well suited to geological studies of
vast accumulations of sedimentary layers which have not been
explored to any significant degree. But above all, it allows
indirect access to the layers forming the sea floor.

Finally, through the methodological adaptations which it
involves, the application of the seismic technique to studies
on peri-Antarctic wedges offers an opportunity for diversi-
fication to researchers who have developed this tool in the
North Sea.

/9
- 9 -

The team led by Dr. HENREIT (RUG) will define the stratigraphic 
and structural characteristics of sediments  of peri-Antarctic 
prisms on the basis of the interpretation of seismic profiles.
To this effect, they will adapt the measurement techniques 
developed for the North Sea.  The sedimentation and deformation 
mechanisms of these prisms will also be studied taking the 
regional geological and tectonic context into account.
Analogies with the sediments of the neighbouring continents will 
also be considered.

FIELD 4 - GLACIOLOGY AND CLIMATOLOGY

The Antarctic plays an important role in regulating the earth's 
climate.  Unlike most other regions, it does not store up the 
heat provided by solar radiation.  This phenomenon is due to 
the ice cap, which reflects almost all this radiation.  The 
Antarctic therefore acts as an enormous heat pump supplied 
through atmospheric and oceanic circulation.

With other factors such as the carbon dioxide content of the 
atmosphere also playing a part, it is the dynamic balance of 
interactions between various phenomena on which the earth's 
climate ultimately depends.

Although knowledge of the mechanisms involved is still sketchy, 
many experts are finding it increasingly probable that this 
balance can be disturbed by human activity in the long term, 
to the point at which climatic conditions may be produced giving 
rise to a substantial reduction of regions fit for habitation 
and cultivation.

Studying such an evolution could not be attempted on scientific 
bases without a thorough knowledge of the natural trends in the 
past and present evolution and regulation of the earth's 
atmosphere.

The field of glaciology and climatology envisaged in this 
programme falls within the scope of this research, with 
particular emphasis being placed on aspects inherent in the 
Antarctic, and allows an operational Belgian scientific project 
to be utilized.
.../10
- 10 -

This field is characterized by the unity of the research concept 
and methods applied.

Four themes will be tackled, dealing with the additional aspects 
of the interactions between the three basic systems defining 
the climatic role of the Antarctic, namely the ocean, the ice 
and the atmosphere.  In this field, extensive use will be made of 
mathematical modelling, which is widely developed in Belgium 
in its applications to natural environments.  Consequently, it 
can be hoped further to increase the operational capacities of 
the research units involved, which will have the opportunity, 
in studying the Antarctic,of comparing methods and concepts 
developed for other environments.

The field concerned has been subdivided into four research 
themes concerning the interactions, to differing degrees, 
between glacial and climatic phenomena:

1. Isotopic composition of regelated ice (Prof. SOUCHEZ, ULB):

The isotopic composition of meteoric ice reflects the 
climatic conditions prevailing at the time when it was 
formed.  The base of the Antarctic glaciers holds such 
information concerning ancient climates about which we know 
very little.

The successive processes of regelation occurring at this 
base alter the original isotopic composition in accordance 
with the degree and the speed of freezing, thus affecting 
the palaeoclimatic information.

The study will tackle this phenomenon of isotopic 
fractionation in order to develop a method of reconstituting 
the original isotopic composition of regelated basal ice.  
This method will also be used to determine the speed at 
which ice is formed from sea water.

2. Sea ice modelling (Prof. BERLAMONT, KUL and Dr. PICHOT, UGMM):

The periodic expansion and contraction of floating ice-fields 
is one of the most characteristic natural phenomena of the 
circumpolar seas.                                                  /11
- 11 -

The presence of this ice makes access to the Antarctic 
continent, and navigation in polar seas in general,
difficult and all the more dangerous in that we have little 
knowledge of the evolution of these ice-fields.  It would 
therefore be useful to be able to establish predictions 
with regard to this evolution.

The development of this phenomenon in time and space is 
closely linked with a complex system of ocean-atmosphere 
interactions giving rise to heat transfers and the 
circulation of air and water.  Sea ice dynamics must 
therefore be approached taking into account both ocean and 
atmosphere dynamics.

These teams will have the task of jointly constructing a 
model describing the evolution of the edge of the sea ice 
in time and through the seasons, taking the above-mentioned 
interactions into account.  This model will be constructed 
for an idealized system and will then be adapted to a 
region of the Antarctic.

The operational potential of the predictive aspects of 
this model will also be considered.

3.  Ice cap dynamics (Prof. DECLEIR, RUG/VUB):

    1) This team will analyse the interactions between the level of 
the ice cap, the ice flow and the variations in sea level 
by applying the data obtained from remote monitoring from 
space and land-based observations.

A model of the integrated dynamics of these phenomena will 
be constructed and applied to the analysis of their inter-
active links with climatic phenomena.

The team will also evaluate the respective performances of 
Landsat and SPOT data application in terms of the objectives 
of this research.
        /12
- 12 -

4. Ocean-ice-atmosphere interactions (Prof. BERGER, UCL):

During the formation of sea ice, a large quantity of salt
is deposited in the underlying ocean. This increase in
salinity, and therefore in the density of the upper layer
of the ocean, can lead in some cases to the formation of
deep water.

Furthermore, the cold dry air that flows over the Antarctic
ice cap and becomes even colder as it passes over the fast
ice causes substantial turbulent flows of latent sensible
heat when it reaches the ice-free ocean. This would seem
to lower the temperature and increase the salinity of the
sea water, thus causing the formation of deep water.

The aim of this research is to evaluate the respective
roles of these two phenomena in the formation of deep
oceanic waters which occurs at the edge of the Antarctic
and contributes to the heat exchanges which play their part
in the regulation of the climate.

Apart from describing these phenomena, this mathematical
modelling will also allow the sensitivity of their inter-
actions to be analysed.
