TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE




BRUXELLES
1985
7-18 octobre
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT XIII / INF 11
10.10.85

ITEM 9 : INFORMAL PAPER RELATING TO MAN'S IMPACT
ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

Regulation concerning conservation of the
natural environment on Svalbard

(submitted by the Delegation of Norway)
-51-

REGULATIONS CONCERNING CONSERVATION OF THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
ON SVALBARD - LAID DOWN BY ROYAL DECREE OF 16 DECEMBER 1983

(Laid down in pursuance of the Act No 11 of 17 July 1925
relating to Svalbard, § 4. Proposed by the Ministry of
Environment).

Chapter I  Purpose and Scope

§ 1

Purpose

The purpose of the regulations is to conserve the natural
environment of Svalbard and the surrounding territorial waters
from pollution, litter and other influences which may cause
damage or disamenity to human beings, the flora and fauna and
the natural environment otherwise, or may appear unsightly.

§ 2

Scope

The regulations apply to land on Svalbard and to the sea as
far out as the territorial boundary.

Chapter II  General rules

§ 3

Concerning traffic in general

All persons travelling on Svalbard shall show consideration
and exercise due care in the natural environment. Traffic or
activity must not result in litter or unnecessarily lead to
pollution or other damage to the natural environment.
-5:-

Unnecessary damage must not be caused to the flora and fauna.
Each and every person travelling on foot, by motor vehicle,
hovercraft or aircraft, shall exercise special care in the
vicinity of bird nesting sites, breeding grounds of seals,
reindeer and polar bears, and other places of particular
significance for the fauna.

The Governor may prohibit or regulate traffic in more
specifically defined areas for the whole or parts of the year
when this is considered necessary in order to protect the
fauna, vegetation or unique geological features.

§ 4

Motorized traffic

When travelling by motor vehicle particular care shall be taken
so that this does not cause permanent or significant damage to
the vegetation or the surface of the ground, or disturb the
fauna unnecessarily.

All use of motorized vehicles on thawed ground is prohibited.
Excepted from this provision is driving on ground where there
is no vegetation, such as river beds, naked moraines and snow-
covered ground where the traffic cannot leave permanent traces
or cause damage from erosion. The exception to the provision
also applies to traffic for purposes of economic subsistence
in areas where, in pursuance of § 7, dispensation has been
granted from the obligation to report pursuant to § 6.

The Governor may fix distinct routes where use of motor vehicles
on thawed ground is permitted without hindrance from the pro-
visions in the second paragraph. He may also following appli-
cation in the individual case grant dispensation from the
provisions in the second paragraph.
The Ministry may prescribe more specific rules for motorized traffic off roads, for boats, hovercraft and aircraft, to the extent this is necessary for the implementation of the provision in the first paragraph.

The provisions in this paragraph shall not preclude necessary traffic in connection with fire-brigade turn-outs, ambulance turn-outs, search and rescue services or exercise of police functions.

§ 5

Prohibition_on_litter_discharges_etc:

No person may empty, leave behind or store waste in such a way that it can appear unsightly or cause damage or disamenity to the environment. By waste is meant discarded objects or substances. Sewage and exhaust gases from activity are not considered as waste.

The prohibition does not apply to specifically defined areas which the Governor has pointed out as treatment sites for waste or storage sites for objects as mentioned in the first paragraph. The Ministry may issue more specific rules concerning the design and operation of such areas, and may alsc decide that certain types of particularly hazardous waste shall be transported away for treatment elsewhere. The costs of such transport shall be covered by the owner of the waste.

The Ministry may issue rules stating that certain kinds of regenerable waste shall be transported elsewhere for recirculation.

It is prohibited to dump or to discharge waste, discarded objects, oil or other toxic substances into the sea from ships. Objects which do not float, and which will not cause injury to life in the sea, may be dumped after permission has been
-54-
obtained from the Governor. The Governor shall indicate where 
the dumping is to take place. Discharge of sewage, pure foo:
residues from small boats, and fresh fish are not subject to 
the prohibition in this paragraph.

The Governor may require any person who has violated the proti-
bition in this paragraph to remove the waste within a specisic
time limit. If this injunction is not obeyed, the Governor may 
arrange to have the waste cleared away and may require the 
person concerned to cover the costs.

CHAPTER III  Activity that must be reported

§ 6

Activities subject to the obligation to report

The following activities or enterprises which it is intended 
to initiate shall be reported to the Governor:

1. Mining, including development works and trial operations, 
petroleum investigations and exploitations and other 
industrial activity.

2. Hotel and hostel enterprises.

3. Use of ground for tank installations and free-standing 
fuel stores.

4. Use of ground for purposes of transport, including 
construction of roads, wharfs, landing sites etc.

5. Investigations of geological structures by means of 
drilling.

6. Setting up radio link, navigation lights, radio beacons 
and similar installations.
7. Building of larger warehouses.

8. Construction of buildings in connection with the
	activities described in items 1-7.

9. Building of cabins and other installations in connection
	with scientific activity or catching operations.

The obligation to report mentioned in the first paragraph
also applies to activities or enterprises which may cause
pollution or significant or lasting changes in the landscape
or the natural environment.

That which is stipulated in the first and second paragraphs
concerning the obligation to report applies correspondingly
when the activity is reorganized or extended, or when an
activity that has been closed down is resumed.

§ 7
Dispensation from the obligation to report

For areas where extensive activity has been or is to be
initiated, the Ministry may grant dispensation from the
obligation to report pursuant to § 6. The provisions in
Chapters I, II, II, V and VI apply unless decided otherwise.
The dispensation shall only apply to an exactly defined geo-
graphic area. It may apply to all activity subject to the
obligation to report or to parts of it, and specific conditions
may be laid down for the dispensation.

If the activity within the dispensation area is shown to cause
considerably more pollution or damage to the landscape or the
natural environment than was to be expected at the time the
dispensation was granted, the Ministry may stipulate new
conditions or in special cases withdraw the dispensation.
- 56 -

The Ministry may also withdraw the dispensation if the activity 
in the dispensation area is extensively or permanently reduced.

§ 8

Time limit for the report, concerning the information to be 
contained in the report and concerning administrative procedure

The report described in § 6 shall be sent to the Governor at 
the latest one year before it is intended to start the activity 
or enterprise. The Ministry may accept a shorter time limit 
in the individual case. The report shall contain information 
on the location of the work site, the kind of work to be carried 
out, the size of the labour force, arrangements for supply of 
water and food, excavation or placing of material, road and 
wharf facilities, as well as other transport conditions and the 
like. The report shall further contain information on the 
effects of the intended activity from the point of view of 
pollution, as well as other effects on the landscape and the 
natural environment.

The Governor prepares the case and may, in the course of the 
administrative procedures, collect the additional information 
which he may find necessary and conduct investigations at the 
site.

§ 9

Requirement for additional information, for investigations 
and postponement of the activity

The Ministry may demand additional information and have in-
vestigations conducted at the site. The Ministry may further 
more require that the person responsible for the planned act-
ivity shall undertake studies or shall pay for any investigat-
or studies which the Ministry deems necessary concerning the 
environmental consequences of the activity.
If this is necessary in order to obtain adequate information,
or out of consideration for the necessary investigations or
studies, the Ministry may require that the start of the 'acti-
vity is postponed.

§ 10

Instructions concerning changes and special measures, and
Prohibition on activity

The Ministry may issue instructions concerning changes in the
reported plans and activity and concerning special measures
to prevent, limit or combat pollution and damage to the land-
scape or the natural environment as a result of the activity.
The Ministry may hereunder prescribe special rules for certain
kinds of work and rules for traffic in connection with the
activity.

The Ministry may totally prohibit activity which may damage
larger areas, areas with particular qualities of landscape,
unique geological, botanical or zoological features, or which
may cause extensive pollution of the soil, water or air.

§ 11

Instructions concerning changes in ongoing activity

If the activity is shown to cause much more extensive pollution
or damage to the landscape or natural environment, or pollution
or damage of another kind than was to be expected when the
report on the activity was considered, the Ministry may issue
new instructions or in special cases stop the activity com-
pletely.

If 5 years or more have passed since the Ministry received
the report, the Ministry may issue new instructions or the
prohibitions that are necessary out of consideration for the
conservation of the landscape or the natural environment.
-58-

When making the decision, reasonable consideration shall be 
given to the activity's needs so that it is not impeded 
unnecessarily.

Chapter IV  Rules governing all activity

§ 12
Measures against pollution
When, in connection with an activity, there arises danger of 
pollution which may damage or affect the natural environment, 
the person responsible for the activity shall arrange for 
measures to prevent this from occurring.  If such pollution 
has occurred, the person concerned shall initiate measures 
to stop, remove or limit its effect. The person responsible 
is also under obligation to implement measures to repair 
damage to the natural environment as a result of the pollution 
or the measures to combat the pollution.

The Governor may instruct the person responsible for the 
activity to implement measures in pursuance of the first 
paragraph within a given time limit.  If this injunction is 
not obeyed, the Governor may arrange for the measures to be 
initiated, and require the person responsible for the activity 
to cover the costs.

§ 13
Emergency measures against acute pollution

The Ministry may issue instructions stating that anyone con-
ducting an activity which may cause acute pollution shall 
provide for the necessary emergency services to prevent, 
detect, stop, remove and limit the effect of the pollution. 
It may be decided that the person responsible for the activity
-55-

shall submit the emergency plan for approval. Specific 
conditions may be laid down for approval of the emergency 
plan.

§ 14
Clean-up

When an activity, or part of an activity, is discontinued, 
all installations on the surface, all waste etc. shall be 
removed from the area, which as far as possible shall be 
restored to its original appearance.

If this provision is not complied with, the Ministry may issue 
instructions that special measures shall be carried out within 
a given time limit. If this injunction is not obeyed, the 
Ministry may arrange for clean-up of the area and require the 
person responsible for the activity to cover the costs.

The Ministry may require that security is provided to cover 
the costs of the clean-up. Such security may be required both 
before and after the activity has been started, or instructions 
have been issued concerning clean-up.

§ 15
The duty to inform in the case of an activity

It is the duty of the person responsible for an activity to 
ensure that all persons carrying out work in connection with 
the activity receive information about the general and special 
provisions and injunctions that apply.
-60-

§ 16

Order to stop the activity

The Ministry may, irrespective of previous decisions, stop 
the activity if:

a) the person conducting the activity violates the regulations 
or rules laid down in pursuance thereof, and the violation 
is a major one, or repeats itself or is permanent,

b) the requirement to provide security as mentioned in 
§ 14, third paragraph, is not complied with,

c) public officials with the authority to exercise supervisic.
and control are refused access to the area of activity.

Chapter V  Supervision and control

§ 17

The Governor shall exercise supervision and control

The Governor undertakes control and enforcement action to 
ensure that these regulations are complied with.

The Ministry may issue specific rules concerning the super-
visicn and control. The rules may stipulate that anyone 
conducting an activity shall pay a fee for the supervision 
or shall cover the costs.

§ 18

Access to the area of operations

Public officials with the authority to exercise supervision 
and control shall have complete access to the area of operation, 
including buildings and other installations.
-01-

§ 19

Order to temporarily stop the activity

If violation of these regulations or of instructions issued
in pursuance thereof, may cause damage or danger of damage to 
the natural environment, the Governor may temporarily stop the
activity.  The resolution to stop the activity shall be submitted
to the Ministry immediately, who shall settle the case as soon
as possible.  The Ministry may, in its settlement of the case,
make the decisions authorized by these regulations.

Chapter VI  Special rules

§ 20

Dispensation

The Ministry may in individual cases make exceptions to the
provisions in these regulations for scientific purposes or
when there is particular justification for so doing, and this
does not conflict with the intention of the regulations.

§ 21

Leisure cabins. Rules as to location etc.

In order to prevent the construction and use of leisure cabins
from unnecessarily disfiguring or damaging the natural environ-
ment, the Ministry may lay down rules for the location, construc-
tion, sale and use of such cabins and may in this connection
decide that the building of cabins shall be restricted to specific
areas.
§ 22

The duty to inform tourists etc.

Persons arranging excursions for purposes of recreation,
tourism, scientific expeditions etc. have a duty to make the
participants acquainted with these regulations and the provi-
sions issued in pursuance thereof.

§ 23

Punishment

Anyone wilfully or negligently violating these regulations
or regulations issued in pursuance of these regulations, shall
be punished by fines, cf. § 339 No 2 of the General Civil
Penal Code. Attempted violations and complicity are punished
in the same manner.

§ 24

The relation to older activity

The regulations also apply to activity started before the
regulations enter into force.

In the case of activity started in accordance with the
provisional regulations of 28 May 1971 concerning regulations
of intervention in the natural environment of Svalbard and
Jan Mayen, the injunctions issued and conditions stipulated
in pursuance of the regulations shall continue to apply.

Dispensations granted in pursuance of § 7, second paragraph,
of the provisional regulations shall continue to apply as
dispensation pursuant to § 7 in the present regulations.

§ 25

Entry into force

These regulations enter into force on 1 April 1984.
