TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                              XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                              XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
BRUXELLES                                                     1985
7-18 octobre                                                 10.10.85.

Item 11 of the agenda

TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS

(Information Paper submitted by the 
Delegation of the Federal Republic 
of Germany)
Information paper of the delegation of the
Federal Republic of Germany

The attached paper is a translation of the
information circular summarizing the recom-
mendations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings on Tourism and Non-Governmental
Expeditions for the use of the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Germany.
It is circulated to delegations for information
on the practise adopted by the Federal Republic
of Germany.
Listing of the reports to be made and assurances to be given by
Consultative Parties in connection with tourism and non-governmental
expeditions in the Antarctic

The following is a summary of recommendations IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9
and X-8 which have been adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties and concern tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarc-
tic. It relates exclusively to tours that are not sponsored by a Consultative
Party (e.g. privately organized visits by individual and groups of tourists
and private expeditions, as well as tours arranged by non-Consultative
Parties).

This form of presentation has been chosen in order to ensure a clear de-
scription of the contents of the respective measures to be taken by the
Federal Republic of Germany.

1.  Specific measures which always have to be taken where the individuals
and tour organizers concerned are in our sphere of influence  or our
territory is affected in any other way (e.g. tours organized  in or
proceeding from the Federal Republic of Germany):

    (A)  In relation to individuals and tour organizers

         NOTIFICATION that

         (a) The visit should be carefully and thoroughly planned and
that the individual or group should be self-sufficient
(decision taken at the Twelfth Consultative Meeting);

         (b) In the case of visits to a station final arrangements must
be made with that station between 24 and 72 hours in
advance of the expected time of arrival, and that
- 2 -

Visitors of a station must comply with any conditions which 
the station commander may stipulate for their safety or to 
safeguard scientific programmes;
(VI-7, sub-paragraphs 2 a, b)

(c)  Visitors must not enter Specially Protected Areas and must 
respect designated historic monuments;
(VI-7, sub-paragraph 2 c)

REQUEST that

(d)  Except in emergencies, only stations for which permission 
has been sought and granted be visited;
(VIII-9, sub-paragraph 2 a; IV-27)

(e)  Tourist groups be accompanied by guides with experience 
of Antarctic conditions, who are aware of the considera-
tions which underly the Agreed Measures for the Conser-
vation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and for the Protection 
of the Antarctic Environment;
(X-8, III)

(f)  In the case of expeditions, adequate insurance cover be 
carried against the risk of incurring financial charges or 
material losses;
(X-8, II sub-paragraph 2)

(g)  Except in emergencies, visitors land only within the Areas 
of Special Tourist Interest;
(VIII-9, sub-paragraph 2 b)

(As to date no list of such areas has been drawn up, this 
Recommendation is as yet not applicable.)
- 3 -

TRANSMISSION

(h) of the Statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant
Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty.
(VIII-9, sub-paragraph 1; X-8, 1)

Note: This text encompasses the points based on previous Rec-
ommendations; thus in order to fulfil the obligations described
under (a) to (h) it will be sufficient in practice to transmit this
text with a reference to the points (a), (e) and (f) which were
added later.

(B) In relation to other Consultative Parties

    (a) Transmission in advance to all other Consultative Parties,
    to the extent possible, of the information described in the
    annex to Recommendation VIII-6;
    (VI-7, sub-paragraph 3; VIII-6)

    (b) Inclusion of a corresponding final notification in the annual
    report on the exchange of information;
    (VIII-6)

    (c) Where a station is to be visited,
    notification of the State concerned as soon as possible
    through diplomatic channels;
    (IV-27, sub-paragraph 1)

(C) In general, it has to be verified and ensured that the purposes
and principles of the Antarctic Treaty and of the Recommenda-
tions are complied with.
(VI-7, sub-paragraph 1; VII-4, sub-paragraph 4)
- 4 -

11. Where the Federal Republic of Germany grants permission for visits 
to be made to one of its own stations

    (a)    Permission to be granted only if reasonable assurances are given 
           in advance of compliance with the provisions of the Treaty, the 
           Recommendations and the conditions applicable at the station to 
           be visited;
           (IV-27, sub-paragraph 3)

    (b)    Tour organizers to be required to submit a report on their 
           activities, which should include in particular:

           (i)     the name and nationality of the ship

           (ii)    the name of the captain

           (iii)   the itinerary of each separate cruise

           (iv)    the number of tourists accompanying each cruise

           (v)     the places and dates at which landings were made in the 
                   Antarctic Treaty Area, with the number of persons landed 
                   on each occasion;
                   (VIII-9, sub-paragraph 3)

    (c)    Require that the reports be submitted at the end of the season 
           to the Consultative Parties whose stations tourist groups have 
           visited, and to the next Consultative Meeting.
           (VIII-9, sub-paragraph 3)

111. Provision on request as promptly as possible of information regarding 
the conditions upon which the government would grant permission for 
tourist groups to visit stations which it maintains.
(IV-27, sub-paragraph 2)
- 5 -

IV.   Requests by expeditions for help or advice

Information of the Contracting Party where the expedition is being 
organized.
(X-8, II, first paragraph)

V.    Intended commercial overflights in Antarctica

Notification of commercial aircraft operators that the present level of 
tourist overflight activity

(a)    exceeds existing capabilities for air traffic control, communica-
       tions and search and rescue in the Antarctic,

(b)    may interfere with normal operational flights in support of expe-
       ditions engaged in ongoing scientific programmes in the 
       Antarctic,

(c)    exceeds the capacity of Antarctic operations of the Consultative 
       Parties to respond adequately to an unplanned emergency 
       landing.
(X-8, IV)
