TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

BRUXELLES

1985

7-18 octobre        ANT/XIII/INFO 8

Item 9 of the Agenda

Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment :
Environmental Impact Assessment in respect
of Ciros Drilling Project

Information paper submitted by the New Zealand
Delegation
- Information-Paper submitted by
the New Zealand delegation

Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment :
Environmental Impact Assessment  in respect
of Ciros Drilling Project

In accordance with Recommendation XII-3 and other relevant
recommendations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative meetings, the
New Zealand authorities prepared an Environmental Impact Asses-
sment in 1984 concerning a new scientific programme in Antarctica -
the CIROS Drilling Programme. The Assessment was circulated to
SCAR members at their 1984 meeting and at the Preparatory meeting
for the XIIIth Consultative Meeting in April 1985.

The paper is now  reissued as an information paper, together
with a summary. New Zealand would welcome comment or discussion on
the methodology adopted. It is believed that international discus-
sion of such procedures will help to ensure that the objectives
of the Antarctic Treaty and the recommendations adopted under
Article IX relating to the protection of the environment are
fulfilled.

1
NEW ZEALAND ANTARCTIC RESEARCH PROGRAMME

CENOZOIC INVESTIGATIONS IN THE WESTERN ROSS SEA (CIROS)


ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL

The CIROS project is a New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme project 
designed to obtain a record of the early history of the Antarctic Ice Sheet 
and the rise of the Transantarctic Mountains by offshore shallow drilling 
in McMurdo Sound.

An environmental appraisal was prepared for the project and circulated to 
members of the Antarctic Treaty at the preparatory meeting for the XIII 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  This report briefly summaries 
activities of the CIROS project for the 1984/85 field season and describes 
the implementation of controls contained in the environmental Appraisal.

FIELD ACTIVITIES AND RESULTS

The 1984/85 phase of the CIROS project commenced in late August 1984 when 
personnel were flown to Antarctica (Table 1).  It was found that the sea-ice 
in 1984 was thinner and more active than usual.  Uncertainty as to the 
stability of the sea-ice led to a decision in early October to forego 
drilling CIROS 1 in 1984 and move to thicker ice at the CIROS 2 site (Fig 1).

Fig 1.
The Longyear 44 drill rig was set up at CIROS 2 by October 10 and coring 
began on October 14.  Delays were caused through water pressure damage to 
the casing floats, but by November 8 granite basement rock was encountered 
at 166m below the sea floor, thus reaching the CIROS 2 target of basement 
rock.  The core obtained from the CIROS 2 site is still being analysed. 
Preliminary analysis of the core appears to represent 7 glacial advances 
over the last 4 million years, but dating of ash layers may indicate older 
material in the lower sections of the core.  A core description bulletin is 
in press and will be available from the Antarctic Research Centre, Victoria 
University, Private Bag, Wellington by October 1985.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS AND THEIR APPLICATION

Operational components for the CIROS project were described in the appraisal 
under three headings.

    Access and ice roads
    Campsite
    Drillsite.

Access and Ice Roads

More than fifty return trips were made between Scott Base and Butter Point. 
Difficulties were encountered through the sea-ice being more active than 
usual.  Consequently sea-ice cracks were a greater hazard than normal.  A 
tractor vehicle was temporarily immobilised when it broke through the edge 
of a sea-ice crack.  Otherwise the controls for activity on access and ice 
roads outlined in the Appraisal were successfuly implemented.

The Campsite

A temporary camp was erected on the Bowers Piedmont Glacier in 1984/85 to 
support the CIROS project.  Waste disposal was undertaken fully in 
accordance with project instructions.  Human wastes were initially disposed 
of in 'long drop' holes.  Snow was backfilled and compacted in both these 
areas after the holes were filled.  A trench was also used as the latrine 
pit from late October.  Of the two types of disposal, the trench method was 
the easier to prepare and maintain.  Three urinal pits were also used during 
the camp's occupation.


Wastes from the ablution building and galley passed along a heated drain to 
a soak pit.  Additional insulation was fitted around the bend outside the 
galley in early September to counter freezing problems in this section of 
the drain.

Combustible wastes were removed from the camp and burnt in drums on the 
sea-ice.  All incinerator drums were brought back to the camp area prior 
to shut-down of the camp.

Non-combustible wastes from the galley, and mess were placed in bags and 
disposed of regularly at Scott Base.

Other non-combustible wastes such as used filters, tins, and general camp 
rubbish were placed in drums and also disposed of at Scott Base.

Three 44-gallon drums of waste oils were returned to Scott Base at the end 
of CIROS 84.  This material included used motor oil, and dirty diesel fuel 
and petrol.  Fuels were safely stored and handled.  Spillage associated with 
fueling vehicles or plant was very minor.
CENOZOIC INVESTIGATIONS IN THE WESTERN ROSS SEA (CIROS)

1984/85

ENVIRONMENTAL APPRAISAL AND CONTROLS

THE PROJECT SETTING

OBJECTIVES AND BACKGROUND OF CIROS

The CIROS project (Cenozoic Investigations in the Western Ross Sea) proposes to investigate the sedimentary, climatic and tectonic history of the western Ross region over the last sixty million years by means of geophysical surveys and shore drilling from sea-ice.

Geophysical surveys were completed in 1982/83 and during 1983/84.  In 1984/85 it is proposed to drill two sites off Butter Point, New Harbour.  Two further sites 
1 be cored off Cape Roberts, Granite Harbour, possibly in 1986/87.

Western McMurdo Sound currently provides the southernmost accessible stratigraphic record for the Cenozoic era, the period which is believed to have seen the et of present glaciation in Antarctica.  The cores obtained by CIROS will make ajor international contribution to understanding the tectonic history of antarctica, the development of Southern Ocean circulation, and the history of the arctic Ice Sheet.

CIROS builds on research and operational experience gained by NZARP during international Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP) drilling phases in 1972/73, 
3/74, 1974/75 and 1975/76, and on the NZARP McMurdo Sound Sediments and Tectonics iy (MSSTS) drilling phase in 1979/80.

SCOPE OF THE APPRAISAL

This appraisal focuses on drilling, scientific field work, and support .vities for the CIROS project during 1984/85.  It is designed as a document .ssist operations as well as assess environmental sensitivities.  The appraisal been undertaken in accordance with Antarctic Treaty Recommendations XII-3 and 
-11 and its annex detailing a code of conduct for Antarctic expeditions and ion activities.  The structure of the appraisal is such that it can be applied, 
appropriate modifications in light of differing circumstances, to CIROS ations in later years and to environmental appraisals of future scientific rammes of a similar nature.

The appraisal describes firstly the environmental setting.  A feature of the s project is that all field work will take place on annual sea-ice or glacier situated in a marine environment.  The appraisal then examines the project r operational headings of assess and ice roads, the campsite and its operations, the drillsite and its operations.  Under each operational heading potential cts are discussed and control measures outlined.

ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES

CIROS is operationally similar to DVDP Phase V (1975/76).  A major ronmental appraisal was prepared for DVDP V (Parker et al 1975).  This appraisal ed the basis for environmental considerations and constraints employed during NZARP MSSTS project and is relevant also to this appraisal.

.../2
3.

As it is proposed to drill at the CIROS 1 site in 1986 the Butter Point Camp 
was sealed and left in place for reopening in 1986. In January 1986 the camp
-- will be checked in preparation for commencing operations in August 1986 for 
drilling at the CIROS 1 site.

The Drillsite

Drilling operations were undertaken successfuly at the CIROS 2 site on 
annual sea-ice. Initially difficulties were experienced with the failure 
of the drill string floats through water pressure which in turn caused the 
drill string to sage and casing to break at the sea pad during the spudding-in 
phase.  The problem was corrected, however, by welding casing and adding 
more floats at a higher level in the water column.

Soft sediments encountered in the upper part of the hole caused more problems 
than expected with hole caving.  The difficulty was overcome by casing and 
wall cake mud additives.  Core recovery was increased in the oldest hardest 
strata with a total recovery of 67% for the hole.

Once basement had been reached in the drilling, an unexpected severe wind 
storm caused damage to the drill site buildings.  After the storm the hole 
could not be re-entered sufficiently satisfactorily for the planned electric 
logging programe to proceed.

On the completion of drilling, drilling fines, comprising rock cuttings 
and a biodegradable Potassium chloride - Polymere drilling fluid, were 
removed to a site nearer the sea-ice edge for disposal during the sea-ice 
break-up.  All other equipment and material were removed to Butter Point 
for storage or further removal to Scott Base.  Burnable wastes were disposed 
of at the site.

CONCLUSION

The 1984/85 phase of the CIROS project successfully completed the second 
half of its objectives by drilling to basement at the CIROS 2 site. 
Environmental controls outlined in the published operations plan were adhered 
to.  Preliminary results of the analyses of core will be available in 
October 1985.

17 September 1985
-2-

Monitoring of proposed drilling sites off Butter Point and Cape Roberts 
has been underway since 1980/81. This appraisal draws also on extensive multi-
disciplinary research carried out in the Butter Point area over the last twenty 
years.

1.4     ALTERNATIVES

        Alternatives to undertaking CIROS include:

a.      Not undertaking the drilling and thus not obtaining core.  This would result 
        in abandoning a major aim of New Zealand's Antarctic research over the last 
        ten years, namely, an understanding of the growth and history of the 
        Antarctic ice sheet and the Cenozoic fragmentation of Gondwanaland.  This 
        aim is critical not only to a better knowledge of New Zealand's geological 
        setting, but also to the inter-relationship of southern hemisphere continents, 
        and world glaciology and climate.

b.      Postponing the project until such time as a similar programme can be under-
        taken by a drillship possibly at a location other than McMurdo Sound.  This 
        alternative is not presently feasible under the auspices of NZARP.

2.      ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1     THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

2.1.1   Climate

        The McMurdo Sound climate is influenced by mid-latitude weather impinging 
on a continent of cold dry air, and by infrequent cyclonic disturbances travelling 
down into the Ross Sea. Weather patterns vary both between years and within years, 
but storm incidents tend to increase in autumn and spring.

        a.  Air Temperatures

Air temperatures were recorded in 1979 (Table 1) at the MSSTS drillsite about 
five kilometres north of the proposed CIROS 1 drillsite (Sinclair 1982).

A more comprehensive record of temperature data at Scott Base, Ross Island 
for the years 1957-79 (Sinclair 1982) can be extrapolated to provide information 
of likely temperature extremes in the Butter Point region (Table 2).

Temperatures of sites on sea-ice, such as the CIROS sites, are characterised 
by lower mean and minimum temperatures resulting from frequent formation of surface 
based inversions.  Strong winds destroy this inversion (Sinclair 1982).

TabZe 1

MSSTS 'DRILLSITE' (Scott Base temperatures in brackets)

 
PERIOD                                     
                                                    
15-30 Oct '79   -25.8(-24.3)   -22.3(-23.7)   -18.9(-22.6)   -20.1(-23.3)   -21.8(-23.5)
1-28 Nov '79    -12.4(-12.2)   -9.8 (-11.0)   -6.6 (-9.7)    -7.2 (-10.0)   -9.0 (-10.7)

.../3
-3-

Table 2

TEMPERATURE DATA (°C) FOR SCOTT BASE (1957-79)

SCOTT BASE  JAN   FEB   MAR   APR   MAY   JUN   JUL   AUG   SEP   OCT   NOV   DEC   YEAR
Mean Temp.   -4.9  -10.8  -20.4  -24.2  -27.4  -26.2  -29.4  -31.0  -28.1  -22.7  -12.0  -5.4  -20.2
Mean Daily                                                                              
Max.         -1.4  -7.2   -15.9  -18.9  -21.2  -20.1  -23.1  -24.3  -21.9  -17.6  -7.6  -2.0  -15.2
Mean Daily                                                                              
Min.         -8.5  -14.3  -24.9  -29.5  -33.7  -32.2  -35.7  -37.6  -34.2  -28.4  -16.4  -8.9  -25.4
Mean Mthly                                                                              
Max.         +3.6  -0.9   -6.3   -8.3   -9.6   -10.5  -11.0  -11.7  -11.7  -7.1   -1.7  +2.7  +4.1
Mean Mthly                                                                              
Min.         -14.9  -23.1  -36.8  -41.8  -45.5  -44.1  -48.1  -50.3  -46.9  -40.7  -25.9  -15.5  -52.6
Extreme                                                                                 
Max          +6.8  +5.0   -2.0   -4.6   +0.2   -4.8   -4.2   -2.7   -3.3   -0.2   +1.3  +5.8  +6.8
Extreme                                                                                 
Min          -19.7  -30.2  -44.6  -50.4  -53.2  -52.2  -54.2  -56.6  -57.0  -52.0  -37.2  -22.8  -57.0
Mean Daily                                                                              
Range        7.1   7.1    9.0    10.6   12.5   12.1   12.6   13.3   12.3   10.8   8.8   6.9   10.2

b. Wind

A strong southerly or southeasterly is the major wind in the McMurdo Sound.
"Herbies", as these southerly storms are sometimes known, are usually accompanied
by blowing and falling snow, and occasionally persist for days at a time.  The
strong winds are usually associated with cyclonic disturbances to the east of Ross
Island. The wind is usually squally at its onset rising rapidly to maximum speed,
then decreasing gradually over an hour or so, or until the next squall (Thompson
1972). "Herbies" are more frequent and severe during the winter period, March
to October, but can occur at any time of the year.

Recordings at the MSSTS Drillsite from September to November 1979 seem to
indicate that western McMurdo Sound is less windy than the east of the Sound.

Table 3

AVERAGE NO. OF DAYS WITH GUSTS OVER 33 KTS AT SCOTT BASE

JAN  FEB  MAR  APR  MAY  JUN  JUL  AUG  SEP  OCT  NOV  DEC
1.0  2.8  9.7  10.7 12.3 11.4 11.9 11.9 10.1 11.4  5.7  2.1

.../4.
-4-

FIG. 1
Wind rose for the MSSTS 'Drillsite' Sept/Oct 1979.
The number in the centre circle is the percentage of calms.

MSSTS'DRILLSITE'


                  N
                  ↑
                  
                  23


% 
0     5    10

Table 4
Wind speed statistics for the MSSTS Drillsite 1 September through November 1979.
All speeds are in knots; Scott Base mean wind speeds for identical periods are
shown for comparison.

SITE       | 'DRILLSITE'          
-----------|-------------
Time       | 0000  0600  1200  1800
Mean Speed | 5.0   4.5   5.5   6.1
Scott Base |       10.7 (0900)     
% Winds >10kt |       16         
>20kt      |       5          

c. Cloud

Comparing MSSTS Drillsite cloud data with concurrent Scott Base data, it
ppears that cloud is more frequent and lower towards Ross Island.  The decreased
loudiness in the west could be the result of more frequent exposure to dry westerly
possibly katabatic) winds (Sinclair 1982).

Table 5
Percentage occurrence of the five states of sky and of low visibility
at the MSSTS Drillsite Sept/Oct 1979.

CLOUD COVER  | VISIBILITY       
-------------|-------------
SKC  SCT BKN OVC X | ≤ 5km ≤1km ≤100m
28   28  16  21  4 | 2.3   0.9    0    

The explanations of the terms for state of sky reporting are as
follows: SKC - Clear Sky, SCT - Scattered cloud; less than half the
sky covered by cloud, BKN - Broken cloud; half or more of the sky
covered by cloud, but not all, OVC - Overcast, X - State of sky not
discernible.

.../5
2.1.2 Oceanography and Sea State

a. Tidal Range

Tidal movements were recorded at the MSSTS Drillsite from 1 to 25 September
9 and 1 to 24 November 1979.  The maximum tidal amplitude was 0.89m.  The main
al variations fell within periods of about 24.20 and 12.20 hours (Pyne et al
1).  The tidal amplitude at the MSSTS Drillsite correlate with those near Scott
e (Heath 1971).

b. Bathymetry Surface Currents and Major Physiographic Divisions

Water depths in the vicinity of CIROS 1 drillsite have been measured
are shown in Figure 2.

FIG. 2

Map of McMurdo Sound, showing bathymetry, surface currents and major
physiographic divisions (names informal).  Bathymetry is simplified
from a compilation by Ward, Barrett and Pyne in Barrett (1982).  Inset
shows texture of sea floor samples collected from selected sites in
McMurdo Sound.

KEY
 Ice-free coast
 Approximate line
 of October ice
 breakout
 Surface
 currents

LOCALITY MAP

.../6
-6-

Current flows comprise a general northerly drift up the western side of 
McMurdo Sound (Figure 2) superimposed on a tidal current (Littlepage 1965; Heath 
1971).  Current measurements at the MSSTS Drillsite in 1978 indicated velocities 
of less than -2.7cms-1 (Barrett et al 1979).

Littlepage (1965) summarised yearly oceanographic conditions in southern 
McMurdo Sound sites 40kms from Butter Point (Table 6).

Light penetration is affected by in situ sea-ice which in turn is influenced 
by physical factors and biological factors such as the growth of epontic flora.

Table 6

SUMMARY OF YEARLY CONDITIONS IN SOUTHERN MCMURDO SOUND

       TEMP.   SALIN.    OXY.    SIG.t    pH    PHOS.    SIL.

Mean   -1.87    34.70    6.72   27.96   7.84    1.82    44.8
Std. dev.  0.09    0.29    0.45    0.15   0.09    0.33    1.69
Minimum    -2.15   33.96    6.08   27.36   7.63    1.12    40.5
Maximum    -1.40    34.99    8.59   28.19   8.09    2.56    48.6

2.1.3  Ice

The CIROS campsite is situated on glacier ice of the Bowers Piedmont 
glacier. CIROS 1 and 2 drillsites are situated on annual fast sea-ice.

a. Glacier Ice

Glaciological data on the Bowers Piedmont Glacier is sparse.  Accummulation 
and ablation are believed to be in equilibrium.  Glacier velocity near Butter Point 
was monitored from 1980-1982. No nett movement was measurable.  The glacier in the 
vicinity of Butter Point is believed to be floating and calved in 1980, leaving a 
100m long berg trapped in sea-ice during the 1980-81 summer.

b. Sea-Ice

Annual sea-ice of McMurdo Sound begins forming as early as late March.  Rare 
breakouts and refreezing in early August have been recorded (1975).  In some years 
the sea-ice does not break out at all at Butter Point.

Sea-ice thickens rapidly in August-September.  Recordings made at the MSSTS 
drillsite are shown in Figure 3 (Pyne & Waghorn 1980).  Ice thickness measured in 
6 holes in the same area was found to be within 20mm.

FIG. 3  Sea-Ice Thickness Measurements August-September 1979





.../7
-7-

Three seasons movements of sea-ice to 20km north-east of Butter Point have
tified movement zones parallel to the coast and the sea-ice pressure ridge
ems. Both magnitude and rate of movement are greater in the more eastward zones
h are closer to the October-November breakout area.  Rates of movement increase
id November and shear cracks tending southeast from Butter Point and the Strand
ines often form about this time (Pyne 1984).

FIG. 4

Fast sea-ice movement vectors northeast of Butter Point for November-December
periods in: 1980, 1981, 1982. Vectors are graduated to show the number of
days between successive measurements.  Zones of movement are identified which
parallel the coast, sea-ice pressure ridges and breakout patterns.  Both
magnitude and movement rates are greater in the more eastward zones.


                                              1         |         1         |         1
                                     45'                 30'                 15'
                                                    zone III
                                                    
                                                    MSSTS1
                                     zone II          2
                                                    
                                                    zone I
                                              +             4             +
                                     77°35'          Nov          27 Nov          1
                                                          
                                              1             2             3
                                     15 Dec          3 Dec         24 Nov
                                                          
                                     16 Nov          5 Dec         3 Dec
                                                          
                                     3 Dec           17 Nov        3 Dec
                                                          
                                     3 Dec           
                                              0             1km          10
                                                         scale
                                                    Sea Ice Movement Vectors
                                              0             1cm          5
                                                    map scale

2.1.4  Sea Floor Terrain

The sea floor terrain of the CIROS 1 drillsite was surveyed prior to the MSSTS
amme. The sea floor around the site has a very subdued topography with an
ximately north-south strike and gentle dip to the east.  Figure 4 shows bathymetry
lope profiles.  The texture of the sea floor sediments is moderately sorted medium
arse grained sand with a mixture of gravel typically from 0.3 to 0.8% and of mud
3 to 13%.  The gravel fraction includes both granitic and basaltic stones, though
atter which include flow rocks and tuffs, are dominant.  The sand is basaltic
ett 1979).

.../8
-8-

FIG. 5

Fast sea-ice movement rates for the measurements of 1980, 1981, 1982.
Rates of movement increase in mid November, about the time when DVDP
15 and MSSTS-1 drill holes were terminated.  Also, soon after this
time sea-ice shear cracks sometimes form off Butter Point and the
Strand Moraines.

                                         Initiation of Butter Pt. & Strand
                                         Moraines shear crack.

                                         Initiation of Butter Pt.
                                         shear crack.

          MSSTS 1 1979 Terminated
          DVDP 15 1975 Terminated

           10      20     30       10      20
     November                   December

.2    BIOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT

While the area encompassing the CIROS 1 and 2 drilling operations has not
been subjected to detailed biological research, much information is available from
xtensive studies conducted near Hut Point Peninsula, eastern McMurdo Sound, and
rom McMurdo Sound generally.

.../9
-9-

In general, the waters in the Ross Sea in summer months are characterised 
by high levels of primary productivity. In McMurdo Sound, Bunt (1964) found that 
primary production under the annual sea-ice was much higher in the eastern part 
of the Sound than in the western part.

2.2.1 Benthos

The benthic community off Butter Point has not been subject to intensive research. 
Studies near Hut Point show the benthic community between 33m and 60m is composed 
primarily of many species of sponges and their various asteroid and molluscan predators 
(Dayton, Robilliard & Paine 1970). In water between 200-700m assemblages comprise 
polychaete worms, cellulare bryozoans, sponges and various eciinoderms, including 
numerous crinoids.

2.2.2 Phytoplankton and Zooplankton

Bunt (1964) recognised at least three distinct communities of algae in McMurdo 
Sound. A diatom community of a limited range of species which appeared in early 
December was succeeded in late December or early January by a second assemblage 
of diatoms and high concentrations of Phaeocystis, which in turn was replaced after four 
weeks by a diverse diatom assemblage including species typical of more northern Antarctic 
waters.

In McMurdo Sound zooplankton are dominated by Copepoda; Amphipoda, Ostracoda 
and Pteropoda are also present. The dominant species of krill in McMurdo Sound and 
the Ross Sea is Euphausia crystallorophias. In sub-ice water, the greater proportion 
of zooplankton is concentrated between 200-300m of water, with a gradual decrease in 
content towards the surface.

2.2.3 Epontic Community

Ice algal communities occur in the lower 20cm of sea-ice. Diatoms dominate 
the community and up to 32 species have been recorded in addition to one dinoflagellate 
and several flagellates. High biomass values as measured by chlorophyll a concentrations 
and cell numbers have been recorded.

Algal biomass varies widely depending on the time of year, thickness of ice 
and amount of snow cover.

2.2.4 Marine Birds

There are no bird breeding sites in New Harbour although skuas and occasional 
Adelie and Emperor penguins do frequent the area later in the summer as the sea-ice edge 
retreats. Skuas have been reported nesting at Marble Point and the Strand Moraines 
(Spellerberg 1967).

2.2.5 Marine Mammals

Weddell seals migrate into McMurdo Sound annually, a first influx of pregnant 
seals occurring in October and a second influx of the main population in November - 
December, reaching peak numbers in early February. Small numbers of Weddell seals are 
likely to be found in the October - November period at sporadic periods along the sea-ice 
tide cracks from the Koettlitz Glacier northwards. Concentrations of over 200 adults 
have been recorded near the Strand Moraines in November (Ross, Testa, Winter, Kuechle and 
Reichle 1982). A group of up to 20 adults has been observed off Butter Point in late 
November.

2.2.6 Other Species

Information on squid and fin fish must be extrapolated from general McMurdo Sound 
data. Observations of coastal and deep water benthic fishes are recorded in De Witt's 
(1971) distribution maps. Perciform fishes of the suborder Notothenioidei are the 
dominant fishes with at least sixteen species identified (De Vries & Eastman 1981).

.../10
-10-

3.    PRESENT USE OF THE AREA

The New Harbour area contains no permanent bases.  A temporary survival hut has been located at Butter Point since 1979.  In 1957 Butter Point was
investigated as a site for Scott Base but rejected.  The area is commonly traversed by research field parties and by helicopters.  Approximately one
to two field parties per year operate in the Butter Point area.

In February 1982 and February 1984 the tourist vessel Lindblad Explorer
visited New Harbour.
-11-
4.    CIROS OPERATIONAL COMPONENTS

For the purposes of this appraisal, the CIROS project is examined under
three headings:

- Access and ice roads
- The campsite
- The Drillsite

Each component is given a brief description. Possible impacts are identified
and all means of control are listed. The control mechanisms form an integral part
of the CIROS Operations Plan, and are to be observed by all participants in the
CIROS project.

4.1   ACCESS AND ICE ROADS

A flagged route is to be established from Scott Base across the annual sea-ice
to Butter Point, to the drillsite, and between the drillsite and Butter Point. Details
are provided in the CIROS Operations Plan under Section 6.2, Section 9 and Annex K.

4.1.1 Possible Environmental Hazards and Control/Disposal Measures

Vehicle operations will result in very limited carbon release into the
atmosphere. Fuel or lubricant leakage from vehicles is possible but would be both
a limited and temporary impact. The loss of a vehicle through accident is improbable
provided measures outlined in the NZARP Operations Manual and the CIROS Operations Plan,
Section 9 and Annex K, are adhered to.

All flags and poles will be removed once access roads cease to be used. All
measures relating to vehicle operations and safety detailed in NZARP Operations
Manual and CIROS Operations Plan will be observed.

FIG. 6

McMurdo Sound: Scott Base, Butter Point Campsite, CIROS 1 and 2.
-12-

4.2  THE CAMPSITE

A base camp for the New Harbour drilling phase of CIROS was established at
Butter Point at 77°38'S, 164°20'E on the glacier ice of the Bowers Piedmont Glacier.
The site has been chosen because it provides the closest "permanent" site with rapid
access to proposed drilling areas.  Being sited on permanent ice has thus enabled
prior erection of buildings and increased safety margins in the event of late season
sea-ice movement.

The base camp has been built to provide comfortable accomodation for twenty
six persons.  It comprises a combined galley-mess-lounge, ten two berth sleeping
buildings, one six berth sleeping building, a refuge hut, generator shed, ablutions
building, food store, and toilet.

A staff of three persons will service the campsite. Scientists and drillers
will live at the campsite and commute daily to the drillsite. Drilling operations
will consist of three eight hour shifts.

Power generation is provided by a 40Kw Caterpillar D333 generator. All buildings
are heated with electric heaters.  In addition a diesel-fired unit has been installed
for standby purposes in the mess. Water supply is provided by an icemelter drawing
heat from the generator exhaust system.

At various times during the project vehicles will be operating at the base
camp. There are two wheeled vehicles, two tractor vehicles, a tracked personnel
carrier and a motor toboggan assigned to the CIROS project.

4.2.1  Possible Environmental Hazards and Control/Disposal Measures

a.  Wastes

Human wastes will be disposed of by a long-drop system into a pit created
by explosives or other means. The ablation and accumulation of the glacier is
believed to be in equilibrium. Human wastes, although frozen, would ultimately be
biodegradable. The campsite area will at some time calve off. Any pit containing
human wastes will not be filled greater than two thirds full, and then will be
covered over.

Water and liquid wastes from the ablution and mess buildings will be piped
by heated drain to a point approximately 10m towards the ice edge.

Non-combustible wastes and all plastic and rubber wastes will be removed
from the campsite to Scott Base. All such wastes, including items such as cans
will be placed in a designated container situated near the mess hut. The container
will be returned periodically to Scott Base.

Combustible wastes, excluding plastic and rubber wastes, will be bagged in
paper rubbish bags and removed from the campsite to a specially designated incineration
site on the sea-ice. Incineration of combustible wastes from the campsite and the
drillcamp is to take place only at this site.

b.  Atmospheric Discharge

Carbon particles and carbon dioxide gas will be discharged into the atmosphere
by vehicle and generator operation and waste incineration. Effects will be insignificant
and disposed by wind.

.../13
-13-

c.  Fuel Spillage

All fuel and lubricants at the campsite will be stored in designated areas: 
diesel fuel near the generator building and Mogas beyond the camp perimeter (refer
CIROS Operations Plan, Annex G and Annex P).  Fuel is stored in 44 gallon drums.
Diesel fuel holdings should not drop below approximately 30 drums and Mogas not below 
10 drums.  Fueling of generators and vehicles will take place only at the designated 
sites, with the exception of fueling of a 44 gallon diesel heater tank attached to 
the Mess Hut.  The heater will be used in emergency only.  All personnel are to 
exercise upmost care when undertaking fueling both for safety reasons and to avoid 
spillage.

d.  Fire

Fire safety controls are listed in the CIROS Operation Plan, Annex I.  All 
remains of any fire are to be removed from the site to Scott Base, or bulldozed onto 
the annual sea-ice.

e.  Surface Alterations

Some small scale bulldozing, berming and use of vehicles will occur at the 
campsite.  Ablation, accumulatiom and. wind-deposited snow will cause these affects 
to disappear within one year.  CIROS vehicles will not be permitted to operate on 
the glacier beyond the campsite perimeter, fueling area or access road without good 
cause.

4.2.2  Site Refurbishment

When the camp is moved, every item is to be removed from the site.  If deemed 
necessary, the site is to be graded level with the surrounding glacier surface.

If sections of buildings or bearers are frozen in, they are to be removed by 
tractor or removed during the January ablation period.

The campsite is to be monitored until 1986 to detect whether any materials 
buried, either intentionally or unintentionally, surface.  Any material which does 
surface will be either removed or reburied.

.../14
-14-

4.3     THE DRILLSITE

All drillsites for the CIROS project will be situated on annual sea-ice.
The precise location of drillsites is to be determined by the Science Manager as
set out in the CIROS Operations Plan, Annex C.  The general location of CIROS 1
and 2 drillsites are shown in Figure 6.  Drilling in 1984/85 will take place on
a sea-ice platform more than 1.5m thick at CIROS 1 , a site approximately 12
kilometres northeast of Butter Point.  A decision whether the CIROS 2 drillsite
will be occupied will depend on progress at the first site and will be made no later
than 1 November 1984.

The drillcamp comprises a drillshack and rig, mud hut, mess and emergency
accommodation, science laboratory, storage hut, generator building and stored
drilling equipment.  The drillcamp is not designed for permanent occupation.
Three shifts of drillers and science support personnel will commute daily from
the Butter Point campsite in eight hour shifts.  Activities at the drillcamp include
the drilling operation, described below, and immediate description and sampling
of core (see CIROS Operations Plan, Annex C).

Power generation at the drillcamp will be provided by a 15Kw unit.  Vehicles
will operate regularly between the drillcamp and Scott Base and the Butter Point campsite.

The drilling programme will use the "Longyear series Q" wire line diamond
coring system.  Core is drilled with diamond impregnated bits and recovered by
retrieving the inner core tube through the drill string with the drill rods remaining
in the hole until the bit needs to be replaced.  The drill used will be a Longyear
model "44" which has been mounted on a specially constructed drill sledge for sea-
ice drilling.

The programme involves drilling from the annual fast sea-ice (minimum thickness
required 1.5m) in water depths of 200m for CIROS 1 and 250m for CIROS 2.  Because
the drilling system, was designed for use on land, a special drilling programme,
including the use of a sea water based polymer mud system, is required for offshore
drilling.  The main steps of this programme are summarised below.  The drilling
system is sketched in Figure 7.

(a) The drilling sledge will be located and oriented at the selected site
on smooth sea-ice.  Wooden bearers may be used to spread the load on
the ice surface.

(b) The drilling hut will be erected around and on the sledge and its
heating system set up.  A heated hut for processing mud used in the
circulation system will be set up nearby.

(c) Drill rod and other equipment and stores will then be assembled by
the drilling hut.

(d) An access hole in the sea-ice for drilling will then be cut by
chain saw.  This will be kept open with heated sea water or air.

(e) The support casing will then be lowered into the water column.  This
has a heavy steel sea pad at the base which rests on the sea floor as
an anchor.  This may be washed down to a firm substrate if necessary.
The support casing is maintained under tension and is approximately
neutrally buoyant using a system of floats and weights.  It has fitted
a tide compensating telescopic joint near the sea-ice surface.

(f) The first downhole casing (HW:OD = 114.3mm ID = 101.6mm) is then
lowered through the water column support casing and rotated into lithified
sediment below the sea floor.  This is expected to go down approximately

.../15
-15-

20m below the sea floor.  This should prevent leakage of mud or 
formation fluids at the sea floor.  This casing can be advanced deeper 
if necessary later in the programme.

(g) The coring can then begin with HQ drill rod (core diameter 63.5mm, 
hole diameter 96mm).  HQ coring is expected to proceed down to 150m 
sub-bottom.  At this depth the drill bit will be replaced with a 
casing bit and the HQ drill rod will then be used as casing.

(h) Coring will continue below the HQ casing to the target depth of 500m 
sub-bottom using HQ drill rod (diameter 47.6mm, hole diameter 75.7mm).

The drilling fluid to be used to remove the chips from the drilling bit and 
also to control formation fluids encountered in. the hole is a seawater 
chloride-polymer system.  The polymer is a natural xanthan gum which is non-toxic 
and biodegradable: potassium chloride, a natural constituent of sea water, is used 
to lower the freezing point of the drilling fluid.  The polymer is used to vary 
the weight and viscosity of the mud.  The following non-toxic biodegradable 
additives may also be used:

      (a) Caustic Soda (for pH control)
      (b) Sodium sulphide (an oxygen scavenger)
      (c) Cellulose viscosifer
      (d) Lubricant additive (a blend of biodegradable additives surfactants 
and polymers)

4.3.1  Possible Environmental Hazards and Control/Disposal Measures

4.3.1.1  Drillcamp Operations

a.  Wastes

Human wastes will be disposed of by a long-drop system into a pit cut into 
the sea-ice.  As personnel will not be living permanently at the drillsite, the 
amount of human waste is not anticipated to be great.  Liquid wastes will be emptied 
onto the sea-ice to freeze.  All non-combustible wastes and plastic and rubber wastes 
will be removed from the site and returned to the waste container at the Butter 
Point campsite.  All combustible wastes, excluding plastic and rubber wastes will 
be bagged in paper rubbish bags, removed from the site to the designated area for 
incineration along with the Butter Point campsite combustible wastes.

b.  Atmospheric Discharge

Small scale discharge of carbon particles and carbon dioxide gas will occur 
from the operation of vehicles, generator and drill motor, but they are regarded as 
insignificant.

c.  Fuel Spillage

All fuels and lubricants at the campsite will be stored at single designated 
sites to be determined by the Drilling Supervisor in accordance with safe handling 
and operating procedures.  Diesel fuels will be stored separately from petrol fuels. 
Holdings of diesel should not drop below 10 drums.  Fuels will be stored in 44 gallon drums.  Controls governing fuel 
usage and operations applying at the Butter Point campsite will apply at the drillsite.

d.  Fire

Fire safety controls are listed in CIROS Operations Plan, Annex I.

.../16
-16-

                  Longyear 46
                  drill rig

                  Drill hut

                  Drill sledge

                  Pump

                  Mud hut

                  A.R.Pyne 86

and
Drill string
mud return
Control Gland
on HW casing
Tension casing with
counter-weights

SEA     ICE

Tide Compensator
telescopic joint

Floats
~120m deep

Sea water support casing

Weights

Sea Pad

SEA     FLOOR

FIG. 7
CIROS DRILLING in ANTARCTICA
Offshore sea ice platform
200-250 m water depth range
-17-

4.3.1.2 Drilling Operations

a. Hydrocarbons

Hydrocarbons are found in most thick sedimentary sequences, though not always
in commercial quantities. They can represent a hazard, both to the environment through
accidental release and to drilling safety in the case of a blowout, but only if they 
are encountered in pockets or pools and if they are under a pressure too great to be
contained by the drilling system. A general discussion of hazards and procedures
for avoiding or containing them can be found in the Manual on Pollution, Prevention
and Safety in connection with JOIDES Deep Sea Drilling Programme (2nd Revised Edition,
1972).

The first 450m of CIROS 1 and all of CIROS 2 will be drilled in essentially
the same marine glacial sequence cored in nearby MSSTS-1 in 1979 (Pyne & Waghorn,
1980; Barrett and McKelvey, 1981). MSSTS-1, which was drilled to 230m sub-bottom
before equipment failure terminated the hole, encountered no oil or gas, though
DVDP 15, 10km to the northeast, found a small pocket of methane about 64m sub-bottom.
The gas was exhausted after a few minutes and analyses showed it to be of shallow
biochemical origin (Barrett et al 1976). Some gas (mainly methane but with a little
ethane) was also encountered in holes drilled to depths of about 300m in the Ross Sea
by the "Glomar Challenger" (Hayes et al 1975). In none of these occurrences was the
gas overpressured. Gas occurrences similar to these may be found in CIROS 1 or
CIROS 2.

The lower part of CIROS 1 from 450-500m (its maximum depth) will be coring
in unknown strata, the scientific aim of the project. Sonic velocity measurements
from MSSTS-1 suggest that the sequence has been buried deeper than at present
(Barrett and McKelvey, 1981) and, hence, has experienced higher temperature, possibly
approaching those required for hydrocarbon generation. Figure 8 shows the temperature
and age relationships of known hydrocarbon generating strata. Our estimate for the
strata at the bottom of CIROS 1 is also plotted assuming they were once buried to
1.5km and that the geothermal gradient measured at MSSTS-1 (35°C/km) existed at that
time. The figure suggests that if these strata contained suitable source material
some hydrocarbon generation could have begun. There is also the possibility that
if hydrocarbon had been generated deeper in the sedimentary pile, which is believed
to be about 2km thick at CIROS 1 (Figure 9) they may have migrated upward into the
interval to be drilled.

FIG. 8

Age and temperature of strata related to petroleum genesis (after Conn?n, 1974),
showing the position of the lower part of CIROS 1.


  400|---------------------------------------------------------------   Cate
  500|                                                               o Oil
      |                                                               * Gas
  0   |---------------------------------------------------------------   
  150|                     11                                        1 Amazon Basin, Brazil
      |                                                               2 Paris Basin, France
  100|                     1                                         3 Aquitaine Basin, France
      |o                                                            o4 Elatamine Area, Rio de Oro,
  75  |  o                                                          o West Africa
      |  o                                                          5 Douala Basin, Cameroon
  60  |   o                                                         6 Offshore Taranaki Basin,
      |                                                             New Zealand
  30  |    o                                                        7 Cormorant Basin, France
      |                                                             8 Offshore Taranaki Basin,
 15  |      o                                                      o New Zealand
      |       o                                                     9 Los Angeles Basin, California
   0|---------------------------------------------------------------  10 Ventura Basin, California
      30       20          10           0                           11 Aquitaine Basin, France
       B        B           B           B
       104     140         183         234
       86      112         144         182
       32      30          23          15      13      (1°/KX10°)
       10      10          10          10      10
      Temp?ature

.../17
-18-

FIG. 9

Interpreted seismic refraction profile through CIROS 1 (after Dibble, 1984, 
unpublished manuscript)

CIROS 1


SW                     1         2   km    3         4         5         6         7         8         NE
                                                                                                                    
       1-                                                            
                                                                                                                    
       !                          1                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
 km     !~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~!~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       2-                        SEA WATER                          
                                                                                                                    
       !                          ! (1433 m/s)                        
                                                                                                                    
       !~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~!~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          ! GLACIAL STRATA                   
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       3-                        -----(320 m)                        
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          ! PRE-GLACIAL STRATA               
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       4-                        (570 m)                            
                                                                                                                    
       !                          ! (V2 = n)                          
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~!~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       !                          BASEMENT                            
                                                                                                                    
       !                          (5400M/S OR GREATER)                
                                                                                                                    
       !                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
       5-                          !                                  
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
The most common traps are structural and stratigraphic. Seismic refractors 
near CIROS 1 (Fig. 9) are sub-horizontal or dip gently eastward at 2°.  They 
appear to have a significant undulating relief of the order of 100m, but no potential 
structural traps of any magnitude are evident. There is, nevertheless, the possiblity 
of stratigraphic traps, as even within the glacial sequence drilled at MSSTS-1 nearby, 
which penetrated mainly mudstone, there are one or two highly permeable sandstone 
bodies. However, the MSSTS-1 core also showed an old fracture system that would 
probably have facilitated the release of any hydrocarbons accumulating in these 
rocks.  Although no faults have been positively identified in the seismic data from 
around the CIROS drillsite, they are suspected from their occurence in basement 
rocks on land nearby (Fitzgerald, 1984) and faults are now known to offset the sea-
floor just west ot the Transantarctic Mountains to the north (Eittreim et al, 1984). 
The youthful character of the faulting and the rift setting suggest the faults may 
have promoted the natural release of any hydrocarbons generated.

An unusual type of trap that can occur in polar regions or in deep water 
results from the formation of methane hydrate (a solid), This also creates zones 
of abnormally high pressure, which are known to occur in the Canadian high Arctic, 
where gas hydrate forms beneath permanently frozen ground, commonly extending 
down several hundred metres. This cannot occur in offshore drilling in western 
Mcmurdo Sound as downhole temperature measurements in DVDP 15 (Bucher and Decker, 
1976) and MSSTS-1 (Sissons, in Pyne & Waghorn, 1980) show that there is not sub-sea 
permafrost layer.  Figure 10 confirms that the temperatures and pressures expected 
at the bottom of CIROS 1 place the strata outside the stability field for methane 
hydrate.

.../18
-19-
FIG. 10

Stability field for methane hydrate (from McIver, in Mudrey & McGinnis,
1975). The pressure/temperature curve for MSSTS-1 and the proposed CIROS 1
is also shown. Water depth at both sites is 200m (corresponding to a pressure
of 300 p.s.i.).





It is concluded that the strata to be cored by CIROS 1 and 2 will probably
encounter pockets of biochemical gas, including methane, and that deeper strata in
CIROS 1 may have been buried deep enough for the generation of hydrocarbons if there
were a suitable source. Eowever, the flat-lying nature of the strata around the
drillsite make it unlikely that they have trapped hydrocarbons in any volume and the
possibility of high pressure gas from methane hydrate is discounted. Nevertheless,
a hydrocarbons monitoring programme and a contingency plan in the event that
significant volumes of hydrocarbons are encountered, are outlined in the next section.

Although abnormal downhole fluid pressures are not expected, the CIROS
drilling programe is nevertheless designed to control excess fluid pressures
as high as twice the normal hydrastatic pressure. This is achieved by increasing
the density and viscosity of the mud. To ensure that mud circulation is completely
closed, the first casing (HW) is driven in to a depth of around 20m sub-bottom into
lithified strata. This prevents fracturing of the rock and the uncontrolled escape of
formation fluids from around the casing if high pressures are encountered. Fluid can
then only reach the surface within the casing. At the top of the casing there is a
control gland (Fig. 7) to seal hydrocarbons between the casing and the drill rods so
that the formation fluids only escape can be controlled. Figure 11 outlines the
control procedures to be used if hydrocarbons are encountered. Monitoring for the
presence of hydrocarbons and the anticipation of abnormally high fluid pressures
downhole will consist of the following:

1. The mud return will be checked for gas bubbles before each core is pulled
(the most critical time in each run) and the flammable gas sensor in the
mud hut will be checked for any slow gas build-up there.

2. Each core will be checked visually and with ultraviolet light for oil
stains.

3. A sudden decrease in the weight of the drill string and increase in pump
pressure would be seen if hydrocarbons are encountered under pressure.

.../19
-20-

If hydrocarbons are encountered under normal hydrostatic pressure, drilling 
will proceed cautiously.

If abnormal fluid pressures are encountered, drilling will stop but mud 
circulation will continue and the mud weighted up to equalise. If fluid flow 
declines (indicating only a small pocket) or if equalisation is successful with 
pressures only slightly above normal, drilling will proceed cautiously.

If fluid pressures are high and flow sustained, cement will be pumped to 
plug the hole and the hole abandoned.

If hydrocarbons are encountered, it is considered highly improbable that 
they would reach the surface. Any gas coming up through the mud system however 
will, if in small quantities, be dispersed away from the rig and, if necessary, 
ignited in a controlled situation for safety. If oil also comes up through 
the mud system, it will be separated and stored in empty fuel drums and later 
incinerated. Collecting oil on the sea-ice for incineration may be necessary 
if larger volumes are released. In this way, very little oil or residue should 
be returned to the water column.

    b. Drilling fluid and cuttings

Some loss of drilling fluid into the sea water and the strata beneath is 
inevitable during normal drilling operations. Also, it is planned at the completion 
of the drilling to dispose of the drilling fluid and cuttings by returning them to 
the sea and sea floor respectively. The volume of drilling fluid released in this 
way is estimated to be about 3600 litres, calculated on open-hole dimensions without 
drill rod and assuming the target depth of 500m sub-bottom is reached. The impact 
of the drilling fluid is likely to be minimal and temporary through its dilution 
by large-scale turbulence and the tidal currents, and the degradation of the polymers. 
Return of cuttings to the sea floor will affect an area of a few tens of square 
metres around the drillsite but the occupation of this area of the sea floor by 
the normal benthos should occur at a natural rate as no toxins will be present.

    c. Downhole logging

The downhole logging programme for CIROS will use two tools with radio-
nuclide sources, a density tool, with a Caesium 137 (Cs 137) gamma ray source, 
and a total count neutron-neutron tool, with an Americium-Beryllium (Am-Be) 
neutron source (half life of 433 years).

The handling, transport and use of these radionuclides in the logging 
programme will be carried out by a licenced operator in accordance with international 
regulations and the Antarctic Treaty. Logging will be carried out in conjunction 
with recovery of the drill string and casing.

The loss of a radioactive tool would constitute a local downhole hazard although 
the tool would be contained within the rock strata. In that situation, leakage of 
radioactive material from the tool is unlikely and particles emitted will be absorbed 
in a few metres by the rock and interstitial fluids.

The standard logging procedures include assessing hole stability with a 
non-radioactive tool before logging with a radioactive tool. Equipment for 
recovering this or any other downhole tool will be available on site.

.../20
NORMAL                  GAS / OIL         DRILLING         MONITORING         CONTROL         DRILLING
OPERATION               PRESENT                                                
                                                                                
Regular Testing         Mud Return      Stop Drilling,   Measure Flow     Gas/Oil Flow     Recover Core,
Mud Hut &               Gas / Oil        Close Control    Rate, Volume in  Ceases.          Continue Normal
Drill Hut for                          Gland,           Mud,             -----------------> Operations &
Gas.                                   Continue to      Gas Composition                    Monitoring.
                                        Circulate.                               
                                Core Recovery                               
                                -Gas Bubbles                                
                                -Oil Tests.                                 
                                                                                
                                        Vent Gas away                            
                                        from site,                               
                                        Collect Oil for                          
                                        Incineration.                           
                                                                                
                                                                        Gas/Oil Flow     
                                                                        Continues.      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                        Gas/Oil Flow     
                                                                        Increases.       
                                                                 --->           ----------------->  Cement & Plug
                                                                 Weight up Mud                Abandon Hole.
                                                                 or               
                                                                 Cement Strata    
                                                                 & Redrill.       
                                                                                
FIG. :21                                                                            
Flow chart of procedures to be followed if petroleum or                         
abnormally high downhole pressures are encountered in                           
CIDROS drilling.                                                                    

-121-
-22-

d. Explosives

Explosives may be used and then only in small quantities (less than 10kg)
in the drillsite area possibly for making holes in the sea-ice and possibly in
conjunction with downhole logging. The commonly used explosives release pre-
dominantly gaseous nitrogen compounds which disperse rapidly into air and sea water
and have no lasting effect.

4.3.2 Site Refurbishment

The drillsite is situated on annual sea-ice which breaks up in January,
floats north into the Ross Sea and disintegrates. Anything left at the drillsite
will therefore be deposited into the Ross Sea at some point in McMurdo Sound.

All items will be removed from the drillsite with the following exceptions:

- human wastes
- drill tailings; comprising a mixture of sediments and drilling mud
amounting to approximately 2.5 cubic metres.
-23-

REFERENCES CITED AND SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barrett, P.J. et al 1976. Dry Valley Drilling Project 1975-76: first cored
drilling in McMurdo Sound.  Antarctic Journal of the United States 11 (2) :
pp.78-80.

Barrett, P.J. 1979.  Immediate Report of Victoria University of Wellington
Antarctic Expedition 23, 1978-79, Wellington.

Barrett, P.J. & McKelvey, B.C. 1981. Permian tillites of South Victoria
Land, Antarctica.  In M.J. Hambrey & W.B. Harland, Earth's Pre-Pleistocene
Glacial Record, Cambridge.

Barrett, P.J. 1982.  Immediate Report of Victoria University of Wellington
Antarctic Expedition 26, 1981-82, Wellington.

Barrett, P.J. & Pyne, A.R. 1983.  Immediate Report of Victoria University of
Wellington Antarctic Expedition 27, 1982-83, Wellington.

Barrett, P.J., Pyne, A.R. & Ward, B.L. 1983. Modern sedimentation in McMurdo
Sound, Antarctica.  In R.L. Oliver, P.R. James & J.B. Jago, Antarctic
Earth Science, Canberra.

Bucher, G.J. & Decker, E.R. 1976. Geothermal studies in the McMurdo Sound
region.  Antarctic Journal of the United States 11 (2)

Bullivant, J.S. & Dearborn, J.H. 1967.  The Fauna of the Ross Sea, Part 5;
General Accounts, Station Lists and Benthic Ecology, DSIR Bulletin 176,
NZ Oceanographic Institute Memoir, No.32.

Bunt, J.S. 1964.  Primary productivity under the sea-ice in Antarctic waters.
1. Concentrations and photosynthetic activities of microalgae in the
waters of McMurdo Sound, Antarctica.  In M.O. Lee (Ed.), Biology of
the Antarctic Seas, Vol. 1., Antarctic Research Series Vol. 1.,
Washington DC.

Dayton, P.K., Robilliard, G.A. & Pane, R.T. 1970.  Bentic faunal zonation
as a result of anchor ice at McMurdo Sound, Antarctica.  In M.W. Holdgate
(Ed.), Antarctic Ecology Vol. 1., London.

Dayton, P.K. 1972.  Toward an understanding of community resilience and the
potential effects of enrichments of the benthos at McMurdo Sound, Antarctica.
In B.C. Parker (Ed.), Conservation Problems in Antarctica, Kansas.

DeVries, A.L. & Eastman, J.T. 1981.  Physiology and ecology of notothenicid fishes
of the Ross Sea.  Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand Vol.11.,No.4.,
pp.329-340.

DeWitt, H.H. 1971.  Coastal and deep-water benthic fishes of the Antarctic.
In V.C. Bushnell (Ed.), Antarctic Map Folio Series, Folio 15.  New York.

Eittreim, S.L. Cooper A.L. & Scientific Staff 1984.  Marine geological and
geophysical investigations of the Antarctic continental margin.  US
Geological Survey Circular 935

Hayes, D.E. et al 1975.  General synthesis, Deep Sea Drilling Project Leg 28,
Initial Reports of the Deep Sea Drilling Project, Vol. 28., pp.919-942.

Heath, R.A. 1971.  Circulation and hydrology under the seasonal ice in McMurdo
Sound, Antarctica.  NZ Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research 5:497-515.
-24-

Keys, J.R. 1980. Air temperature, wind, precipitation and atmospheric humidity 
in the McMurdo region. Department of Geology Publication No. 17, Victoria 
University of Wellington.

Knox, G.A. Biological oceanography of the Ross Sea. Journal of the Royal Society 
of New Zealand, Vol. 11., No.4. pp.324-347.

Littlepage, J.L. 1965. Oceanographic observations in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. 
In G.A. Llano (Ed.), Biology of Antarctic Seas Vol.II. Antarctic Research 
Series Vol. 5 Washington DC.

Parker, B.C., Mudrey, M.G., Cartwright, K., McGinnis, L.D. 1975. Environmental 
Appraisal for the Dry Valley Drilling Project Phase V (1975-76).

Pyne, A.R. & Waghorn, D.B. 1980. Immediate Report of Victoria University of 
Wellington Antarctic Expedition 24, 1979-80 and McMurdo Sound Sediment 
and Tectonic Studies (MSSTS) 1979-80, Wellington.

Pyne, A.R. 1981. Immediate Report of the Victoria University of Wellington 
Antarctic Expedition 25, 1980-81. Wellington.

Pyne, A.R. 1984. Immediate Report of the Victoria University of Wellington 
Antarctic Expedition 28, 1983-84. Wellington.

Ross, J., Testa, J.W., Winter, J.D., Kuechle, L., & Reichle, L. 1982. Weddell 
seal population dynamics and Antarctic cod movement patterns in McMurdo 
Sound. Antarctic Journal of the United States Vol. 17., No. 5, pp.138-189.

Sinclair, M.R. 1982. Weather observations in the Ross Island area, Antarctica. 
New Zealand Meteorological Service, Technical Note 253, Wellington.

Spellerberg, L.F. 1967. Distribution of the McCormack Skuá. Notornis 14 pp.201-207

Thompson, D.C. 1972. Adverse weather conditions for flying operations at McMurdo 
Sound and Cape Hallett, Antarctica. New Zealand Meteorological Service 
Technical Note 214, Wellington.
NAME                  PARENT              DESIGNATION         APPROXIMATE DATES OF MAJOR MOVEMENT         BUTTER PT/S.D.   S.B./N.Z
                  ORGANISATION                                N.Z/S.D.   S.B./BUTTER PT   OTHER LOCALITIES                                 
G. Neal             Lands & Survey      Surveyor            23 Aug     26 Aug                                  22 Oct         24 Oct
A. Haanen           Lands & Survey      Surveyor            12 Oct     14 Oct                                  20 Dec         22 Dec
Dr J. Daniels       USGS                Guest               15 Oct     18 Oct                                  12 Dec         15 Dec
                                                        Scientist                                               
Dr G. Olhoeft       USGS                "   "               26 Oct     28 Oct                                  12 Dec         15 Dec
Dr J. Scott         USGS                "   "               15 Oct     18 Oct                                  12 Dec         15 Dec
Dr K. Komura        JARE                "   "               10 Oct     11 Oct                                  12 Dec         15 Dec
Scott/Base/                                                                                                          
McMurdo Station                                                                                                       
Mr V. Williams      NZGS                Core Curator        5 Nov                                               15 Dec
Mr R. Rieck         USGS                Paleontologist      14 Nov                                              15 Dec
Dr N. Nakaya        JARE                Geochemist          29 Oct                                              20 Dec
CIROS PROJECT MANNING AND MOVEMENT SCHEDULE                  ANNEX F?


NAME                  PARENT         DESIGNATION         APPROXIMATE DATES OF MAJOR MOVEMENT
ORGANISATION                             NZ/S.B.         S.D./BUTTER PT.     OTHER LOCALITIES     BUTTER PT/SD     SD / NZ

Drilling site                                                                 

Dr P.J. Barrett   V.U.W.         Science Co-ord.     23 Aug          20 Aug                      1 Nov           5 Nov
A. Pyne           V.U.W.         Science Mgr         23 Aug          20 Aug          10 Nov (KO42)   17 Dec          20 Dec
J. Ashby          V.U.W.         Geologist           23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
T. Macpherson     V.U.W.         Geologist           23 Aug          20 Aug          10 Nov (KO42)   17 Dec          20 Dec
Dr B. Pillans     V.U.W.         Geologist           2 Nov           4 Nov           10 Nov (KO42)   17 Dec          20 Dec
Ms B. Ward        V.U.W.         Geologist           23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
I. Wright         V.U.W.         Geologist           23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
J. Hoffman        DSIR           Drill Co-ord.       3 Oct           5 Oct                       12 Dec          15 Dec
T. Griffiths      Ant. Div.      Ass.Drill Supervisor23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
L. Oliver         DSIR           Camp Manager        23 Aug          26 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
N. Stevenson      Ant. Div.      Ass. Camp Manager   23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
K. Jenkins        Ant. Div.      Driller             23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
G. Brown          Ant. Div.      Driller             23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
S. Pilcher        Ant. Div.      Asst. Driller       23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
P. Cooper         Ant. Div.      Asst. Driller       23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
L. Weller         Ant. Div.      Asst. Driller       23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
J. Williams       Ant. Div.      Asst. Driller       23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
D. Ross           Ant. Div.      Asst. Driller       23 Aug          20 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
J. McClennan      Ant. Div.      Asst. Driller       23 Aug          26 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
C. Olley          Ant. Div.      Asst. Driller       23 Aug          26 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
R.D. Topping      Ant. Div.      A.M.O.              23 Aug          26 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
D.A. Miller       Ant. Div.      A.M.O.              23 Aug          26 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
R.M. Sharp        Ant. Div.      Chef                23 Aug          26 Aug                      12 Dec          15 Dec
