TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                         ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

BRUXELLES
1985

7-18 octobre                                                  ANT/XIII INF 20
                                                              October 15, 1985

ITEM 9 :  MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

Environmental review of the Dry Valleys
Seismograph Project

(Information document submitted by
the US Delegation)
ANT XIII /INF 20

ANNEX

ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW OF THE DRY VALLEYS
SEISMOGRAPH PROJECT (DVSP)
JUNE 1985

Introduction

The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) is presently developing a high quality digital
seismograph and related power, telemetry, and recording equipment for installation in
the Antarctic during the 1985-1986 season. The objective is to acquire high resolution
short period, broadband, and long period seismic signals from two borehole seismometers
located in Wright Valley and telemeter these signals to Scott Base for recording and
analysis. This is a cooperative project with the New Zealand Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research (DSIR). An Environmental Assessment of project prepared by the
DSIR is attached and has been taken into account in the preparation of this document.

The installation will occur in several steps. These are:

1. Drill and case two boreholes at approximately 77°31.1'S, 161°50.4'E, at 820 feet
elevation on the floor of Wright Valley. This location is on exposed granodiorite, and the
deepest borehole (100 m.) is expected to be entirely in the grandiorite. (See enclosed
letter from P. J. Barrett, Reader in Geology, Victoria University of Wellington,
Department of Geology.) DSIR of New Zealand will be drilling the boreholes using the
same Longyear 44 drill rig that was used for the Dry Valleys Drilling Project (DVDP)
during the 1970's.

2. Install seismometers, power equipment, and uphole electronics and antennas at
borehole site.

3. Install power and telemetry equipment on top of Mt. Newall (repeater site) at
approximately 77°30'S, 162°42'E, 6240 feet elevation.

4. Install antenna at or near Crater Hill on Ross Island within sight Mt. Newall.

5. Install recording and control equipment at Scott Base.
Steps 2 through 5 will be performed by the USGS and its contractor, Teledyne-Geotech 
(T-G) of Garland, Texas. (See Figure 1 for a rough sketch of the system configuration.)

Environmental Considerations

DRILLING: The same environmental appraisal that was submitted for the DVDP also 
applies to the drilling portion of the DVSP. In fact, DSIR's excellent record in preserving 
the environment in the Dry Valleys during the DVDP is the best possible assurance that 
the same will happen during the drilling of the DVSP seismometer boreholes, and the 
USGS will be sure that DSIR conforms to the standards set forth in the Environmental 
Appraisal for the DVDP Phase V (enclosed).

SEISMOMETER INSTALLATION: T-G and USGS will install a seismometer and a 
digitizer/calibrator unit (DCU) in each borehole. This equipment will dissipate less than 
10 watts of power into the ground, so the temperature rise in the boreholes will be quite 
small (not enough to melt the permafrost). The tops of the boreholes, which will not 
extend more than 12 inches above the surface, will be sealed after the installation. In 
fact, the bottom of the casing will be sealed before the casing is inserted in the borehole, 
so that any equipment placed inside the casing after it is frozen in place (using water) 
cannot contaminate the subsurface. Electrical cables and support cables will exit the top 
of the borehole through the wellhead seal.

POWER SUBSYSTEMS: T-G and USGS will install propane-powered thermoelectric 
generators (TEGs) as power sources at the borehole site and at the Mt. Newall repeater 
site. The borehole site will use a 50-watt TEG built by Global Thermoelectric of Canada 
and three 225-gallon propane tanks. The repeater site will use a 15-watt Global TEG and 
one 225-gallon propane tank. In both cases, the propane tanks will be located within 50 
feet of the boreholes and/or antenna tower. Overall height of each TEG is about 5 feet 
(see Figure 2). The propane tanks are about 8 feet long by about 3 feet in diameter (see 
Figures 3 and 4). The only combustion products to be vented into the atmosphere are 
water, carbon dioxide, and trace amounts of carbon monoxide and propane due to 
incomplete combustion. Small amounts of waste heat will also be produced.
I. FOREWORD

Recognizing that the concept of no impact is an unrealizeable 
human goal, the objective of all impact statements is to minimize or reduce 
potential adverse impacts on the environment, wherever and as far as possible 
and practical.  Antarctic soil and lake ecosystems are particularly delicate, 
and consequently, vulnerable to any and all human activities, including 
those of DVDP.  The text of this Appraisal reviews these potential impacts 
and outlines procedures for their prevention, reduction, or remedy.  If the 
procedures in this Appraisal are followed judiciously, the probability of 
major environmental impacts on Antarctic ecosystems, we believe, will be 
reduced to a level not heretofore experienced by any scientific and logistic 
operation of equivalent nature in Antarctica.

An environmental scientist on the drill site and prior environmental 
discussion of each site by scientists, drill team personnel, and visitors will 
comprise the basis for the DVDP environmental protection program.  An operations 
procedure and monitoring scheme will be implemented to detect and control 
environmental impact.  Monitoring before, during, and after the drilling 
operations will identify environmental changes caused by the activities at 
all site, and these results will be reported to enhance the accuracy of 
prediction and to prevent or reduce impacts by this and future projects.

The Committee

1
II. SCOPE OF THE APPRAISAL

This appraisal covers only the drilling and scientific field operations 
of the Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP).  DVDP studies undertaken at McMurdo 
Station or in the laboratories of individual investigators are beyond the 
scope of this statement.  This document covers projected operations only for 
the austral field season 1975-1976.

This document is a supplemental environmental impact appraisal for Phase 
V (1975-1976) of the Dry Valley Drilling Project.  As such, it updates the 
Phase IV Appraisal (issued in final form November 1974) by presenting summaries 
of previous DVDP operations, and environmental impacts, and assesses engineer-
ing actions proposed for this forthcoming austral field season.  Because much 
future work is similar to our previous appraisal, this document basically is 
supplemental to the earlier appraisal, and only discusses in detail new fea-
ture, or features that are significantly modified.

We make no pretense at suggesting that this environmental impact apprais-
al is faultless.  Rather it is an attempt to identify areas in need of atten-
tion and to establish constraints or alternatives to prevent or minimize envi-
ronmental impacts.  That the DVDP is the first scientific activity in Antarctica 
to accomplish both the preparation of an impact appraisal and the implementa-
tion of a monitoring plan for evaluating the appraisal's effectiveness, fore-
warns that the chances of adverse environmental impacts may well be reduced 
although not eliminated.

 
2
CHRONOLOGY OF DVDP ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT DEVELOPMENT

May 1, 1972 - Cameron (biology) accepts environmental responsibilities.
August 19, 1972 - XII SCAR Conference establishes procedures for
    Environmental Statements for Antarctic projects.
November 14, 1972 - Cameron submits Environmental Guidelines for
    DVDP to Project office.
January 3, 1973 - Cameron (biology) and Cartwright (geology) accept
    monitoring responsibilities.
- Parker (biology) joins Environmental Assessment team.
April 9, 1973 - Geological section received by DVDP office.
April 26-27, 1973 - Preparation meeting in DeKalb-Mudrey (geology)
    joins Environmental Assessment team.
May 29, 1973 - Consultant's meeting in Washington concur in Environmental
    Assessment approach.
June 13, 1973 - Cartwright and Mudrey complete geological section
    in Urbana.
July 5-7, 1973 - Parker and Mudrey complete draft for review of
    Environmental Impact Appraisal.
July 18, 1973 - Draft for review of Appraisal submitted to NSF via
    Acting Chief Scientist.
August 30, 1973 - Availability for agency review announced in Federal
    Register, vol. 38, no. 168, p. 23438.
November 1, 1973 - Agency comments received by preparation team.
November 20, 1973 - Parker and Mudrey complete replies to agency
    comments in Washington.
November 23, 1973 - Replies submitted to NSF via Acting Chief Scientist
    (G. Llano).
November 30, 1973 - Environmental Impact Appraisal for Phase III
    (1973-74) issued.
June 26, 1974 - Environmental and biological monitoring transferred to
    the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg,
    Virginia.
August 5-6, 1974 - Preparation meeting in Blacksburg. Impact matrices agreed
    upon.
September 18, 1974 - Preparation meeting at Skyland. Outline of writing
    responsibilities agreed upon.
December 3, 1974 - Environmental Impact Appraisal for Phase V (1974-75)
    issued.

iv
September 1, 1975 - Environmental Impact Appraisal for Phase V (1975-76)
issued.

Phase I - 1971-1972
Geophysical surveys for site selection
Pre-drilling environmental resource evaluation

Phase II - 1972-1973
January 9, 1973 - Environmental monitoring initiated
January 21, 1973 - Drilling on Ross Island initiated
February 20, 1973 - Drilling on Ross Island completed
Environmental monitoring and evaluation completed (Cameron and others)

Phase III - 1973-1974
September 11, 1973 - Drilling on Ross Island initiated
October 15, 1973 - Environmental monitoring initiated
January 22, 1974 - Drilling terminated at New Harbor
Environmental monitoring and evaluation completed (Cameron and others)

Phase IV - 1974-1975
September 2, 1974 - Winfly deployment of DVDP advance party to assess
possible wintering damage of camp and equipment
October 29, 1974 - Drilling at New Harbor initiated
January 19, 1975 - Drilling terminated at North Fork Basin
January 19, 1975 - Environmental monitoring completed (Parker and others)

Phase V - 1975
September 1, 1975 - Winfly deployment of DVDP advance party.
16 miles
6240 feet
RF
POWER
Mt. Newall
18 miles
820 feet
RF
POWER
BBRT
SPAT
20171A
or DB-21
GFE
30 meters
34000-0104
GFE
10 miles
500 feet
RF
2400 bps
CLOCK
TERMINAL
CT
ANALOG RECORDING
DIGITAL RECORDING
UPS
AC LINE
Scott Base
INTELSAT
EARTH STATION
UPS
AC LINE
Future satellite link
DVSP - ANTARCTICA
ARL Aug.1984
U.S.G.S. DRY VALLEY SEISMIC PROJECT
ENVIRONMENT ASSESSMENT

1.  THE PROJECT SETTING

1.1  OBJECTIVES AND BACKGROUND

The prime objective of this project is to increase the quantity of 
high quality seismic data from Antarctica. When in operation the system 
will enable short, intermediate and long period digital seismic data from 
the Dry Valleys region to be added to the world seismic data network.

Achievement of this objective will be obtained by drilling of two 
boreholes in the Wright Valley, near Lake Vanda. Seismometers will 
then be installed in these holes and the information obtained will be 
transmitted to recording facilities to be installed at Scott Base for 
retransmission to the Albuquerque Seismological Laboratory in New Mexico.

During the 1985/86 season it is proposed that the boreholes are 
drilled and the seismometers installed in these holes. This will then 
enable the installation and commissioning of the recording equipment to 
be undertaken during the same season.

The camp is due to be set up on 3 November 1985 with drilling 
commencing on 6 November.  It is envisaged that drilling operations will 
be completed by 11 December 1985.

1.2  SCOPE OF APPRAISAL

This appraisal focuses on the drilling, scientific field work, and 
support activities of the Dry Valley Seismic Project (DVSP) to be 
undertaken during 1985/86. It is designed as a document to assist 
operations as well as to assess environmental sensitivities.  The appraisal 
has been undertaken in accordance with Antarctic Treaty Recommendations 
XII-3 and XII-II and its annex detailing a code of conduct for Antarctic 
expeditions and station activities.

The appraisal describes the environmental setting, current activities 
in the Dry Valleys and operational aspects of the project.  Under each 
operational heading potential impacts are discussed and control measures 
outlined.

2.  ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.0  LOCATION

The site of the project is in the Wright Valley approximately 4.3 km 
east from Vanda Station.  (see fig. 1).
Fig. 1.


SCALE 1:50 000
       0       1000      2000      3000      4000      5000
      0         1         2         NAUTICAL MILES
      0                   1                   2         STATUTE MILES

CONTOUR INTERVAL 50 METERS WITH SUPPLEMENTARY CONTOURS AT 25 METER INTERVALS
DATUM IS MEAN SEA LEVEL
LAMBERT CONFORMAL CONIC PROJECTION--STANDARD PARALLELS 76°40' AND 79°20'
FOR SALE BY U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY, RESTON, VIRGINIA 22092
``` 


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































2.1  CLIMATE

Because the site is near to Vanda Station the climate should be 
similar to that recorded at the station.

Shade temperatures up to +15°C and a well-developed up and down 
wind sequence characterize the Dry Valley's summer weather and assist 
in keeping them substantially snow-free.  Long cold calms during winter 
are interspersed with periods of warm westerly gales and relative 
humidities often below 10%, quickly ablating any snowfalls which might 
occur during this season.  Temperature changes of over 40°C can occur at 
the onset of a winter gale and gusts can exceed 90 knots, raising dust 
and grit to sandblast buildings and sculpt ventifacts from rocks on the 
valley floor.  Snowfalls during each year are usually only very light and 
in the summer snowfalls are near the eastern boundary of the valley and 
almost always above 600m.  Slight isolated showers of rain have been known 
to occur within the dry valley region on rare occasions.

The area on the wide shingle flats, just to the east of Bull Pass is 
often subject to dust devils.  These occur mostly on relatively hot days 
during December  and January before the regular up and down valley winds 
commence.  In most cases these dust devils are quite small but cases where 
people have been knocked over and crates lifted and deposited several 
hundred metres away have been recorded.

CLIMATOLOGICAL TABLE FOR LAKE VANDA (1968/80)

(Note: data for FEB-OCT based on only three years' observations)

                JAN  FEB  MAR  APR  MAY  JUN  JUL  AUG  SEP  OCT  NOV  DEC 
Temperatures °C                                                         
Mean            + 1.2 - 5.9 -20.4 -29.7 -29.2 -30.0 -38.0 -32.3 -31.2 -15.7 - 6.5 + 0.3 
Mean Daily Max  + 4.6 - 2.1 -15.6 -25.4 -23.5 -25.5 -33.4 -26.5 -25.7 -10.0 - 1.9 + 3.7 
Mean Daily Min  - 2.2 - 9.7 -25.1 -34.0 -34.8 -34.8 -42.6 -38.1 -36.7 -21.4 -11.1 - 3.1 
Highest         +15.0 + 4.4 - 0.1 - 6.0 - 1.2 - 0.9 - 7.6 - 3.2 - 2.6 + 0.7 + 9.5 +14.3 
Lowest          -11.4 -21.8 -41.4 -46.7 -48.8 -49.4 -56.9 -55.2 -50.7 -36.7 -23.4 - 9.6 

MONTHLY SNOWFALL TOTALS (mm), VANDA STATION

        JAN  FEB  MAR  APR  MAY  JUN  JUL  AUG  SEP  OCT  NOV  DEC  YEAR 
1968                                                                 Tce 
1969    Tce  Tce  13    5   16   16  Tce   16    0    3  Tce   13   82 
1970    Tce   2    0    5    0    0    0    0    0    0    0  Tce    7 
1971    Tce                                                                0  Tce 
1972    Tce                                                                Tce  Tce 
1973    Tce                                                                Tce  Tce 
1974     1    5   89  Tce  Tce    5   10    1    4    0  Tce  Tce  115 
1975    Tce                                                                
2.2  GEOLOGY

The bedrock of Wright Valley consists of a late Pre-cambrian-early 
Paleozoic basement complex exposed on the valley floor and lower walls,
unconformably overlain by sedimentary strata, the Beacon Sandstone, of late 
Paleozoic and early Mesozoic age which crop out high on the valley sides 
and by virtue of their gentle westward dip form the headwall of the valley 
also.  Both Beacon and basement rocks are intruded by sills and dykes of the 
Ferra Dolerite (Jurassic in age).  Very little has been deposited in the 
valley since it was cut by glaciers some time in the early Cenozoic.  Large 
areas of bedrock are exposed but there are locally extensive patches of 
moraine, gravel and sand of relatively recent age.

The proposed drill site is near the floor of the valley where the 
bedrock is granodiorite (Olympic Granite Gneiss of McKelvey and Webb, 1962, 
NZ Journal of Geology and geophysics; Larson and granodiorite of Warren, 1970, 
American Geographical Society Map Folio Series 12, sheet 14).  The 
granodiorite is cut by north-northeast trending veins and dykes of pigmatite 
and lamprophyre that are an essential part of the basement complex and at 
least 450 million years old.  A Jurassic dolerite sill forms vertical cliffs 
high on the valley wall but no similar rock is known or can be expected at 
a lower level in this area.  Neither the sills nor the dykes in the basement 
show measurable offset that would indicate faults crossing the area of 
interest.

2.3  SOILS

The effects of physical weathering in the area can be seen in the 
reduction of some boulders to fine particles through repetitive freeze thaw 
cycles.

The buried soils are charcterized by rotten boulders, locally strong 
iron staining, salt-indurated horizons, and salt encrustations.  This makes 
them similar with those soils contained in older deposits such as those 
of the Loop Glaciation.

2.4  GROUNDWATER

Groundwater flow systems occur in the Dry Valleys and play a role in the 
replenishment of the lakes in the area.  It is estimated that some 20,000 
cubic metres of deep saline groundwater flows into Lake Vanda each year.

Very saline groundwater can be detected flowing along the surface of the 
ice-cemented layer in the late summer.  The groundwater in the Ferrar Dolerite 
however is less saline due to the dolerite acting as an aquifer through which 
sub-ice sheet meltwater is discharging.

2.5  GEOMORPHOLOGY

The Wright Valley has been shaped by glacial action and is characterized 
by truncated spurs and hanging valleys.

The bedrock basin of Lake Vanda was carved by an outlet glacier which 
moved eastward down the Wright Valley and represents the oldest glaciation 
recognized in the Wright Valley.  Three younger glaciations are marked by 
deposits from glaciers which moved from McMurdo Sound and the coastal mountains 
westward up the valley.
4.

These deposits include ice-cored moraines, with a detailed relief
characterized by hillocks, kettles and frost furrows. Many up-standing,
unweathered boulders are found in younger deposits and differ from the
earlier glaciation deposits which contain many ventifacts and weathered
boulders.

Annual fans formed mainly in interglacial time are found under Bull
Pass and elevated beaches are visible round Lake Vanda. Eolian sand sheets
and dunes are found under Bull Pass. The drillsite is near the toe of an
outwash fan on a small terrace at the base of a convex hill slope, on gently
rising ground.

2.6     BIOLOGY

Only sparse plant and animal life is visible in the Dry Valleys area.
Bacteria, fungi and algae do however exist under the surface and in the air
spaces of porous rocks. The rocks' pores permit sunlight and moisture to
penetrate but keep the cold, drying wind out. The penetrating sunlight warms
the interior enabling photosynthesis to occur.

The Onyx River which flows through the Wright Valley area contains
various types of algal growth. During the winter period these algae tend
to dry out and freeze.

Lake Vanda, 4.3 km downstream from the drillsite, is a biologically
simple ecosystem containing benthic and planktonic communities with algae
as the sole photosynthetic primary producer, a select few protozoa and metazoa
as herbivores, and bacteria and fungi as decomposers.

3. CURRENT ACTIVITIES IN THE WRIGHT VALLEY

3.1     VANDA STATION

Vanda Station (New Zealand) located on the shores of Lake Vanda is
the summer support base for scientific field parties operating in the Wright
Valley area. This station provides the field parties with communications
as well as general logistics services.

3.2     GLACIOLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

Current research includes a monitoring programme documenting long and
short climatic variations in the region, and specific projects on glacial
fluctuations and the physical properties and dynamics of valley glaciers.

3.3     METEOROLOGY

General meteorology observations are undertaken from Vanda Station in
addition to studies on the energy balance over the surface of Lake Vanda and
of longwave radiation fluxes.

3.4     BIOLOGY

Biological studies are focusing on the flowing water ecosystems which
offer a unique set of environments in which to  test out basic hypothesis of
stream community structure and function. Factors controlling organic carbon
production, photosynthesis and heterotrophic ecophysiology are also under
study.
5.

3.5     GEOMORPHOLOGY     

Geomorphological studies are investigating the influence of lithological 
and geotechnical properties or rocks upon the morphology of glacial valleys.
In addition mapping and characterization of the valley and surrounding areas 
are being undertaken.

3.6     GEOLOGY

Geologists are conducting on-going research examining a wide range of 
geological questions including documenting the uplift history of the 
Transantarctic Mountains in the McMurdo Region.

4.  OPERATIONAL COMPONENTS, ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS AND CONTROLS

4.1     CAMPSITE AND DRILLSITE

The campsite and drillsite will be located together at a site 
approximately 4.3 km east of Vanda Station.

4.1.1.  THE CAMP

The campsite will consist of two small buildings. One will be used 
for sleeping accomodation. The other will be for messing and ablutions. 
Both buildings will be heated by diesel fired Preway heaters.  A limited 
amount of tent accommodation will be provided adjacent to the camp.

Power generation for the campsite and drilling operation will be 
provided by a small 3kva generator.  A Herman Nelson heater unit, small 
petrol generator and welding unit will also be in operation at the site.

Water will be flown to the site by helicopter in 5 gallon plastic 
containers from either Vanda Station or the Marble Point refueling facility. 
Water is not to be obtained from the Onyx River.

A staff of ten will operate from the campsite.  They will include 
the Project Co-ordinator, Drilling Supervisor and Camp Manager, five drillers, 
and three engineers from the United States Geological Survey.

4.1.2  THE DRILL AND DRILL OPERATIONS

The drilling programmes will use the Longyear diamond coring system. 
The drill will be mounted on timbers and rock and bolted down.  The holes 
will be continuously cored with a 7 3/4" single tube core barrel using D.F.A. 
as a circulating fluid.  A diamond impregnated 8" starter pipe will be 
drilled and grouted into the granite and a tee screw on top.  A "Totco" 
survey instrument will be used to monitor the verticality of the hole.

The project objective is to drill two 7 3/4" boreholes within 3 degrees 
of vertical, one to 100m, the other to 30m.  On completion of the drilling 
a 6" casing containing a seismometer holelock will be installed dry into the 
hole, and then frozen into place.
4.2     POSSIBLE ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS AND CONTROL/DISPOSAL MEASURES

4.2.1  SUPPORT OPERATIONS

a.  Site Preparation

The drilling site has been selected to ensure drilling is undertaken 
entirely on basement granite from the surface and not through any glacial 
deposits. When selecting the final campsite, consideration must be given 
to locating the campsite and a material storage area near or in an enclosed 
sink area, and not on any area which could allow surface drainage, in the 
event of a spillage, to the Onyx River.

b.  Surface Alterations

No major surface alterations other than removal of loose rocks 
should be necessary.  Any alterations or movement of rocks must be kept to 
a minimum.  The site is to be refurbished to as near to its original condition 
as possible on the completion of the project.

c.  Helicopter Operations

UH-lN helicopters will be used to lift all personnel and equipment 
to and from the site.  Safety of operations in and around machines is paramount. 
All stores and materials must be secured to prevent scattering by wind during 
helicopter operations.

d.  Vehicle Operations

No vehicles will operate at the camp or drillsite or between 
Vanda Station and the site.  Vehicle movement from Vanda to the site may be 
authorised upon request to authorities at Scott Base and McMurdo only in the 
event of emergency requiring immediate assistance.

Movement on foot around the camp and drill sites may also be 
restricted to appropriate paths.

e.  Wastes

Human Wastes are to be placed in a "honey-bucket" system using 
44 gallon drums and U-barrel.  The drums will be flown from the site for 
disposal at McMurdo.

Water and Liquid Wastes are to be run into 44 gallon drums and 
removed by helicopter.

Non-Combustible and Combustible Wastes are to be placed in a waste 
container and removed from the site for disposal at McMurdo.  Any chemical 
or battery wastes are to be separated for removal from Antarctica.  No wastes 
are to be burned at the camp or drillsite.

f.  Atmospheric Discharge

Limited atmospheric discharge of carbon materials will result from 
the operation of the 3 kva generator, 150 hp drill engine, petrol engine 
and heaters.  The amount of discharge will be minor, the effects insignificant 
and disposed of by wind.
7.

g. Fire Safety

Fire safety controls will be designated by the Camp Manager.  In 
the event of accidental fire, all remains of the fire are to be removed from 
the area.

h. Fuels

All fuels will be flown to the site as underslung helicopter loads.
The campsite and drilling operations will require thirty-four 44 gallon drums 
(1500 gallons) of contaminated D.F.A. for drilling fluid, 11 drums of D.F.A. 
to operate the drill and camp heaters, two 44 gallon drums (88 gallons) of 
petrol, and a small quantity of lubricating oils and greases.  The normal 
safety procedures for underslinging fuel loads must be observed.

All fuels are to be stored on tarpaulins supplied for this purpose. 
D.F.A. and petrol must be stored separately to prevent fire.  All personnel 
are to exercise utmost care when undertaking movement of fuel drums and when 
handling fuels for safety reasons and to avoid spillage.

4.2.2.  DRILLING OPERATIONS

Drilling operations are described above. Once the depth target has 
been reached the drill hole will be cleared of D.F.A. fluid to prevent ice 
formation forcing the D.F.A. to the surface. Once the hole is clear a six 
inch steel pipe will be placed in the hole.  The space between the pipe, 
and the hole wall will be filled with water and frozen.

Plastic tarpaulins will be laid under and around the drill rig to 
prevent spillage from drilling operations.

(i)    Drilling Fluid and Tailings

All used drilling fluid, which will contain a limited amount of 
drilling fines, will be placed in drums and removed for disposal at McMurdo. 
One hundred and thirty metres of seven inch diameter granite core will be 
extracted and laid out in stratigraphic sequence.  The core may be removed 
to McMurdo for research purposes as helicopter track flights permit.

(ii)   Explosives

A limited quantity of explosives will be held at the drillsite 
so that in the event of difficulties in extracting the final core, a small 
centrally drilled charge may be used to break the base of the core.

(iii)  Hydrocarbons

As the project depends on a hole entirely in solid granite there 
is no likelihood of encountering hydrocarbons.

(iv)   Down-hole Leakage of Drilling Fluid

As the drilling is taking place in a single structure of granite, 
with no surface glacial sediments or loose deposits, the likelihood of 
down-hole loss of drilling fluid is regarded as negligible.

4.2.3.  SITE REFURBISHMENT

On the completion of the drilling, all drilling equipment and 
associated material uplifted from the CIROS campsite at Butter Point will
be returned to Butter Point.  At the completion of installation of the 
seismic station, all support buildings and associated equipment, stores, 
fuels and wastes will be removed from the site.  The area will then be 
checked by appropriate authorities from McMurdo and Scott Base, with, if 
necessary, a final refurbishment of the area including gravels and rocks 
returned to as near the original condition as possible.  Some scarring of 
the landscape will be unavoidable but should be minimal if the instructions 
contained in this assessment are adhered to:

4.3  ADMINISTRATIVE OVERSIGHT

The New Zealand environmental overseer for the setting up of the 
campsite and the drilling phase of the programme will be Mr Peter Foster, 
the leader of Vanda Station.  He is to ensure through regular inspection 
that the operation is undertaken in an environmentally cautious manner and 
in strict observance with the provisions of this assessment.  Monitoring is 
also to be undertaken by Dr Charles Hutt, United States Geological Survey 
engineer responsible for the installation of the seismometers.  In the event 
Mr Foster or Dr Hutt believes an unacceptable impact is likely to occur, 
or that controls are not being complied with, they are to consult and have 
authority to halt operations and hold discussions with the drilling supervisor 
and other personnel associated with the project.  In this event, the 
Officer-in-Charge at Scott Base and N.S.F. representative, McMurdo are to 
be notified immediately.

5.  CONCLUSION

The drilling programme is a major component of a project to instal 
borehole seismometers for long term monitoring of seismic events. Operations 
will take place in the Wright Dry Valley and involve the drilling of two 
holes into basement granodiorite, to a depth of 100m and 30m respectively.

There are no known unique biological communities in the area of the 
drillsite.  Nevertheless, drilling will occur in an ice free area, within 
one kilometre of a closed inland water drainage system which is sensitive 
to human disturbance.  In order to protect this system, access to the site 
is to be by aircraft or on foot.  No wheeled vehicle operations are permitted. 
All wastes from the project are to be removed from the site.  Fuels 
contamination of the water drainage system is judged to be a possible hazard. 
Consequently fuels will be stored on tarpaulin matting in order to prevent 
accidental spillage during storage or handling.

On the completion of the project all materials with the exception of 
the seismic station will be removed from the area.  An environmental overseer 
will supervise the execution of the project in an environmentally sound manner.

The project will contribute significantly to improving the quality of 
world-wide seismic data.  The drilling phase of the project executed in 
accordance with the controls contained in this document will present a minimum 
of disturbance to the surrounding area.

30 September 1985
Antarctic Division, DSIR
APPENDIX II.

ENVIRONMENTAL APPRAISAL FOR THE
DRY VALLEY DRILLING PROJECT
PHASE V (1975-76)

Prepared by

DVDP Committee on Environmental Impact

Bruce C. Parker - Chairman
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University

Michael G. Mudrey, Jr.
Northern Illinois University

Keros Cartwright
Illinois State Geological Survey

Lyle D. McGinnis - ex-officio member
Northern Illinois University

June 1975
TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                      Page

CHRONOLOGY OF DVDP ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT ............................iv

I. FOREWORD ............................................................... 1

II. SCOPE OF THE APPRAISAL ............................................... 2

III. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS ............................................... 3

IV. DESCRIPTION OF DVDP

     A. Introduction ....................................................... 4

     B. Scientific Objectives ................................................ 5

     C. Geology of the Region ................................................ 5

     D. Environmental Setting ................................................ 9

     E. Ecosystems ........................................................... 11

     F. Drilling Operations ................................................... 12

     G. Precautions and Guidelines ............................................ 13

V. IMPACT AND EFFECTS

     A. General ............................................................... 16

     B. Evaluation Concepts

          1. Method of Analysis ................................................ 19

               Impact Matrix ................................................... 20

               Probability ..................................................... 21

               Aerial Extent .................................................... 22

               Significance ..................................................... 22

          2. Existing Characteristics Not Otherwise Discussed ............... 22

          3. Definitions of Evaluated Characteristics ....................... 23

          4. Definitions of Proposed Actions .................................. 24

     C. Appraisal

          1. Dates and Objectives .............................................. 26

          2. Drilling Site ...................................................... 26

          3. Plan of Drilling ................................................... 26

          4. Circulating Medium ................................................ 29

          5. Clean-up ........................................................... 29

          6. Summary of Matrix ................................................. 30

          7. Summary Statement ................................................. 33

     D. Summary Effects ....................................................... 33

     E. Future Evaluation of this Appraisal ............................... 34

VI. PROBABLE ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS WHICH CANNOT BE AVOIDED ........ 35

VII. ALTERNATIVES ............................................................. 36

VIII. RELATION BETWEEN LOCAL SHORT-TERM USES OF MAN'S ENVIRONMENT AND THE

      MAINTENANCE AND ENHANCEMENT OF LONG-TERM PRODUCTIVITY ................ 37

                                                      ii
IX. IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENTS OR RESOURCES ................ 38
X. REFERENCES CITED ............................................................... 39
XI. APPENDICES .................................................................... 40

LIST OF FIGURES

1. Bathymetric map of McMurdo Sound ............................................... 6
2. Geologic cross-section of McMurdo Sound Area .................................... 10
3. Geologic map of Hut Point Penninsula .............................................. 27
4. Location map of proposed McMurdo Sound drill sites ............................... 28

TABLE

1. Environmental Impact Matrix for McMurdo Sound site ............................... 31

iii
III. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The probable impacts on the environment and unique Antarctic ecosystems due to the DVDP field operations will be sufficiently small as to not jeopardize or lower the future scientific value of the area. This conclusion assumes that the constraints and procedural plans outlined in the text of this Appraisal and the Phase V Operations Plan will be followed by all persons, including visitors associated with the on-site field operations. Also, this conclusion is based on the general drilling experience gained during the 1972-1973, 1973-1974, and 1974-1975 austral drilling on Ross Island and other sites, prior knowledge of the proposed drill sites, and lengthy discussions and evaluations by the Environmental Impact Committee which are summarized in this text.

Environmental constraints for the various phases of the field operations have varied from one site to another for several reasons:

(1) Drilling objectives and anticipated differences in surface and subsurface geology necessitate variations in drilling procedures; and

(2) The nature of the ecosystems associated with the different drill sites differ as to their uniqueness, vulnerability, scientific value, and degree of prior disturbance by activities by man.

This Appraisal is based on the available scientific knowledge and estimated future scientific value of each site. Our evaluation, although often fraught with lack of information, is multidisciplinary in that numerous scientific interests--biological, chemical, physical, geological-were addressed. In short, this Appraisal and its constraints constitutes a satisfactory compromise among the many scientific interests. It is hoped the Appraisal will be compatible with the continuing program of cooperative international scientific research in Antarctica and under the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research.

3
IV.  DESCRIPTION OF DVDP

A.  INTRODUCTION

Traditional surface or near-surface measurements used to reconstruct 
Antarctic prehistory often are limited and contradictory. Most clues to 
Antarctica's past have been skimmed from easily accessible surficial mater-
ials.  The first boreholes in sedimentary and igneous rock have returned 
information for earth scientists to view the long but poorly known Cenozoic 
era immediately preceding our historical record.  It was during Cenozoic 
time that Antarctica became established as earth's most extensive, ice-
covered region.

    Deep or intermediate drilling into sediment and rock of Antarctica had 
not been undertaken prior to this project.  The Dry Valley Drilling Project 
(DVDP), initiated during the 1971-72 field season with airborne and surface 
geological, geophysical, and microbiological reconnaissance studies, is the 
first of several drilling projects now planned.  Drilling began in late 
January of 1973 (Appendix B) and will conclude in December 1975.

    DVDP is truly international in its management, support, and participation 
of scientists:  it has been stimulated through interest of scientists from 
Japan, New Zealand, and the United States; and it is funded principally by 
the United States National Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programs, the 
Japanese National Institute of Polar Research, and the New Zealand Department 
of Scientific and Industrial Reasearch.

    DVDP was planned to take advantage of the diverse geological framework 
of the McMurdo Sound region which contains rocks and sediments ranging in age 
from the Precambrian to Recent.  The unique setting of glacial, volcanic, 
terrestrial, and marine environments permits a series of independent analyses 
of Antarctic geochronology, paleoclimatology, and paleomagnetism.  Because of 
the diverse geological record, and the fact that the region straddles the 
ancient suture between east and west Antarctica, the retrieval of continuous, 
hard rock, and sedimenatary rock core will permit a detailed reconstruction 
of an unknown period of Antarctic history, which in turn played a critical role 
in global history.

4
The region to be studied lies within close logistical support of McMurdo 
Station (Figure 1), thus the usual set-up delays of remote operations in 
rigorous environments have been minimized.  Fourteen boreholes have been drilled, 
three on Ross Island, and the remainder in the dry valley area, approximately 
75 km west of McMurdo Station.  The final drilling phase includes drilling through 
sea ice as a platform in McMurdo Sound.

  Programs that have been conducted during the course of the project include 
geological, geochemical, geophysical, and biological analyses of rocks and soils, 
borehole geophysical logging, hydrogeological analyses and an array of inter-
related surface and airborne studies (Appendix C).

B.  SCIENTIFIC OBJECTIVES

  Scientific objectives of the field project are to drill and collect con-
tinuous core from the McMurdo Sound area, and to make certain geophysical and 
hydrogeologic measurements in and near the holes.  In the field, the core was 
taken in a manner compatible with subsequent laboratory investigations.  The 
laboratory studies include: paleontology, microbiology, petrology, geochemistry, 
paleomagnetics, isotope studies, sedimentological studies, hydrogeologic studies, 
thermal studies (heat flow), and geochronologic studies.

C.  GEOLOGY OF THE REGION

  The stratigraphic sequence of the rock occurring in the ice-free valleys 
can be divided into five groups:  the basement complex, sedimentary rock of the 
Beacon Supergroup, diabase sills of the Ferrar Dolerites, the McMurdo Volcanics, 
and the glacial drift, lacustrine, and marine sediment of Cenozoic to Recent age.

  The basement rocks in the valleys are composed of the Ross System meta-
sedimentary rocks and the Admiralty Intrusives.  The Ross System metasediment-
ary rocks are of late Precambrian to Cambrian age and consist primarily of 
marbles, schists and hornfelses.  The Admiralty Intrusives similar age intrude 
the Ross System rocks.  The Admiralty rocks are granites and granodiorites, 
with pegmatites and granodiorite dikes, and swarms of lamprophyre and porphyry 
dikes.  The basement complex comprises the bulk of the material through which 
the valleys are cut.

5
77         164         166         168         77
               
9
               
30
         ROSS         ISLAND               
               
DRY VALLEYS                                            
               
                                 ROSS ICE SHELF
                                 
                                 100 fathom contours
                                 Auxiliary 25 fathom contours
                                 in areas of low relief
                                 
                                 Contoured from soundings published on H O Chart 6666 FRANKLIN
                                 ISLAND TO MCMURDO SOUND 1969 revision and from soundings
                                 made during February 1973 by the crew of the U.S.S. Northwind for
                                 the Dry Valley Drilling Project
               
78         164         166         168         78
               
Figure 1. Bathymetric map of McMurdo Sound. Taken from L. D. McGinnis,1973,
McMurdo Sound - a key to the Cenozoic of Antarctica: Antarctic Jour.
of the U. S., v. VIII, no. 4, p. 166-169.
Unconformably overlying the basement rocks, and often forming the valleys uplands, are the sedimentary rocks of the Beacon Supergroup.  The Beacon rocks consist of orthoquartzites, arkoses, shales, and subgraywackes of Devonian possibly to Cretaceous age with some carbon-rich streaks and plant fossils of Permian to Jurassic age.

Intruding both the basement rocks and the Beacon Supergroup are the Jurassic sills and dikes of the Ferrar Dolerites.  The sills crystallized from a tholeiitic magma and consist primarily of augite and calcic plagioclase. The Ferrar Dolerites often form the cap rock for ridges and summits surrounding the valleys.

The McMurdo Volcanics consist primarily of strongly undersaturated alkali basalts, trachytes, and kenytes of Late Tertiary and Quaternary age. These volcanics belong to a unique petrographic province and contain numerous inclusions of peridotites, felsic rocks and megacrysts of olivine, pyroxene and hornblende.

Covering all of the low-lying areas of the valleys are Cenozoic deposits of glacial and marine origin.  These are extremely important because they comprise the material which most commonly is affected directly by weathering processes.

The major structural features of the bedrock topography reflect periods of faulting and intrusion. The main tectonic disturbance appears to be block-faulting of late Tertiary-Quaternary age with associated McMurdo volcanism; This block-faulting has been modified by glacial and fluvial erosion.  The front of the Transantarctic Mountains possibly represents a rift margin that has been subjected to fragmentation.

The work of glaciers in the ice-free valleys was important not only in the formation of the valleys, but also in the process of exposing material to weathering.  Several periods of glacial advance and retreat have been noted in the literature, with each successive episode less extensive than that episode preceding it.

The first episode of glaciation was an extensive spilling of plateau ice eastward towards McMurdo Sound, cutting the valleys in an east-west trend. The second period of glaciation was similar to the first, but less extensive. Morainal debris of the first and second glaciations are deeply weathered.  The coastal ice of the second event expanded and dammed the valleys existing to the

7
east, resulting in the formation of the valley lakes.  The third episode of 
glaciation was much less extensive than either of the two previous events, 
but deposited extremely thick terminal, lateral, and ground moraines which 
extend from Lake Vanda westward to the fork in western Wright Valley.  The 
fourth, and most recent glaciation was the least extensive of the series. 
Its angular morainal deposits are distinct and well preserved.  Ventifacts 
and major weathering phenomena have not developed on this material, although 
it comprises much of the material presently exposed for weathering.  Deglaciation 
occurred in all cases as a result of the reduction of the ice supply with sub-
sequent cut-off by the rock thresholds at the head of the valleys.

Deposits which were formerly thought to be terrestrial-glaciofluvial 
deposits of the Pecten Glaciation are, in actuality, glaciomarine fjord sed-
iments formed in situ.  Marine arms of fjords did extend into Wright Valley and 
possibly Taylor Valley, in the late Pliocene, and the water retreated because 
of isostatic rebound following the retreat of glaciers.  The many brackish and 
saline ponds may have been left as remnants after the sea withdrawal, or by 
evaporation of surface waters in the area.

The geologic record in McMurdo Sound is known only from a few grab 
samples and shallow cores taken from ships, and from geophysical profiling. 
The best estimate of the McMurdo Sound subsurface is up to 2,000 meters of 
Miocene to Recent sediments overlying on accoustic basement of crystalline 
rocks, Beacon Sandstone or McMurdo Volcanics (Appendix A,). 
Within the marine sediments a disconformity separating 2.4 m.y. and 
older sediments from 0.7 m.y. and younger sediments is widespread, and has 
been interpreted as a period of maximum glaciation and an expanded Ross Ice 
Shelf.

Scientists interested in the history of Antarctica agree that there are 
many sites that could be drilled to piece together the geologic history of 
Antarctica, some of which have been drilled by DVDP, and others are scheduled 
for the 1975-76 season.

Of particular importance to the entire project are holes in McMurdo Sound 
to recover as complete a record of near-shore continental shelf sediments 
as possible.  Because it is in a submarine environment, sandwiched between the 
antarctic mainland and a volcanic island, McMurdo Sound acts as a sedimentation

8
trap which records the marine, terrestrial, and volcanic geologic history 
of at least the last twenty million years. With this record in hand, tectonic 
and historical developments of the McMurdo Sound area can be ascertained for 
the first time.

In the bottom of McMurdo Sound, interbedded glacial deposits derived 
from the East Antarctic ice sheet, and perhaps glacial deposits derived 
from West Antarctica, may be interbedded with volcanic ash from Ross Island. 
If these volcanic ash layers can be correlated with times of known eruptions, 
an evolutionary cross section of the whole area of McMurdo Sound will be 
established. Sediments of McMurdo Sound will provide climatic, tectonic, 
and chronologic controls to our understanding of antarctica that can be melded 
into known patterns of physical change on a global scale.

The oldest fossils in the Ross Sea reported by work on the Glomar 
Challenger are Miocene in age, 15-20 million years younger than 
fossils tentatively identified from the pyroclastics in DVDP 3 on Ross Island. 
It becomes critically important to understand this Mesozoic to Cenozoic period 
of time when glaciation began. A diagrammatic cross section serves to illustrate 
the scientific relations (Figure 2).

The potentially high scientific return expected from coring sediments in 
McMurdo Sound, and their value in correlating the marine geologic record with 
the volcanic record on Ross Island, and with the terrestrial glacio-marine 
record in the dry valleys, strongly requires that coring be carried on in 
McMurdo Sound. Oceanographic piston-coring is limited to tens of meters, whereas 
the DVDP-Longyear drilling rig is capable of recovering material to 1500 meters. 
A suggestion that the Glomar Challenger should drill in McMurdo Sound was 
discounted, based primarily on the supposition that holes would be drilled 
during DVDP. The absence of a McMurdo Sound hole diminishes the value of Ross 
Island and Taylor Valley holes and correlations with material collected by the 
Glomar Challenger.

For reasons enumerated above, scientific interest by the three nations 
supporting DVDP remains high.

D. ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

Antarctica's ice-free region and adjacent ocean is a polar desert.  The 
mean annual temperature of the valleys is -18°C with a maximum high of +12.3°C 
9
Figure 2. Schematic geologic cross-section of the McMurdo Sound area.
recorded at Lake Vashka, Barwick Valley, and a minimum low of -62°C recorded 
at Lake Vida, Victoria Valley.  The average amount of precipitation in the dry 
area is 10 g/cm2, which occurs entirely as snowfall.  The average wind speed 
is 22.5 km/hour with speeds up to 150 km/hour.  The western parts of the valleys 
are drier because of katabatic winds coming off the polar plateau.  One result 
of the desert environment in Antarctica is the dominance of evaporation over 
precipitation resulting in such features as saline ponds, surface and sub-
surface efflorescences, internal drainage, and salt veneers.

The soils in the ice-free valleys have been extensively studied by sev-
eral workers.  It has been found that physical weathering can reduce boulders 
to fine- or even clay-size particles through repetitive freeze-thaw cycles 
with no need for chemical action.  Both ion migration and water movement are 
in an upward direction in the soil profile, and as a result soluble salts are 
quite common near the surface.

Random antarctic soil samples contain illite, vermiculite, chlorite, 
hydrous micas, clay-size feldspars and quartz, and montmorillonite.  The 
parent-product relationship of valley soils shows that the soils in the val-
leys tend to be alkaline and contain considerable amounts of soluble salts. 
The valley soils quite clearly reflect the fact that mineral alteration and 
transport of ions does occur.  A soil profile will contain variable amounts 
of salts available for solution and transport to low-lying areas.

E.  ECOSYSTEMS

The two scientifically most valuable ecosystems associated with the 
DVDP sites are those of soils and lakes of the dry valleys (see Parker and 
others (1974) for a more complete discussion of terrestial ecosystems).  This 
statement does not imply that marine ecosystems are unimportant, but that the 
DVDP will have little interaction with the extant marine environment and its 
component organisms.

El-Sayed (1972, p. 134) emphasizes the enormous gaps that remain in our 
knowledge with respect to critical information on polar biota.  The antarctic 
marine exosystem is unique, in that the populations exhibit high fecundity, 
large body size, slow growth, and small numbers of species.  This simple 
system is more vunerable to external disturbances than the more complex 
and stable ecosystems encountered in tropical and subtropical waters.

11
In order to determine the effect of pollution or other stress on an ecosystem, it is imperative to know the components of the system, how it functions, and how it responds to stress. Dayton (1972) and El-Sayed (1972) provide summaries of the marine ecosystem in the McMurdo Sound area.

Ross Island is of lowest value from the ecosystem standpoint compared to the various other DVDP sites.  First, it is less isolated from the sea and other more complex ecosystems, such as those involving birds, and so forth. Second, it has been disturbed by prior human activities to such an extent that its value as a natural ecosystem is much lowered.

F. DRILLING OPERATIONS

A program designed to collect this diverse suite of material in an unambiguous stratigraphic sequence is by continuous core drilling. With this in mind, NSF procured a Longyear wire-line drill rig with the capability of drilling and recovering core to 2,000 m, although equipment presently available at McMurdo Station limits drilling to 1,500 m.

Several boreholes have been drilled to basement depths of 300 m or more, whereas others penetrated only the relatively soft glacial and marine deposits in Wright and Taylor Valleys. This is a continuation of the coring operations of the 1972-73, 1973-74, and 1974-75 austral summers (Appendix B).

Details of drilling plans, and operations goals are elaborated in the Phase V Operations Plan, 1973-74 (Appendix A).

Sites to be investigated during the 1975-76 season include:

(1) McMurdo Sound - auger through 3 meters of annual sea ice in McMurdo Sound, through 150 to 300 meters of water, and penetrate the marine sediments to 1,200 meters, or to the operational limits of the equipment. Four alternate sites have been located, two of which will be attempted.

(2) Ross Island (DVDP 3)-- DVDP 3 will be deepened to the operational limits of the equipment in order to trace the initial stages of volcanic evolution of Hut Point Peninsula.  This is a contingency site, should the sea ice be unsuitable as a platform. An environmental analysis of this site is presented in Parker and others (1974, p. 43).

Collection of the geological materials for scientific purposes consists of standard wire-line coring techniques, as modified for operation in polar

12
climates, and drilled in a manner compatible with environmental restraints.
Sea water with commercial additives will be used for circulation.

G.  PRECAUTIONS AND GUIDLINES

The surface and subsurface environmental problems cannot all be antici-
pated in advance of each individual field set up, and each site is an individ-
ual situation. It has, therefore, been proposed that an environmental scien-
tist be available during the entire drilling process, and that all drilling
personnel at the site (drillers, scientists, and visitors) adhere to constraints
imposed by the National Science Foundation.  Representative at McMurdo Station
in consultation with the DVDP project scientists, drilling superintendent, and
environmental impact officer concerning living, drilling operations, logistics,
or any other field activity associated with DVDP.

    The following monitoring and procedure scheme has been used without consid-
eration of priority or importance, in order to minimize the environmental impact
of the drilling program:

(1) The drilling supervisor and drilling crew have not been permitted to
select the precise spot to drill based on the ease of drill operation, but
rather that selection has been made following on-the-spot inspection by a Pro-
ject Coordinator, drilling superintendent and USARP representative in consul-
tation with Advisory Panels.  It follows, therefore that the final sites were
within a particular area of DVDP scientific interest and which would suffer
least environmental impact from the drilling operations.

(2) Drilling was not undertaken in any area where major adverse en-
vironmental consequences were probable.

(3) The number of personnel operating the rig, and on-site investigators
were kept to a minimum.  The number of non-scientific visitors was restricted,
especially during monitoring operations so as to reduce bias of drilling
operations.

(4) The drilling team was instructed of necessary precautions in regard
to operations so as to minimize environmental impacts.

(5) The area of operations and the movements of all personnel, whether
by foot or in vehicles, was restricted in the project area.

(6) Effective controls were established on the kinds and amounts of
materials and stores taken into the project areas.

 
13
(7) Effective methods were used to collect, contain, transport, and 
dispose of all wastes to sites removed from the dry valleys.

(8) Burning of materials was prohibited at the sites and in the dry 
valleys.

(9) General tidiness was maintained at and around the sites, includ-
ing both rigs and camps.  All stores and material were secured to preclude 
dislodgement and scattering by wind and helicopters, especially in the dry 
valleys.

(10) Camp and drilling activities were minimized with regard to surface 
impact.  Environmental perturbations, such as excavations, leveling, forming 
of foundations, and so forth, were rectified where possible.

(11) All lakes, ponds, streams, and ground water in the dry valleys 
received special protection from perturbation.  Pollution, either biotic 
or abiotic, was avoided.  Drainage was not impeded, nor was normal flow 
obstructed.  Lake or pond stratifications, that is, thermoclines, chemoclines, 
or bioclines, were not disrupted.  Pumping of lake muds or water, to be used 
as a drilling medium, was generally prohibited, except as defined in some 
special instances.

(12) Drilling fluids were contained, both at the surface and sub-
surface, by barrels and tanks.

(13) Composition of fuels, amount, and consumption, were known, and 
special care was taken in the transportation, storage and handling of fuels.  
Care was taken to avoid seeps or spills, especially near water surfaces.

(14) Monitoring was undertaken for biotic and abiotic perturbations 
due to drilling and associated site activities.  Monitoring included micro-
organisms, organics, combustion products, trace metals, and any other sub-
stances which may perturb the environment, for example, drilling fluids, 
lubricants, and casing composition.

(15) A photographic record was made of drilling and other site 
activities for future reference.

(16) Authority was assigned to a monitoring team, and a reporting 
responsibility also was established.  This authority was directed through 
appropriate channels as outlined in the various Field Operations Plans.

(17) All drill holes were plugged when abandoned to prevent migration 
of fluid between permeable zones and between the surface and subsurface.

14
(18) A monitoring system was initiated for post-drilling observance 
at all given sites.

(19) All personnel in the camp were expected to participate in remedial 
clean-up procedures as needed.

 
   
      
15
V. IMPACT AND EFFECTS

A. GENERAL

It is commonly recognized that the antarctic does not posses a large 
human population, (nor any past endemic population), and it cannot be envis-
ioned in the foreseeable future as an industrial region, although transient 
tourism is expected to increase. Antarctica is truly an underdeveloped con-
tinent, and its main use is in the realm of diverse scientific investigations 
undertaken in an atmosphere of international cooperation.  Scientific information 
is the only presently exploitable resource of the continent. It is agreed that 
the antarctic must not be endangered in regard to future scientific endeavours.

Drilling operations can perturb both the surface and subsurface environ-
ments in the immediate vicinity of the operations.  The surface environment may 
be perturbed by the concentratied activities of man and machines;  the subsurface 
environment may be impacted by migrating fluids in the borehole itself, or in 
water, by mixing stratified layers or contaminating them chemically and micro-
biologically. Remedial measures designed wholly to protect one environment 
may be inapplicable or undesi?reable for others.

The antarctic soils and the unique microbial communities they support 
are especially delicate and subject to alteration by human activities, drill-
ing materials, and subsurface materials (mostly fluids where encountered). 
Some of these soils are especially vulnerable when, as in some cases, they 
have either no biotic phase or a single population as a simple community of 
microorganisms, both in number and in kind.  Any alteration of the abiotic 
(physical and chemical) characteristics can subsequently have adverse or 
irreversible effects on the soil ecosystem, especially on the biotic phase. 
Human activities at a given site can be expected to have some effect on the 
soil microbial ecosystems, either through possible elimination of some pop-
ulations, enhancement of other indigenous groups, or introduction and adaptation 
of exogeneous groups as has been well-documented for other areas of man's 
activities, such as the "populous" and highly perturbed McMurdo Station, or 
other stations where general housekeeping measures have been lax or lacking.

16
Previous aerobiological monitoring has confirmed that activities at
drilling sites greatly increase the numbers of aerial microorganisms, especially
bacteria and molds (Appendix B).  Many of these are nonindigenous forms,
such as from skin and mucus membranes, food, and more rapidly and at lower temp-
eratures than the nonindigenous microbiota .  Studies are too recent to determine
the longevity and adaptability of nonindigenous forms associated with man's
transient activities, such as at drill sites, but obvious changes in microbial
populations, population shifts and numbers have occurred in areas of obvious
contamination.

Drilling operations and camp activities will constitute major sources
of perturbations, with transient activities associated with helicopter activities
serving as secondary sources of perturbations.  Human wastes, cooking slops,
camp debris, daily personnel activities, and associated drilling activities,
for example, fuel and drilling materials, will have impacts on soil microbial
ecosystems.  The extent and import of the impacts will vary from site to site
but are likely to be of greater consequence in previously, relatively non-
contaminated sites or in areas which would favor growth and reproduction of
indigenous or nonindigenous microorganisms because of an environment already
"favorable" in terms of "available" moisture and food supply--especially organic
substrates such as algae, in or along the borders of streams, ponds, and lakes.

The use of drilling muds and other drilling materials will introduce
foreign physical and chemical substances as well as microorganisms to the soil,
and fuels and lubricants, both through accidental spillage or airborne exhaust
products, can introduce undesireable carbon products to the ecosystem, and
thereby disturb natural microbial populations.  Certain drilling muds or chem-
icals may result in "toxic" conditions for microorganisms, such as salt im-
balance, high osmotic pressures, and unfavorable pH and Eh.  However, the intro-
duction of certain muds, particularly clays, will enhance the soil environment
for microorganisms through an emelioration of the generally coarse texture of
soil materials, increase an ion holding and exchange capacity, and provide a
more favorable areal environment for microorganisms.  The introduction of clays,
in consideration of the low degree of chemical weathering and resultant paucity
of clay minerals, may be detrimental to clay mineralogical studies by future
pedologists and related disciplines.

17
From the viewpoint of microbiology, none of the chemicals for drilling 
(Appendix D), are advisable.  The use of most materials would produce a salt 
imbalance and a generally unfavorable local chemical environment for micro-
organisms.  Chemicals toxic to microorganisms whether organic or inorganic, 
are not recommended.  Materials containing cellulose, vegetable fiber, fatty 
acids, starch and clays generally will not be toxic, but may be expected to 
enhance or enrich the natural soil environment and provide for increase in 
growth, reproduction or adaptation of microorganisms.

Surface modification for foundations will be minor, although any un-
sightly scars would be restricted to the immediate vicinity of the drilling 
site and campsite.  A possible long-term effect is not erosion in the classical 
sense, but rather the exposure of salt minerals to subaerial solution, and the 
resultant salt imbalance.  Scars of the landscape can be returned to normal, 
but a disturbed soil will take time to reestablish.

The subsurface environment is not well known, and knowledge of this 
environment is one of the primary goals of DVDP.  To successfully accomplish 
deep drilling operations, the drilling products (soil, rock chips, cores and so 
forth) must be removed from the hole.  The hole must also be stabilized in fri-
able and weak zones, and native fluids encountered must not be allowed to mi-
grate between permeable zones or to the land surface.

Two types of drilling operating methods are contemplated in this phase of 
DVDP:

(1) Water circulation:  This method removes drill cuttings from the hole 
by circulating liquids, generally salt water.  Because of the relatively low 
viscosity of water, problems of lifting rock chips increase as the hole deepens.  
In addition, drilling fluids will enter any highly permeable zone with lower 
formation pressure than the fluid level maintained during drilling; conversely 
permeable formations with greater artesian pressures will fill the hole, causing 
formation and drilling water to spill over the land surface.

(2) Diesel fuel circulation:  This method removes drill cuttings from 
the hole by circulating diesel fuel arctic (DFA) with or without additives.  
At permafrost temperatures, DFA is a suitable circulation medium, however,its 
generally low viscosity and low density limits its use to holes generally less 
than 300 m in depth.  Dangers from fires and explosions must also be considered.

18
As with water, DFA can enter permeable zones, and hence contaminate 
the ground water.  In ice-cemented permafrost regions of the hole, this 
problem does not occur.

Mud circulation is the standard drilling method in which the drilling 
cuttings are brought to the surface by a viscous mud solution.  The mud, usual-
ly a treated bentonite, may be mixed with fresh water (impractical in the cold 
antarctic environment), salt water, or oil (generally diesel fuel).  In add-
ition to removing cuttings from the drill hole, mud is used to control the hole 
itself; it forms a barrier to prevent drilling fluid from excessive invasion 
of the permeable zones encountered; it prevents caving of the weak or friable 
zones; it can be weighted to control high formation pressures; it even affords 
some control over gases if encountered.  In DVDP, mud will almost certainly be 
necessary for the deep basement drilling and where potentially unfrozen, highly 
permeable zones may be encountered.  All sites will use a mud system.

All holes, when completed, must be adequately plugged to prevent migration 
of fluids to the land surface or between permeable zones, if encountered.

We recognize that a number of the chemicals listed in Appendix D represent 
potential impacts to the environment, especially to the microbial communities.  
For example, Q-broxin, which is chrome lignosulfonate, and Aldacide, which is 
paraformaldehyde, are two substances which could permanently damage a microbial 
community.  However, these, as with most other industrial substances are used 
only when it is necessary to avoid or correct down-hole drilling problems. 
Therefore, it is unlikely that these substances will be used for most of the 
drilling operation.  In the absence of data on the detailed effects of these 
various substances and on their detailed chemical composition, we have included 
our estimate of their potential impact in the impact matrices under the pro-
posed action:  Well drilling and fluid removal.  An adequate investigation to 
assess these substances would be a separate, detailed project in itself in 
order to assess the full impact of drilling chemicals on the environment.

B.  EVALUATION CONCEPTS

1.  Method of analysis

    An Environmental Impact Assessment for a particular activity upon a spe-
cific environmental characteristic is a function of four parameters:

    (1) magnitude or degree, extensiveness, or scales - which ideally can 
be quantified; 
                                                                 19
(2) importance or significance - which is more or less a value judgement;
(3) probability or chance of occuring - for unplanned operations, a prob-
ability less than 1.0; and
(4) duration - or length of time over which impact will be discernable.

The first two parameters have been addressed and discussed by Leopold and others (1971), the third by Brew (1974) for the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, and the fourth by Parker and others (1974) for DVDP.

     Brew (1974, p. 5) emphasises that the analytical method for analysis should 
be formulated for the specific environmental situation, and the proposed project 
at hand.  Below, we discuss the philosophy and analytical technique used in 
preparation of DVDP Environmental Impact Statements.

     Impact Matrix:  We have used a modified matrix approach in analyzing the 
effects of the project on the various sites.  We are guided by the principles 
outlined by Leopold and others (1971) in developing these matrices.  Although 
both magnitude and importance of the various proposed actions are required in 
the Leopold evaluation, we have classified these together to arrive at a total 
value judgement.  We feel that this is justified, in that all of us represent 
quite different backgrounds, and are able to arrive at a consensus of the var-
ious effects.  We further point out that this environmental Impact Appraisal, 
while possessing similarities with the United States' Environmental Impact 
Statements, differs in many ways from the latter.  Most notably, the informa-
tion base of the Appraisal is inadequate for a thorough  analysis as is requir-
ed for Environmental Impact Statements.

     Each site has listed the "existing characteristisc," and the "effects 
of proposed actions."  Under each heading appears a five digit number, repre-
senting our evaluation of a specific action on a specific existing character-
istic.  The five digit number represents probable maximum effects in five dif-
ferent time-intervals.  The choice of the time intervals is guided by our 
experiences, by the project duration, and by the duration of the Antarctic treaty. 
The time-scales are:

     First digit  - Diel (effect noticeable within one day)
     Second digit - Intermediate (within one season)
     Third digit  - Short Term (1-5 years, duration of project)
     Fourth digit - Medium Term (5-15 years, duration of antarctic treaty)
     Fifth digit  - Long Term (15 plus years, effects beyond the antarctic 
treaty)

20
A possibility of 6 evaluations for the DISML exists:
- does not apply
0 no effect
1 slight effect
2 moderate effect
3 severe effect
4 terminal effect--an existing characteristic can be destroyed 
    by a specific proposed action

Some of the effects require an "incubation period," the effects in-
crease with time, such as 12223. Other effects lessen with time, such as 
33221, and represent the ability of that characteristic to recover and ap-
proach an unaltered state.

Whereas still others, notably any impact on annual sea ice, ceases 
to apply after a period of time, such as 222--, that is after a few years, 
the sea ice under discussion has "broken out," and no longer exists.

Some effects are terminal, the original characteristic is destroyed, 
however, even a few of these (such as salinity changes of water resources) are 
able to recover given a long time base.

Below, we discuss the impact matrices of the site by boxes containing 
large numbers, by actions which affect many characteristics, and by character-
istics which are affected by many actions. Within each of these topics, we 
have chosen to follow the guidelines as put forth in the U.S. Federal Register 
(vol. 36, no. 79, p. 7724-7729, 23 April 1971).

Probability: This is the fourth drilling season for DVDP (Appendix B).
Experience gained, both in engineering and in environmental aspects, have been 
used extensively in designing the final phases of drilling and monitoring.  An 
important concept that has evolved, is one of "probability." Certain proposed 
engineering actions (see below) have a probability of 1.0 (inevitable), whereas 
other actions have low probability. We delimit 5 probability intervals:

Inevitable  0.9-1.0  This action will occur at nearly every drill site
High        0.5-0.9  10 to 18 sites will be involved
Moderate    0.2-0.5  4 to 10 sites will be involved
Low         0.25-0.2 1 to 4 drill sites will be involved
Improbable  0  -0.05 This action will probably occur at only 1 drill site

These probability factors are only significant for"accidental actions" 
(see below), in that all other actions are designed into the project
21
(probability=1.0) or are not proposed (probability=0.0).  In detail of course,
the probability must be considered in the same DISML time-frame as impact.  How-
ever, since DVDP is still in the "Short Term" time-frame (1 to 5 years) we do
not have a realisitc data base to make projections beyond "Intermediate"
time scales.

Aerial Extent:  The total impacted area of an individual DVDP drill and
camp site is 100 meter square, with maximum impact at the drill site, a 15 meter
square.  Migratory impact effects, for example, water-borne pollutants, could
encompass a larger area than the 10    square meters of the DVDP camp.  However,
from available data (Appendix B, Cameron), migratory effects are not dectectable.

Significance:  Don Juan Pond has been and is continuing to be used as a
terrestrial analogue of possible martian ecosystems.  As discussed previously
(Parker and others, 1973, p. 57) microbiologically we are concerned with:

    (1) introduction of foreign organisms;
    (2) establishment of foreign organisms;
    (3) extermination of native organisms; and
    (4) continued adaptation and evolution of indigenous populations.

Thus, modification of the microbiota could have profound consequences for
future work.

Cartwright (DVDP Bull. No. 3, p. 81) reports an upward gradient of 0.13
cm/cm for DVDP 5 at Don Juan Pond.  An unconstrained borehole to actual drill-
ing depth of 3.8 meters could provide 0.5 liters/day into the 1.8 x 10    liter
pond.  Because of similar water chemistries, this amount of ground water is 
relatively insignificant when compared to an equal volume of saline, bacterial-
rich water originating from domestic waste or human waste.  This amount of
waste water would have strong and deleterious effects on the microbiota.

However, because of this, the significance of any proposed action is
included in the DISML parameter and represents the maximum environmental impact.

2. Existing Characteristics Not Otherwise Discussed

Many of the characteristics established by Leopold and others (1971) are
not present in the area of study, such as highways, or recreational areas.
Also, in order to simplify our matrices and direct attention to characteristics
that we recognize as important, we have removed from the original matrices cer-
tain other existing characteristics.  These are enumerated below.

    (1) Mineral Resources--Probable mineral resources (such as seafloor
nodules) will not be affected.

22
(2) Force field and background radiation--will not be affected.

(3) Atmosphere-Quality--will be degraded by internal combustion engines,
however, the small displacements of the engines, and high velocities of the
atmosphere will disperse particulate matter.  Airborne organisms are discussed
under "microorganisms."

(4) Atmosphere-Climate--the operation is too small to affect either
short- or long-term climate.

(5) Atmosphere-Temperature--the operation is too small, and of such
low temperature (30° maximum in tents) to affect the air temperature much be-
yond a few meters from structures.

(6) Stress-strain (earthquake)--This is a seismically inactive area.
Structures will be small, and no high pressure underground pumping is planned,
and hence we conceive of no change in the tectonic regime of this area.

(7) Air movements--All structures are low, and small.  Aside from minor
variations in local air movements, no changes are visualized.

(8) Biological--Microflora and microfauna have been considered together
as microorganisms.  "Endangered species" has been omitted as evidence is lack-
ing, and we do not really know if such exists.

(9) Land use--This is difficult to evaluate in that scenic vistas are
present, but the area has little or no recreational use, only scientific.  As
the project is transitory, we feel that this feature will not be affected once
the operation moves off the site.

3. Definitions of Evaluated Characteristics

    In this section we define each of the existing characteristics that we
have evaluated.

        Earth

(1) Petroleum--natural hydrocarbons including gas.
(2) Sea bottom--the sea floor
        Water

(3) Ocean--McMurdo Sound
(4) Underground--any non-frozen subsurface water
(5) Sea ice--frozen water resting on McMurdo Sound irrespective of
fresh or marine origin.

        Processes

(6) Compaction and settling--consolidation
23
Biological

(7) Microorganisms--bacteria, algae, fungi, and protozoa, whether in 
soil or water.

(8) Birds--skuas and penguins

(9) Fish and shellfish--marine coastal species

(10) Mammals--seals, and whales

(11) Benthic organisms--bottom-inhabiting organisms such as sponges 
in the sea

        Land Use

(12) Scientific--for the immediate future, we visualize only scientific 
work and no commercial activities.

        Aesthetics

(13) Rare or unique Ecosystems--an ecosystem constitutes any relative-
ly discrete environment along with its native biological communities; for 
example, Lake Bonney, Don Juan Pond, or soils.

        Ecological

(14) Salinity changes of water resources--refers to both surface and 
subsurface waters, in addition an increase or decrease in natural salinity.

(15) Food chains and metabolism--addresses interaction among organisms 
and man in an ecosystem; for example, algae eaten by protozoa or decomposed 
by bacteria, and man's garbage eaten by skuas.

4. Definitions of Proposed Actions

In this section we define all major catagories of actions that will be 
initiated by the Project. We list them in an approximate time sequence.

(1) Ice road--a vehicular trail from McMurdo Station to the McMurdo 
Sound drill site.

(2) Camp vehicle--Nodwells, pick-up trucks, fork-lifts, fuel trucks 
that use the ice road.

(3) Campsites and buildings--the area underneath and around the camp 
area, and resultant foot traffic.

(4) Camp trail--a defined foot path between the campsite and the im-
mediately adjacent drill site.

(5) Modification of surface--the establishment of a camp, and the con-
sequence isostatic depression of the annual sea ice surface.

(6) Access hole--the drilling and maintenance of a 76-cm diameter hole 
through the annual sea ice to the underlying sea water.

24
(7) Well-drilling and fluid removal--the process of drilling a hole,
and pumping any natural subsurface fluids.

(8) Emplacement of tailings--disposal of drilling fines.  All tailings
are ultimately placed in used, metal, 55-gal (200 liter) barrels.  The barrels
are placed on annual sea ice, and are permitted to drift north, and thus are
disposed of at sea.  In general, all tailings are temporarily (1 week) stored
adjacent to the drilling mud tanks, and this constitutes "emplacement of
tailings."

(9) Drilling fluid discharge--of the circulating medium according to the
plan of drilling.

(10) Exhaust emissions--from internal combustion engines at the drill
campsite.

(11) Introduction and survival of exotic microorganisms--non-native
or exogenous microorganisms.

(12) Explosions--accidental expolosions.

(13) Spills and leaks--accidental spills.

(14) Operational failure--failures of all kinds that delay or cancel
that plan of drilling, and any changes in the projected plan of drilling.

(15) Accidental release of naturally occuring hydrocarbons--the acci-
dental drilling into and release to the environment of natural hydrocarbons,
including natural gas.

(16) Violation of environmental constraints--all violations of guide-
lines set forth above.

C.  APPRAISAL

Below we discuss the location and projected drilling plans.  This infor-
mation is taken from the Phase V Operations Plan prepared by Mudrey and McGinnis,
to which the reader is referred for more specific logistic details (Appendix A).
The Phase V Operations Field Plan up-dates those estimates provided in Field
Operations Plan Phase IV.  Selection of drilling sites proposed for the 1975-76
field season is based upon discussions with the U.S. Advisory Panel, DVDP
Coordinators from Japan and New Zealand, TF-199 support personnel in Antarctica
and Pt. Mugu, California, NSF personnel, and interested scientists from Japan,
New Zealand and the United States.

The initial operations for this year include drilling through annual
sea ice and 300 m of water in McMurdo Sound to recover sediments in McMurdo

25
Sound. Last season storms, and in particular, the record storm on August 20,
1974 led to the break up of 80 percent of the fast sea ice in McMurdo Sound.
This devastation in the projected drill site area forced abandonment of the
original plans, and rewriting of the operations plan to accomodate the new
conditions.

It is here proposed that the 1975-76 field season be concentrated in
McMurdo Sound with contingency plans to drill DVDP 3 in volcanic rocks on
Ross Island (Figure 3). The Impact Analysis for Ross Island is presented in
Parker and others (1974, p. 43).

This engineering summary presented below is followed by a discussion
of proposed actions which potentially can produce severe impacts upon existing
characteristics.

1. Dates and Objectives

Drilling is proposed to commence in mid- to late-October 1975 after
the arrival of a full drill crew and scientific party. As a safety factor,
extended stays at the drilling site will not occur prior to reactivation of
the VXE-6 helicopter squadron. A skeleton crew of three drillers will arrive
on Winfly 1975 to prepare equipment for shipment via an ice road to the projected
drill site.

The objective is to drill and recover marine sediments at at least one
McMurdo Sound site to full operational depth, and to drill lower priority
Sound sites prior to termination of drilling by mid-December 1975.

2. Drilling Site

Coordinates, and water depths of projected sites are shown in Figure 4.
The sites were chosen with regard to water depths between 150 and 300 m,
inferred stratigraphy based on seismic studies, and relations to existing drilling
sites.

3. Plan of Drilling

After the camp and drilling equipment have been located in the site area,
a 76-cm diameter access will be augered through the 2 or more meters of annual
sea ice. Depth to the bottom will be determined. An assembly of a weighted
seafloor pad, and casing and floats will be passed to the bottom. Because of
tidal motions of less than 1 m at the surface, this assembly, drilled, and set
solidly into the subsurface. Grouting will be used. Drilling and core recovery
will commence once this assembly is installed. Drilling will proceed with the
26
McMurdo Sound
          Second
          Arrival Heights
          First Crater
Hut Point
McMurdo 
Station
Erebus Bay
          Crater Hill
          Knob?ess
          Rock
          The
          Gap
Cape Armitage
          Pram Point
          0      1/2     1 Km
                  Scale
          Hornblende trachyte
          Olivine-augite basalt
          Hornblende basalt
NIU Cartographic Lab: RPV
Figure 3. Geologic map of Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island, Antarctica.  Taken 
from  P. R. Kyle and S. B. Treves, 1973, Review of the Geology of 
Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island, Antarctica: DVDP Bull. No. 2, p. 1-10.
McMurdo Sound

                Ross Island

DVDP 3 (McMurdo Station)

                Ross Ice Shelf

Kilometers
  10 20 30 40 50

Figure 4. Geographic location map of proposed DVDP Phase V drillsites.

            South Latitude         East Longitude
Site 1A     77° 27' 40"         164° 26' 02"
1B          77° 31' 55"         164° 34' 49"
1C          77° 40' 38"         164° 38' 08"
2A          77° 42' 38"         164° 59' 38"
            ± 1' 15"            ± 5' 30"

(circle of error - 2 km circle)

28
recovery of 63.5 mm diameter core, and successively smaller diameter core as 
reductions become necessary.  Core will be recovered in 3.05 m lengths in 
plastic tubing.  This permits visual examination of the core for traces of 
hydrocarbons, and maintains the physical integrity of the core.  When the 
hole is completed, and down-hole measurements are made, the process will be 
reversed, and all down-hole tools removed and brought to the surface.

4.  Circulating medium

    Sea water with additives is the primary circulation fluid.  Permissible 
additives are tabulated in Appendix D.

    After evaluating previous DVDP experience, and quantities used, the use 
of diesel fuel arctic (DFA) is permitted.  In the past DVDP operations, 
freezing of the circulating fluid has been a problem.  Aqueous fluids may 
freeze both in mud tanks at the surface, and in permafrost parts of the sub-
surface.  The subsurface under McMurdo Sound is probably non-frozen.  During 
the proposed drilling, air temperatures may drop to -50°C, thus surface freez-
ing is a real problem; DFA does not freeze at this temperature.

    Depending upon the salt concentration a CaCl_(2)-H_(2)O mixture may freeze. 
Excess salt, however can affect the yield characteristics of drilling muds, 
contaminate the core, and become highly corrosive.

    The exact circulating fluid and mud program will be worked out by DVDP 
Project Manager, drilling superintendent, and environmental monitor.

5.  Clean-up

    Clean-up consists of three aspects:  removal of down-hole tools and 
plugging; removal of tailings and waste; and removal of camp and drilling equip-
ment.  Clean-up will be completed prior to final abandonment of the camp, 
December 1975.

    The removal of the drilling string and down-hole tools is summarized 
above.  Where necessary, the hole will be plugged by back-filling or by grouting 
should leakage of hydrocarbons or groundwater be a problem.  Upon removal of 
the drilling string, the marine sediments will collapse into the hole, and will 
thus be self-sealing.

    During the drilling, tailings will have been stock-piled in wooden crates 
at some distance from the site.

    The proposal to leave this waste on the ice is environmentally acceptable. 
Wast at McMurdo Station is disposed in a similar manner, and waste from past 
DVDP operations in the dry valleys has been flown from the sites, and disposed

29
by placing the waste on annual sea ice. Upon break-up, the ice and waste is 
rafted north, and ultimately sinks into the deeper parts of Ross Sea.

All equipment and unused supplies will be brought back to McMurdo Station,
inventoried, and placed in storage; or shipped back to New Zealand for repair.

6. Summary of Matrix

The environmental Assessment Matrix summarizes the environment impact
of the proposed drilling on the 15 selected environmental characteristics
(Table 1). Of the 16 proposed actions, only the accidental, uncontrolled
release of natural hydrocarbons by operational failures appears to have
serious impact as suggested by values of 3 and 4 (several and terminal) in
the matrix. The impact can seriously affect six characteristics: Petroleum,
Sea bottom, Ocean water, Underground water, Microorganisms, and Scientific uses.

Clearly, a "blowout," or an accidental, uncontrolled release of natural
hydrocarbons, will affect the subsurface petroleum reservoir. There is little
reason to expect a reservoir shallower than 500 to 1,000 meters. At such
depths, with the designed casing system it should be possible to use heavy mud
and grouting technology to plug the borehole and abandon the site with the
projected drilling season. Hence a (44211) appraisal reflects our feeling that
remedial action can be implemented within a few weeks at most.

This rationale is also applicable to the other physical environmental
factors in the matrix: Sea bottom, and Underground water.

However, once leakage enters the ocean, effects could be discernible
in the water column and the associated microorganisms. All of these character-
istics, however are diluted over time. Gilmour (see Appendix A) reports a
north current in McMurdo Sound in the region of the drill site of 2 cm/sec
(240 ft/hr), and a flux in this region of 0.04 x 10 m /sec (10  gallons/day).
This current and volume of material should dilute any oil spills to below
normal detection limits.

Higher life-forms, fish, whales, seals, and birds are all migratory.
The mammals and birds will not be near the drilling site area during drilling,
because of ice thickness, ice cover, and time of the year. Any hydrocarbon
residue from an accident in November, which would be succesfully stopped
soon after detection, would be dissipated by mid- to late-December when these
animals would migrate into the area in relatively large numbers.

30
Table 1.  Information Matrix For
Environmental Impact Assessment,
McMurdo Sound Site
31

EARTH   1. Petroleum ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 10000 ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 10000 44211 00000
        2. Sea bottom ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 11000 ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 10000 44211 10000
WATER   3. Ocean ---- 00000 000 - 000-- 000-- 00000 11100 11100 ---- 10000 00000 11000 00000 43100 11000
        4. Underground ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 21000 ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 00000 11000 44211 10000
        5. Sea ice 110-- 110-- 110-- 110-- 110-- 110-- 111-- 212-- 222-- 100-- 000-- 400-- 222-- 111-- 232-- 111--
PROCESSES
        6. Compaction ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 11100 ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 00000 ---- 111--
BIOLOGICAL
        7. Microorganisms 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 21000 10000 00000 10000 10000 10000 21000 21000 44300 21000
        8. Birds 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- ---- 00000 00000 00000 00000 10000 11000 11000 00000 11000 00300 11000
        9. Fish ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 11000 10000 00000 ---- 11000 11000 11000 11000 11000 02200 11000
        10. Mammals 11-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 110-- 110-- 00000 10000 00000 00000 11000 11000 00000 11000 00300 11000
        11. Benthic Organisms ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 11000 11000 00000 ---- 11000 11000 11000 11000 11000 00000 11000
LAND USE
        12. Scientific 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 11000 00000 00000 ---- 00000 11000 11000 11000 33320 11000
AESTHETICS
        13. Rare Ecosystems 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 00000 00000 00000 00000 00000 11000 11000 11000 02200 11000
ECOLOGICAL
        14. Salinity changes ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 10000 00000 10000 00000 00000 00000 10000 11000 00000 11000
        15. Food chains ---- 000-- 000-- 000-- 000-- 100-- 11000 11000 00000 00000 00000 11000 11000 00000 02200 11000
Probability 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 ≤0.05 ≤0.05 0.9 0.2-0.5 ≤ 0.5 0.05-0.2
                                                                                                Imp Inevit Mod Imp Low
Two kinds of birds are present, skuas (gulls), and penguins.  The
nearest rookery is 60 km to the east on Ross Island.  Skuas are scavengers
and follow man.  The penguins are migratory, and will not be in the site
area until mid- to late-December as the ice edge melts towards the south.  As
with the mammals, any accidental hydrocarbon spills would be dissipated by
this time.

DVDP is a continuous coring and recovery operation.  Recovery seldom
falls below 80 percent, and typically runs better than 90 percent over the
length of a hole.

As a part of the DVDP environmental monitoring program, Parker is
initiating gas chromatographic studies.  This is an extension of the suc-
cessful gas analysis program by T. Torii and O. Waguri in 1974-75.  (see DVDP
Bull. No. 5).

Most of the procedures advocated by the JOIDES Safety Panel have been
implemented (see Appendix A).  These include visual examination of the core
and of circulation fluid, gas chromatography, on-site lithologic examination,
drilling rate observation, stand-by heavy mud program, and early hole abandon-
ment.

The success ratio in oil well drilling sets constraints on the probability
of encountering significant hydrocarbon in the surface.  Wildcat drilling is
exploratory drilling in areas that have favorable geologic relations for pet-
roleum, but no deposits have yet been found.  Annually, drilling and success
figures are published by the American Association of Petroleum Geologists
(see Stevens and Callahan, 1974, for example).  In general, over wide areas
and wide geologic settings, wildcat drilling has a success ratio of 12 percent
oil and 5 percent gas.  In detail, however, few of these finds prove commer-
cially significant.  About two percent of the new field wildcats result in one
significant petroleum discovery.

A second factor to consider is depth of drilling.  In general, at depths
shallower than 500 to 1,000 meters, there is little or no entrapment during
"primary migration" of petroleum, leakage to the surface is common (McColluh,
1973, p. 486, and Figure 59).  Similar conclusions were reached by the JOIDES
Safety Panel (1972, p. 7).  However, because of unknown geologic hazards, JOIDES
places the emphasis on caution, even though probability may be low.

32
A third factor is the design of the drilling string and mode of circula-
tion. DVDP equipment utilize return circulation, and thus the circulating
fluid may be monitored for oil, water streaks, and gas, and immediate revision
of the mud program may be implemented. Thus there is a greater operational
safety factor should hydrocarbons be encountered.

Blow-out preventers (BOP) have been advocated for all drilling.  A
BOP was procurrred by DVDP for use primarily on Ross Island, where concern was
expressed over possible hydrothermal fluids. None were encountered to a depth
of 350 depths.

In an engineering re-evaluation of the use of a BOP for McMurdo Sound
drilling (Appendix E), the use of the BOP would reduce the diameter of core
from the primary diameter of 63.5 mm to 47.6 mm. The engineering problems
that were advanced appear to be surmountable, however, the loss of the primary
drilling string, and thus loss of drilling flexibility is significant.  Thus,
it is proposed that no BOP will be used unless warning signs of a possible
hydrocarbon trap are observed.

7. Summary Statement

The impact assessment indicates that only the accidental release of
natural hydrocarbons could have deleterious environmental impact on the system
in McMurdo Sound. The low probability of encountering such hydrocarbons at
shallow depths, and the engineering options available to compact such a spill
suggest to us that dangers related to this are reasonably small and subsurface
complications can be rectified.

D. SUMMARY EFFECTS

Those proposed actions which may effect the existing environment are:

(1) Well drilling
(2) Emplacement of tailings
(3) Drilling fluid discharge
(4) Introduction and survival of exotic microorganisms
(5) Accidental explosions
(6) Accidental spills and leaks
(7) Operational failures
(8) Accidental release of natural hydrocarbons
(9) Environmental violations

33
The first four actions can be controlled effectively by careful adherence 
to the field operations plans.  These effects are potentially long term, in that 
physical and chemical processes are much slower in polar climates, and the natural 
system will take decades to reestablish a dynamic equilibrium.  In order to mini-
mize effects from these actions, we rely on an on-site environmental scientist 
to monitor changes and report to the project manager.  Although a plan of drill-
ing is established for the site, we provide sufficient flexibility in operations 
for modified procedures should environmental difficulties arise.

    Actions 5 through 9 we have less direct control over.  However, by care-
ful and conscientious efforts of the experienced personnel, we feel that that 
these accidental and unexpected problems will arise infrequently.  Also, by 
being aware of their possible occurrence, clean-up or other remedial measures 
can be taken quickly, thereby minimizing their impacts if they do occur.

    More specifically, spills will be remedied by clean-up operations.
Operational failures require a sufficient on-site inventory of drilling equip-
ment to remedy down-hole complications, and to repair broken equipment.  With this 
in mind, the Phase V Operations Plan was prepared.  The drilling supervisor and 
project scientists will keep up-to-date on field operations, and insure the 
mechanical capabilities of the operation.

    Environmental violations fall into two broad catagories:  accidents 
through inexperience or forgetfulness; and deliberate actions.  The planned 
indoctrination of all personnel can be effective in reducing the frequency and 
magnitude of both accidental and deliberate actions.  Here responsibility and 
individual morale are vital.

E.  FUTURE EVALUATION OF THIS APPRAISAL

    Detailed engineering and environmental records will continue to be main-
tained for this Phase of DVDP.  We propose to evaluate this appraisal against 
the actual operations as happening in 1975.  This re-evaluation on our part will 
permit a more detailed appraisal for future drilling operations, in polar regions 
and direct attention to those actions which will need to be modified to bring 
them into accord with the letter and spirit of antarctic research.  Furthermore, 
the lessons learned during DVDP operations can contribute to a lessening of 
impacts in future years by this and related scientific activities.

34
VI.  PROBABLE ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS WHICH CANNOT BE AVOIDED

The probable unavoidable environmental effects discussed undividually 
in Section IV, IMPACTS AND EFFECTS include some damage to the ecosystems in 
the imediate vicinity of the drill site, possibly some polllution or alter-
ation of the water by drilling fluids, and a small probability of the accident-
al release of natural hydrocarbons.

The damage to the ecosystems is the natural and unavoidable result of 
human activity and the use of machinery in the antarctic environment.  In this 
case the numerous procedures and precautions which have been suggested should 
minimize the impacts.

The invasion of the ground water by drilling fluids is unavoidable where 
unfrozen, permeable zones are encountered if no drilling muds or well bore 
controls are used during drilling because of other environmental constraints. 
These effects will be relatively short-term as the subsurface environment will 
normalize rapidly after plugging the hole.

 
35
VII.  ALTERNATIVES

Alternatives to the proposed DVDP program include the following:

(1) One alternative to the drilling program of the DVDP is not 
drilling at all. This would result in the abandonment of the National 
Science Foundation's commitment to probe the subsurface geology of the 
antarctic.

(2) Select other drill sites where there may be less environmental 
impact. To the degree that this may be possible, given the unknowns of the 
environment, this probably would result in the drilling of only one rock type. 
This would defeat the purpose of the research and render any environmental 
impact which might occur unbalanced by significant scientific gain.

 
36
VIII.  RELATION BETWEEN LOCAL SHORT-TERM USES OF MAN'S ENVIRONMENT 
AND THE MAINTENANCE AND ENHANCEMENT OF LONG-TERM PRODUCTIVITY

The Antarctic Treaty specifies that the Antarctic Continent is to be 
used for the betterment of man through scientific investigation. 
Specifically:

"Recognizing that it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica 
shall continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall 
not become the scene or object of international discord;

"Acknowledging the substantial contributions to scientific knowledge 
resulting from international cooperation in scientific investigation in 
Antarctica;

"Convinced that the establishment of a firm foundation for the contin-
uation and development of such cooperation on the basis of freedom of 
scientific investigation in Antarctica as applied during the International 
Geophysical Year accords with the interests of science and the progress of 
all mankind;

"Convinced also that a treaty ensuring the use of Antarctica for peace-
ful purposes only and the continuance of international harmony in the Charter 
of the United Nations."  In addition, it was set forth in SCAR Circular 292 
that the scientific operation on the continent outline the effect and extent 
of man's interference and take measures to minimize the harmful interference.

The DVDP complies with both goals.  The long-term goal specified the 
gathering of scientific data for the betterment of mankind and which is unique 
to the region, while minimizing the impact on the environment required to ob-
tain the scientific data.  The effects of the project on the environment will 
be monitored.  This will allow future researchers to gain from the DVDP exper-
iences and allow the assessment of intense short-term activity and occupation 
of the environment by man.

37
IX.  IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENTS OF RESOURCES

There is no irreversible or irretrievable commitment of resources in 
the conventional sense of the word by the DVDP drilling program.  However, 
Antarctica's unique, completely undeveloped situation makes scientific in-
formation one of the principal resources of the region.  For the most part, 
scientific information is not a consumable resource which is irretrievably 
lost once obtained.

    In the case of unique ecosystems, an irretrievable loss may occur through 
the four accidental actions over which the project has little control.

    No specifically protected areas set aside by the Antarctic Treaty are 
to be encroached upon, and no specifically prohibited or controlled substances 
are to be brought into the project area.

 
38
X. REFERENCES CITED

Brew, D.A., 1974, Environmental impact analysis: The example of the proposed 
Trans-Alaska pipeline:  U.S. Geol. Survey Circ. 695, 16 p.

Dayton, P.K., 1972, Toward an understanding of community resilience and 
the potential effects of enrichments to the benthos at McMurdo Sound, 
Antarctica:  in B.C. Parker, editor, Proceedings of the Colloquim on 
Conservation in Antarctica:  Virginia Polytech. Instit. and State Univ. 
Printing Dept., p. 81-96.

El-Sayed, S.Z., 1972, Understanding the Antarctic marine ecosystem:  A 
prerequisite for its conservation:  in B.C. Parker, editor, Proceedings 
of the Colloquim on Conservation Problems in Antarctica:  Virginia 
Polytech. Instit. and State Univ. Printing Dept., p. 131-142.

Leopold, L.B., Clarke, F.E., Henshaw, B.B., and Balsley, J.R., 1971, A procedure 
for evaluating environmental impact:  U.S. Geol. Survey Circ. 645, 13 p.

Parker, B.C., Mudrey, M.G., Jr., Cameron, R.E., and Cartwright, K., 1973, 
Environmental appraisal for the Dry Valley Drilling Project Phase III 
(1973-74):  Dry Valley Drilling Project, Northern Ill. Univ., 122 p.

Parker, B.C., Mudrey, M.G., Jr., and Cartwright, K., 1974, Environmental appraisal 
for the Dry Valley Drilling Project Phase IV (1974-75):  Dry Valley 
Drilling Project, Northern Ill. Univ., 170 p.

Stevens, E.M., and Callahan, R.L., 1974, Developments in Louisiana Gulf Coast 
in 1973:  Amer. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull., v. 58, no. 8, p. 1626.

39
XI.  APPENDICES

A.  Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP) Phase V Field Operations Plan
    1975-1976.  Prepared by M.G. Mudrey, Jr. and L.D. McGinnis.

B.  Summaries of 1971-1975 Operations

    1.  Preprint:  Summary of Field Activities of the Dry Valley Drilling
        Project 1972-1973 and 1973-1974, by M.G. Mudrey, Jr., L.D. McGinnis,
        and S.B. Treves.

    2.  Published article:  Aerobiological monitoring of dry valley
        drilling sites (1973) by R.E. Cameron, F.A. Morelli, and R.C.
        Honour, Antarctic Journal of the U.S., v. VIII, no. 4, p. 211-214.

    3.  Published article:  DVDP environmental monitoring (1974) by R.E.
        Cameron, F.A. Morelli, R. Donlan, J. Guilfoyle, B. Markley, and
        R. Smith, Antarctic Journal of the U.S., v. IX, no. 4, p. 141-144.

    4.  Published article:  The physical impact of DVDP drilling at site 4,
        Lake Vanda (1974) by C.H. Hendy and R. Holdsworth, Antarctica
        Journal of the U.S., v. IX, no. 4, p. 144-146.

    5.  Published article:  Dry Valley Drilling Project Summaries (1975)
        by L. D. McGinnis and S.B. Treves.  Available from DVDP, Northern
        Illinois University, Dept. of Geology, DeKalb, Illinois 60115.

C.  DVDP Bibliography
    Available from DVDP, Northern Illinois University, Dept. of Geology,
    DeKalb, Illinois 60115

D.  Supporting Information on Drilling Chemicals

E.  Limitations on the Use of a Blow Out Prevention

F.  Definitions

G.  Individual Responsibilities

40
APPENDIX D.

Supporting Information on Drilling Chemicals.

41
BAROID OF CANADA. LTD.

6th Floor, Humford Building, 608 - 7th Street S.W., Calgary 2. Alberta
Phone (403) 263-8740

June 27, 1974

Mr. Mik Mudrey
Dry Valley Drilling Project
Geology Department
North Illinois University
Dekalb, Illinois  60115

Dear Sir:

Re our telephone conversation yesterday I would recommend 
that on the project in the South Pole they preheat the 
diesel fuel to 65°and premix 2% Methanol into the diesel. 
Then mix 20#/bbl. of Geltone into the above slurry.  I 
would recommend a funnel viscosity of 40 - 45 sec/qt. 
To lower viscosity add diesel and to raise viscosity add 
small amounts of Geltone.

Yours very truly,

BAROID OF CANADA, LTD.

Donald M. Larson
Sales Representative

DML:jh
42
* PTG.:F2.67740.SM

CANADIAN LONGYEAR LIMITED
P.O. BOX 330
NORTH BAY, ONTARIO P1B 8H6

AIR MAIL                                      June 21, 1974

Mr. Jack Hoffman
Senior Technical Officer
D.S.I.R.
P.O. Box 8005
Wellington, New Zealand

Subject:  Oil Base Mud

Dear Jack:

After consulting with Oil Mud Engineers and Drill Contractors who have worked in the far North, I have come up with a Oil Mud mix, which hopefully, should permit us to complete the holes in Antarctic. We will require two ingredients to be taken down. Menthenol and Geltone. Geltone is a mud and Menthenol is a liquid needed to make the Geltone yield in the D.F.A.

Assuming we have a NQ hole 1000' deep, the volume required to fill the hole will be 300 gallons, with twice the hole volume in the surface tanks (600 gal) will give us a total volume of 900 gal. IMP.

First add the menthenol (liquid) at 2% by volume 2% x 900 = 18 gal. menthenol mix thoroughly.

Add Geltone 10 lbs per barrel (35 imp gallons) = 26 barrels.

Mix the Geltone thoroughly then check the viscosity, which should be around 42 sec. using the Marsh funnel.  If more viscosity is needed add more Geltone, if too high-thick, add more D.F.A.

If dehydrated zone are encountered in the hole that start to swell, we can add salt brine up to 20% of volume which should dry up the formation and control the swelling.

Geltone comes in 50 lb sacks and menthenol comes in 35 gallon drums.  I have passed this information on to the U.S. but I don't know how much we will be able to take down on winfly. Canadian Longyear Limited will be supplying the two fuel supply pumps and the tripod holder.

.../2
43
TG.-F2-67740-SM

                  COPY OF LETTER FROM
                  CANADIAN LONGYEAR LIMITED
                  P.O. BOX 330
                  NORTH BAY. ONTARIO   P1B 8H6


Longyear
- Page 2 -

We have had some unsatisfactory results when trying to drill
in areas of Canada using S.F. 100, which is an oil base mud
additive recommended by Baroid as a "cure all".  We had to
discard the oil mud and switch over to a salt brine in order
to complete the hole in Eastern Canada.

Yours trulu,

M. McGale/lm                  Senior Fieldman.

c.c. D. Backstrum (Mpls)
Dr M.Mudray
Project Scientist
Northern Illinois University
Dekalb, Illinois,  60115.

44
NL 
INDUSTRIES

BAROID DIVISION

April 17, 1974

Mr. M. G. Mudrey, Jr., Project Scientist
Department of Geology
Northern Illinois University
Dekalb, Illinois  60115

Re:    Chemical Description of
       Baroid Drilling Mud Products

Dear Mr. Mudrey:

In response to your April 1, 1974 letter requesting chemical compositions and possible environmental effects of various Baroid drilling mud products, the chemical descriptions are as follows:

GELTONE - Reaction product of a high grade bentonite with a long chain quaternary amine.

CMC - Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose.

E Z MUL - A pentamine fatty acid amide reacted with fumaric acid and diluted with an aromatic solvent and isopropyl alcohol.

CC-16 - Reaction product of leonardite (a form of lignite) with sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate.

TANNEX - A homegenous blend of CARBONOX* and Quebracho.
*CARBONOX - leonardite

SF-100 - A homogenous blend of INVERMUL*, GELTONE (see above) and asphalt. This product has been discontinued.
*INVERMUL - Reaction product of a tall oil with calcium hydroxide, caustic soda, and sodium carbonate. Diatomaceous earth and calcium chloride are added to the reacted product.

SURFLO-OWL - An aqueous solution of a glycerol long chain fatty acid ester and a oxyalkylated glycerol long chain fatty acid ester.

45

P. O. Box 1675, Houston, Texas 77001 · (713) 524-6381 · Cable Address: Baroid-Houston
Division of N L Industries, Inc.
Mr. M. G. Mudrey, Jr.                                  -2-                          April 17, 1974

As to possible environtnental effects, I have enclosed a laboratory 
report, "Bioassay of an Oil Mud Compounded with Baroid Oil Mud 
Products - STP-4154", for your perusal.  To date, this report is 
the only information available as to possible environtnental effects 
for the above products.

I hope that the foregoing will be of assistance to you.  If I can 
be of further assistance, please let me know.

                                                      Very truly yours,

                                                                    Tracy E. East
                                                      Industrial Hygienist

TEE:fd1

Enclosure

cc:  Davis, E. W., w/o enclosure
     Simpson, w/o enclosure

                                                                             46
NORTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY

An Equal Opportunity Employer                     DEKALB, ILLINOIS 60115


Dry Valley Drilling Project                        Area Code 815
L. D. McGinnis, Coordinator                        Telephone 753 1184
M. G. Mudrey, Jr., Project Scientist              753 0284
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY                              February 6, 1974

Baroid Division
P. O. Box 1675
Houston, Texas  77001

Dear Sir:

We have corresponded previously with you through Mr. E. L. Herbst of Holmes
& Narver, Anaheim, California.

The Dry Valley Drilling Project is an international, interdisciplinary program
designed to investigate the subsurface of Antarctica through the recovery of con-
tinuous core by diamond drilling with a Longyear model 44 drill rig utilizing PQ,
NQ, and BQ wireline drill strings.  The program is funded in the United States by
the National Science Foundation.

We have used various chemicals that you supply.  However, our initial plans
for drilling in permafrost sediments, volcanics and basement have been modified
from a calicum chloride based drilling fluid (to suppress the freezing of the
fluid) to diesel fuel arctic (DFA).  Rock temperatures range from -24°F to +32°F
at a depth of 1500 feet.

The use of calcium chloride poses problems.  The salt tends to dissolve ice,
hence removing the cementing agent from the unconsolidated sands.  This leads to
caving, and the consequent loss of the hole.

The use of DFA poses a few problems in basement rock, however we now
recognize several serious problems with DFA in the broken volcanics, and in the
clay-rich sediments.  Locally severe circulation loss problems occur within parts
of the volcanic sequences, and result from the porosity and permeability of the
rocks.  The clay-rich sediments offer different circulation problems, in that the
DFA does not lift the cuttings from the hole.  This leads to down-hole torque,
gumming of the rods, and the necessity of excess pressure on the circulation
system to get a return flow.

I would greatly appreciate information and recomendations relating to
circulation additives for DFA for this permafrost drilling program.  I would also
appreciate any data manuals that you may have for distribution to our environ-
mental assessment group.

Respectfully,

M. Ly Mudrey if.  (Jr.)

Michael G. Mudrey, Jr.

cc:  L. D. McGinnis
     M. J. McGale
     E. L. Herbst
     R. P. Backstrom
     R. B. Thomson
     J. E. Hoffman
     A. Oliver
     47
INDUSTRIES

BAROID DIVISION
February 12, 1974

Mr. Michael G. Mudrey, Jr.
Project Scientist, Dry Valley Drilling Project
Northern Illinois University
Dekalt, Illinois  60115

Re:  Oil Mud for Arctic Drilling

Dear Mr. Mudrey:

Thank you for your letter of February 6, 1974 requesting information on
additives for Arctic diesel fuel to lift cuttings and to combat circula-
tion loss in permafrost drilling. Baroid has considerable experience
with such drilling and, fortunately, we can recommend a very simple system
for your continuous diamond core drilling.

Our experience has shown that some water becomes incorporated in oil when
used for permafrost drilling. Even when present in oil at very low con-
centrations, that water will wet the clay-bearing sediments, causing
down-hole torque and gumming of the bit and drill string. Two steps are
necessary to combat the detrimental effects of water.  First, a surfactant
(E Z MUL) is used in the oil "mud system" to oil-wet any exposed solids and
to emulsify the water that becomes dispersed in the system.  Second, calcium
chloride is used in the oil mud system to maintain a salinity of about
250,000 ppm in the dispersed water phase. This salinity creates an osmotic
condition that combats the hydration tendency of the clay-bearing formations.
The salinity also prevents freezing of the emulsified water droplets in the
temperature range of -24°F to +32°F. Emulsification of the calcium chloride
solution in the oil prevents the salt from dissolving ice from the oil-wet
formation.

Once water-wetting problems are controlled, lifting of cuttings can be
accomplished by use of GELTONE, an oil-dispersible bentonite. The con-
centration of GELTONE required depends to some extent upon the amount of
water in the oil mud. If no water were present, a small amount of a polar
additive such as methanol would be needed to cause the GELTONE to yield.
Since water will become incorporated, a simpler approach is to prepare the
mud to contain about 5% water by volume. With proper maintenance of E Z MUL
and calcium chloride, the water content can be varied to as high as 30 or
40% with no detrimental effects on the wellbore conditions. For easy control
in your operations, the following range of compositions is suggested per
barrel of liquid:

48

P. O. Box 1675, Houston, Texas 77001  (713) 524-6381 · Cable Address: Baroid-Houston
Division of N L Industries, Inc.
-2-

Arctic Diesel Fuel, bbl         0.95   to   0.85
E Z MUL, lb                     3       5
GELTONE, lb                    15       5
Calcium Chloride (Tech) lb     7.5     24
Water, bbl                     0.05    0.15

Attached is a laboratory report (STB-638) that describes an oil mud system
of this type.  For your type of drilling, I believe that a lower viscosity
and gel strength would be better than that provided by the 25 lb/bbl of
GELTONE.  As stated in the report, the oil mud should be mixed at a temp-
erature above 65°F to get good yield from the GELTONE.  Once prepared, the
mud can then be used effectively at low temperature.

I have also attached brochures that describe our oil mud products and the
various types of solids-control equipment and testing equipment that are
available from Baroid.  Please let me know if we can be of further assistance.

Yours truly,

                  Jay P. Simpson
Manager, Technical Sales

JPS:ds

Attachments (4)

cc:  B. W. Emerson, w/attch. (1)
     Tanner-Litman, w/o attch.
     Howard Morton, w/attch. (1)
     B. L. Boccella, w/o attch.
     Ray Morris, w/attch. (1)

49
NORTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY
An Equal Opporunity Employer                  DEKALB, ILLINOIS 60115

Dry Valley Drilling Project                   
L. D. McGinnis, Coordinator                  Area Code 815
M. G. Mudrey, Jr., Project Scientist        Telephone 753-1184
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY                        753-0284

                                              April 1, 1974

Mr. Tracy East
Industrial Hygienist
Baroid Division
N.C. Industries, Inc.
P. O. Box 1675
Houston, Texas  77001

Dear Mr. East:

Last year you responded on April 16, 1973 to Mr. E. L. Herbst
of Holmes and Narver about chemical analysis and possible environ-
mental effects of various drilling fluid additives for use by the
Dry Valley Drilling Project in Antarctica.

On February 6, 1974, I wrote to Mr. Jay P. Simpson of Baroid's
Technical Sales department about DVDP drilling complications with
diesel fuel.  On February 12, 1974 he kindly responded, and offered
a realistic appraisal of our problems, and recommended suitable
procedures and additives to combat our problems.

Prior to procuring any additional chemicals, our environmental
assessment group must have more information on these chemicals.

I would greatly appreciate information similar to last year on
GeHone, EZ Mul, Cellex, CC-16, Tannex, SF-100, and Surflo-0W-1.
This information should include chemical composition and possible
environmental effects.

The information supplies last year was most helpful to us and
aided materially in the preparation of our Impact Statement.

Sincerely,

M.G. Mudrey, Jr.
M. G. Mudrey, Jr.

cc:  B. Parker
     R. Cameron
     L. McGinnis
     K. Cartwright
     G. Llano

MGM/gd
50
HOLMES & 
NARVER, INC.                                                
400 EAST ORANGE THORPE AVENUE     |     ANAHEIM, CALIFORNIA 92801     |     (714) 870-5700
                                                                 
                TECHNOLOGY & CONSTRUCTION
                                                                 
SOURCE SCIENCES COMPANY

May 7, 1973

Dr. Lyle D. McGinnis
Coordinator, Dry Valley Drilling Project
Department of Geology
Northern Illinois University
DeKalb, Illinois  60115

Dear Lyle:

Enclosed are chemical analyses of the drilling mud products Holmes & Narver purchased last season for the Dry Valley Drilling Project.
These analyses are forwarded in response to your earlier letter of request to Dick Backstrom of the Longyear Company. Inasmuch as Holmes & Narver did the purchasing, Dick forwarded your request to us for action.

Both Dresser Industries and the Baroid Division were most receptive to our special problems in Antarctica and appear to have gone out of their way to provide us with the details needed. To avoid communication problems or misunderstanding, I will pass this information on to you by copy of the respective letters. If you have any specific questions, you can contact the companies and the responsible individuals directly or, if you prefer, give me a call to follow up.

Very truly yours,

HOLMES & NARVER, INC.

E. L. Herbst
Assistant Project Manager
Antarctic Support Services

Enclosures (2)

cc: Mr. Rolf Bjornert, NSF/OPP (w/encl)
    Mr. Richard Backstrom, Longyear (w/encl)

51
PETROLEUM & MINERALS GROUP, DRESSER INDUSTRIES, INC. · P. O. BOX 6504, HOUSTON, TEXAS 77005 · 713 781-5900

April 16, 1973

Mr. E. L. Herbst
Holmes and Narvey
400 East Orange Thorpe
Anaheim, California 92801

Dear Mr. Herbst:

In reference to your request for chemical analysis and possible environmental 
effects of various drilling fluid additives, we offer the following information.

MAGCObAR - Chemical Name:  Barium Sulfate
Chemical Formula: BaSO4
Description:  Inert, non-toxic, insoluble mineral
Environmental Effects:  None

KWIK-THIK - Chemical Name:  Peptized Bentonite
Chemical Formula:  (OH)7Si8(Al3.34Mgo.66)O20 Sodium Heavy + (C3H4O2)N
                                                   Na0.66
Description:  Inert, non-toxic, insoluble mineral
Environmental Effects:  None

SALT GEL - Chemical Name:  Attapulgite Clay
Chemical Formula:  (OH2)4(OH)2Mg5Si8O20 . 4H2O
Description:  Inert, non-toxic, insoluble mineral
Environmental Effects:  None

CALCIUM CHLORIDE - Chemical Name:  Calcium Chloride
Chemical Formula:  CaCl2 + .5% Salt Chromate
Description:  White to off-white, odorless flakes, soluable in 
water
Environmental Effects:  None

CEMENT FONDU - Chemical Name:  Fondu Calcium Aluminate Cement
Chemical Analysis:  Al2O3    40%
                    TiO2      2%
                    CaO      38%
                    Fe2O3    11%
                    FeO       4%
                    SiO2      5%

52
Mr. E. L. Herbst
4/16/73
-2-

Description: Dark colored, hydraulic, forty percent alumina 
             calcium aluminate cement
Environmental Effects:  None

SPERSENE - Chemical Name:  Chrome Lignosulfonate
Chemical Formula: Unknown
Description: Dark brown, finely ground powder. Specific gravity -
             1.2. Water soluble, non-toxic
Environmental Effects:  None

CMC REGULAR - Chemical Name:  Sodium Carboxymethylcellulose
Chemical Formula: (C30H43O4Na3)N
Description: Odorless, cream to white granular solid. Specific
             gravity - 1.005
Environmental Effects:  None

MY LO GEL - Chemical Name:  Pregelotinized Starch
Chemical Formula: (C6H1005)X
Description: Odorless, off-white to cereal color dry powder. Specific
             gravity - 1.4 - 1.5
Environmental Effects:  None

CAUSTIC SODA - Chemical Name:  Sodium Hydroxide
Chemical Formula: NaOH
Description: Odorless, white to gray flakes or powder. Specific
             gravity - 2.13
Environmental Effects:  Will cause temporary increase in pH; however,
             effects are not lasting

Regarding your prime concern of the possible environmental effects resulting from
the use of the above products, it is our opinion that the danger is negligible.

Should you have any further questions or need further assistance in this matter,
we will be happy to assist.

Sincerely,

DRESSER INDUSTRIES, INC.
PETROLEUM AND MINERALS GROUP




James W. Woodley, P.E., C.S.P.
Manager
Safety and Environmental Control

JwW:cas

cc:  John Puryear
53
INDUSTRIES

BAROID DIVISION

April 16, 1973

Mr. E. L. Herbst
Assistant Project Manager
Antarctic Support Services
Holmes & Narver, Inc.
400 East Orangethorpe Avenue
Anaheim, California 92801

Re:  Chemical Description of Baroid Drilling Mud Products

Dear Mr. Herbst:

In regard to your April 9, 1973 letter concerning chemical 
descriptions for the products on Purchase Order 3-000QX,
the descriptions are as follows:

Product                                  Chemical Description

ALDACIDE                                 Paraformaldehyde
QUIK-TROL                                Polyanionic Cellulose
KWIK SEAL (fine)                         A mixture of vegetable fiber 
                                            (bagasse), synthetic fiber (nylon),
                                            cellophane flakes, and wall-nut 
                                            hulls
COAT-415                                 Tallow 1,3 propylene diamine 
                                            neutralized with a fatty acid
                                            (commonly referred to as Tallow 
                                            diamine)

I have also enclosed a copy of "Baroid Drilling Mud Products".
This alphabetical listing covers the most common Baroid drilling
mud products and includes chemical descriptions, functions,
recommended usage, and make-up dosage.  I hope that this infor-
mation will aid you in planning exploratory drilling operations
and compliance with biologist requirements.

54
P. O. Box 1675, Houston, Texas 77001 · (713) 524-6381 · Cable Address: Baroid-Houston
Division of N L Industries, Inc.
Mr. E. L. Herbst                  -2-                 April 16, 1973

If I can be of further assistance, please let me know.

Very truly yours,

Tracy East
Industrial Hygienist

TE:nt

Enclosure

cc: Davis, E. W. - w/o enclosures
     Doyle, J. J. - w/o enclosures
PRODUCT TRADE                PRIMARY FUNCTION                                                                 RECOMMENDED USAGE              DESCRIPTION                                                                                   MAKE-UP 
NAME                                                                                                                                                    LOW     HIGH                                                                                    DOSAGE
                                                                                                                                                       pH      pH                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
AKTAFLO-E (55 gal)                                                                               X       X                                                                                    Oxyethylated alkyl phenol liquid                                                  0.5 - 3 lb/bbl
AKTAFLO-S (55 gal)                                                                               X       X                                                                                    Mixed oxyethylated phenols liquid                                                 2 - 6 lb/bbl
ALCOPTIDE (50#)                                                                                                                           X                                                                 Paraformaldehyde powder toxic (CH20) y                                            0.5 - 1.0 lb/bbl
Aluminum Stearate (25#)                                                                                                                                   X                                                                 Aluminum stearate powder, non toxic                                               1 quart/10 quart
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [CH3(CH2)16COO]3Al                                                                diesel per circulation
ADUFCEL (10!#)                                                                                  X                                                                                               Sodium type montmorillonite powder,                                               10 - 25 lb/bbl
                                                                                                                                                    non toxic, specific gravity 2.7                                                   
BARAFLOC (1#)                                                                                                                           X                                                                         Acrylamide polymeric hydrolite powder                                             0.005 - 0.01 lb/bbl
BARATOS (10#)                                                                                   X                                                                                               Sudiun tetraphosphate powder, non                                                 0.1 - 0.2 lb/bbl
                                                                                                                                                    toxic                                                                             Na4P4013                                   
BARCO (100#)                                                                                    X                                                                                               Calcium type montmorillonite powder,                                              10 - 40 lb/bbl
                                                                                                                                                    non toxic                                                                                                                          
BAROID (100#)                                                                                                                                                                                                   Barite, barium sulfate powder BaSO4                                               50 - 900 lb/bbl
                                                                                                                                                    specific gravity 4.2                                                              
BAROID ASPHALT (50#)                                                                                                                                                                                            Oxidized asphalt                                                                  50 lb/bbl diesel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3-6 lb/bbl
POLI-EX (2#)                                                                                    X                                                                                               Co-polymer, flocculant and clay extender                                          0.01 - 0.1 lb/bbl
Bicarbonate of Soda (100#)                                                                                                                      X                                                                 Sodium bicarbonate powder, non toxic                                              0.1 - 1.5 lb/bbl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NaHCO3                                                                           
Calcium Chloride (100, 80#)                                                                     X                                                                                               Calcium chloride powder, non toxic                                                10 - 350 lt/bbl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CaCl2                                                                            
CARBOHXCX (50#)                                                                                 X                                                                                               Lignitic humic acid powder, non toxic                                             0.5 - 35 lb/bbl
Caustic Soda (50#)                                                                                                                              X                                                                 Sodium hydroxide flake, toxic haOH                                               0.1 - 3 lb/bbl
CC-16 (50#)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Solubilized sodium salt of lignitic                                                0.5 - 6 lb/bbl
                                                                                                                                                    humic acid powder                                                                 
CELLEX (2#)                                                                                     X                                                                                               Sodium carboxymethylcellulose                                                     0.1 - 1.5 lb/bbl
                                                                                                                                                    powder, non toxic                                                                 
cement (94#)                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cement powder                                                                    0.1 lb/bbl
CLAY-S[?] 20 (55 gal)                                                                           X                                                                                               Surfactant for removal of oil mud lost                                            Slug treatrent
                                                                                                                                                    to formation                                                                                  5-50 gal slug diesel
CONT-LUBE (55 gal)                                                                                                                                                                                              Film-forming amine                                                                treated with 20: C13:5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5-50 gal slug diesel
CONT-T15 (55 gal)                                                                                                                                                                                               Film-forming amine                                                                treated witn 20: : 415
COAT-HL-03 (55 gal)                                                                                                                                                                                             For use in solids free fresh or brine                                            0.2 - 0.4 gal/bbl
                                                                                                                                                    water packer fluids                                                               
PRODUCT TRADE 
NAME                                                                                   
                                                                                
CON DET (5-15 gal)                                                        Water solution of surfactants             0.01 - 0.1 gal/bbl
Cottonseed Hulls (100#)                                         Cottonseed hulls fibrous cellulose,       3 - 25 lb/bbl 
                                                                non toxic                                
CYPAN (50#)                                                     Sodium polyacrylate                       1 - 3 lb/bbl 
JESCO (50#)                                                     Organic thinner                          0.5 - 3 lb/bbl 
EXTRID (50#)                                   Stabilized partially dextrinized          0.2 - 5 lb/bbl 
                                                                polysaccharide powder, toxic             
Dierconia Phosphate (80#)                                       Shale control inhibitor                  5 - 7 lb/bbl 
GESEAL M(50#)                                  Mixture of Lost Circulation               20 - 50 lb/bbl 
                                                                Squeeze Material                         
CPITFEAT (50# Dr)                                               Phosphatide liquid                        0.5 - 4 lb/bbl 
DRISPAC (50#)                                                   Polyanionic cellulose                     0.1 - 3 lb/bbl 
DURATONE HI (50#)                                               Organophilic colloid powder              2 - 20 lb/bbl 
EP MUDLUBE (55 gal)                                             Modified higher organic acids liquid      2 - 6 lb/bbl 
E Z MUL (55 gal)                                                Oil soluble surfactant liquid             2 - 15 lb/bbl 
FIBERPTEX (40#)                                  Processed cane fibers, non toxic          3 - 40 lb/bbl 
FLOSAL (52#)                                   Shredded asbestos suspending agent         2 - 6 lb/bbl 
                                                                for increasing carrying power            
Galena (100#)                                  Lead sulfide powder, toxic PbS            2300 lb/bbl for 
                                                                                                       32 lb/gal mud
GEL CON (50#)                                                   Inorganic Minerals and Organic Polymers   1 - 3 lb/bbl 
GELTOIL (50#)                                                   Organophilic clay powder                 0.5 - 7 lb/bbl 
Graphite (50#)                                                  Carbon powder, non toxic                  1 - 2 lb/bbl 
Gypsum (100#)                                  Calcium sulfate powder, non toxic         2 - 6 lb/bbl 
                                                                CaSO4 2H20                               
MI-FIL (45#)                                   Shredded organic fiber, non toxic         2 - 15 lb/bbl 
MIPROPTEX (50#)                                  Pregelatinized starch powder, non toxic    2 - 8 lb/bbl 
MIL-TEMP (50#)                                  Modified calcium salts of higher          5 - 25 lb/bbl 
                                                                organic acids powder                    
PRODUCT TRADE 
NAME                                                        
                                                                                
JELFLAKE (25#)                                                        
Lime (50#)                                                            
LO LOSS (50#)                                                         
MICATEX (50#)                                                         
G.E.C (15 gal)                                                        
PETHTOPE (50#)                                                        
PILCOSEAL (50#)                                                       
PLUG-GIT (40#)                                                        
POLYFLAKE (25#)                                                       
Q-BROXIL (50#)                                                        
Quebracho (50#)                                                       
QUIK-FOAM (1 gal)                                                     
QUIK-GEL (50#)                                                        
QUIK-MUD (1 gal)                                                      
QUIK-TEOL (2#)                                                        
Salt (100#)                                                           
SAPP (100#)                                                           
SKAMUL (5 gal)                                                        
SKOT FREE (50#)                                                       
SF-100 (50#)                                                          
Soda Ash (100#)                                                       
Sodium Chromate (50#)                                                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                
BAROID DRILLING MUD PRODUCTS                                                                                           Page 4 of 4


PRODUCT TRADE 
NAME                                        PRIMARY FUNCTION                                  /. RECOMMENDED USAGE                                                                                  MAKE-UP 
                                                                                                                                                                        DOSAGE

                                                                                                                 LGW    HIGH                                                                         
                                                                                                                   pH     pH                                                                         
SOLTEX (50#)                                   •      •     •        •        •        •     •                                                                 Moditied high molecular weight 
                                                                                                                                                                        hydrocarbon powder              2 - 6 lb/bbl
STABILITE (50#)                                                                                                                                                        Organic phosphate               0.1-0.5 lb/bbl
SURFLO-011 (55 gal)                                                                                                                                                    Film-forming amine for treating 
                                                                                                                                                                        solids free packer fluids       2 lb/bbl
SURFLO-019 (55 gal)                                                                                                                                                    Biocide for solids free fluids  2 lb/bbl
SURFLO-833 (55 gal)                                                                                                                                                    Chlorinated phenol for treating 
                                                                                                                                                                        water base packer muds          2 lb/bbl
SURFLO-530 (55 gal)                                                                                                                                                    Anionic biodegradable foaming 
                                                                                                                                                                        agent                           1-2 gal/10 bbl water 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        per hour
SURFLO 1200, W3CC (55 gal)                                                                                                                                             Surface active defoamer         0.01 - 0.1 lb/bbl
TANNEX (50#)                                                                                                                                                           Mixed tannin powder             0.2 - 5 lb/bbl
TORQ TRI! (55 gal)                                                                                                                                                     Biodegradable and non-toxic     2 - 6 lb/bbl
TRIKULSO (15-55 gal)                                                                                                                                                   Fatty ester liquid added to diesel for 
                                                                                                                                                                        spotting or emulsifying low solids muds 0.2 - 0.5 gal/bbl 
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.1 - 0.3 gal/bbl
TRIPHATE (100#)                                                                                                                                                        Granular barite                 as required
NALL-NUT (50#)                                                                                                                                                         Nut hulls granular               2 - 10 lb/bbl
WORKOVER ONE (50#)                                                                                                                                                     Acid soluble viscosifier for workover 
                                                                                                                                                                        fluids                          5 - 25 lb/bbl
XC-POLYMER (50#)                                                                                                                                                       High molecular weight Xanthum gum 0.25 - 1.50 lb/bbl
X-TEHO (1*)                                                                                                                                                            Powdered flocculant and clay extender 0.001 - 0.01 lb/bbl
ZEOGIL (100*)                                                                                                                                                          Attapulgite powder              10 - 20 lb/bbl

                                                                                                                                                                Revised April 1971-C.H.Jones
Summary of chemicals available to DVDP for drilling. Information
taken from p. 88-95, and shipping invoices supplied by E. Herbst.

Quantity  Unit Wt.  Total Wt.  Name                                                
1         100 lb    100 lb    Aldacide                                         
                                  0.5-1.0 lb/bbl                                   
25        2 lbs     50 lbs    Quik Trol                                        
                                  0.5-1.0 lb/bbl                                   
          Polyanionic Cellulose                                                   
10        40 lb     400 lb    Kwik Seal                                        
                                  2.0-10.0 lbs/bbl                                 
          A mixture of vegetable fiber                                            
          (bagasse), synthetic fiber (nylon),                                     
          cellophane flakes, & walnut hulls                                       

2         55 gal    110 gal   Coat-415                                         
                                  5-50 gal slug                                    
          Tallow. 1,3 propylene diamine                                           
          neutralized with a fatty acid                                           
          diesel treated with 20% C-415                                           

200       100 lb    20,000    Calcium chloride-toxic                          
                                  10-350 lb/bbl                                    
          CaCl 2 + .5% salt chromate                                               

100       50        5,000     Kwik-Thik (Quik Gel)                             
                                  5-10 lb/bbl                                      
          peptized bentonite                                                      
          Mg 6.66 Na .66 Al 3.34 Si 8 O 20 (OH) 7                                  
          +(C 3 H 4 O 2 )N                                                         

4         50        200       Caustic soda-toxic                               
                                  0.1-3.0 lb/bbl                                   
          NaOH                                                                    

40        50        2,000     Geltone                                          
                                  20 lbs/bbl                                       
          Bentonite with a long chain                                             
          quaternary amine                                                        

3         55 gal    165 gal    Methanol                                         
                                   2%                                              
          (CH 3 OH) - Technical grade                                              

100       50        5,000     Salt-Gel (Zeogel)                                
                                  10-20 lb/bbl                                     
          Attapulgite Clay                                                        
          Mg 5 Si 8 O 20 (OH) 6 *4H 2                                              

20        50        1,000     Spersene (Q-Broxin)                              
                                  1-20 lb/bbl                                      
          chrome Lignosulfonate                                                   

12        20        240       Magco-CMC (Cellex)                               
                                  0.1-1.5 lb/bbl                                   
          sodium carboxymethylcellulose                                           
          (C 30 H 43 O 11 Na 3 )N                                                  

50        50        2,500     Mylogel (Impermix)                               
                                  2-8 lb/bbl                                       
          Pregelotinized starch                                                   

20        100       2,000     Magcobar (Baroid)                                
                                  50-900 lb/bbl                                    
          Barium sulfate                                                          
          BaSO 4                                                                  

50        94        4,700     Cement, Fondu                                    
                                  .1 lb/bbl                                        
          Fondu Calcium Aluminate Cement                                          

                      60
Aldacide  Baroid  Calcium chloride  Caustic soda  Cellex  Cement  Coat-415  Gel tone  Methanol  Impermix  G-Broxin  Quik Gel  Quik Trol  Sodium chromate  Zeogel  
                                                                                                                        Weight Material
x                                                                                   x      x                          Viscosifier
                  x                                   x                                  x                          Thinner Dispersant
x                 x                 x                 x                                  x                          Filtrate Reducer
                                                                                                  x                          Lost Circulation Material
                                                                                  x                                                  Alkalinity, pH Control
                                  x                                                                                          Emulsifier
x                                                                 x                                                  Corrosion Inhibitor
                                                      x                                                                      Flocculent
x                                                                 x                          x                          Bactericide
                                                                                  x                                                  Calcium Remover
                                  x                                   x           x                                      Shale Control Inhibitor
                                                                                                  x                          Water Shut Off Agent
                                                                                  x           x                                  Water in Oil
                                                                                  x           x                                  Oil Mud
APPENDIX E.





Dry Valley Drilling Project
Northern Illinois University
DeKalb, Illinois 60115


Attention: Mr. M. G. Mudrey, Jr.

Dear Mike:

Your letter of June 19 asked for a report on the use of the (BOP) on 
the Sound hole.

After talking with both Mr. Anderson and Mr. it was indicated 
to me the problems involved. One problem is that if the hole 
grouted into bedrock. Martin drill grouted into bedrock. The second string of casing in the hole. This casing must be 
seating area. If the second string and cause the first string of casing altogether. The first string thus would 
be the third string in the system. This knowledge has cost Canadian Lengyear 

The second problem with using the BOP is the tidal movement, plus the and its affect on the drill pipe and accomodate the 4 foot tidal movement, plus the casing on the Sound hole would that elevation of 
the drill for which we don't think 

There is an adapter at McMurdo that will be hooked up to 
the NW Casing so that mechanically 
third string of casing in the Scure coring to be commenced with NQ tools. This, however, 
vertical support for the drill.


RPB:lmo

62


Telex 28684  ?
APPENDIX F.  Definitions

Biota - all forms of life.
Ecosystem - the environment and its native community of living organisms.
Environment - all factors and characteristics of an ecosystem which are
non-living;  such as chemical, physical, geological features.

Environmental Assessment - a formal evaluation process to determine
whether a proposed agency action is expected to have a significant
impact on the environment (U.S. Federal Register, vol. 37, no. 13,
p. 879-885, 20 January 1972).

Environmental Impact Appraisal - an abbreviated document based on an
Environmental Assessment and supporting a negative declaration, which
describes a proposed agency action, its expected environmental impact,
and the basis for the conclusion that no significant impact is
anticipated (U.S. Federal Register, vol. 37. no. 13, p. 879-885,
20 January 1972).

Environmental Impact Statement - a report which identified and analyzes
in detail the environmental impact of an agency action (U.S.
Federal Register, vol. 37, no. 13, p. 879-885, 20 January 1972).

Microbial - adjective referring to any and all microorganisms;  with
respect to this Environmental Impact Appraisal, the microbes
include bacteria, fungi, algae, and protozoa.

SCAR - Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research under the United Nations.

63
APPENDIX G.  Individual Responsibilities

Dr. Keros Cartwright is a hydrogeologist with the Illinois Geological 
Survey. He is well acquainted with drilling techniques, and has prepared 
environmental statements.  His responsibilities included preparation of an 
extended preliminary draft of this appraisal with particular reference to 
outline, geological input and drilling concepts.

Dr. Michael Mudrey, Jr. is a geochemist-petrologist at Northern Illinois 
University. He is project scientist for DVDP, and has been actively engaged 
in the preparation of the draft copy of review.

Dr. Bruce C. Parker is an aquatic ecologist at Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University with five years research experience on Antarctic 
lakes, and recently has become one of the most active U.S. Antarctic scientists 
involved with conservation and environmental impact analysis.  His responsibili-
ties included biological aspects of the appraisal relating to environmental 
impact statement standards and SCAR guidelines.

64
