TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

BRUXELLES
1985
7-18 octobre          October 9, 1985

ANT/XIII/INF 9

INFORMAL PAPER RELATING TO MAN'S IMPACT ON
THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

Submitted by the United States
The Antarctic Treaty System :  A Conservation* System

Rapidly expanding scientific and logistic activities, increa-
sed tourism and interest in exploration and exploitation of
both living and non-living resources have  led, among other
things, to proposals for a review of the approach to identi-
fying and protecting areas of particular importance in the
Antarctic. Several Consultative Parties have recognized this
issue.  It was also identified by the S C A R Subcommittee on
Conservation (September 1984) and at the S C A R / I U C N
Symposium in April 1985.  Specificly, there is a need to exa-
mine whether the concept of Specially Protected Areas (SPA's)
and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI's) are sufficient
to meet all special conservation needs.

The ability to identify and manage special areas in the Antarc-
tic depends in part on environmental and other information.
Such information is essential to all Antarctic management deci-
sions.  Technical developments now make it possible to create
information managements systems which allow the storage and
manipulation of  large, multi-disciplinary data sets collected
over broad areas and long periods of time.  In addition, satel-
lite technology is making possible the collection of new and
extensive environmental data from Antarctica.

* NOTE :  The term "conservation" as used here includes
"environmental protection".

./.
Techniques, procedures and criteria for a system of protected
areas together with an information management system are im-
portant elements of the evolving Antarctic Treaty System (ATS),
which is in effect an Antarctic conservation system. The Con-
sultative Parties have already elaborated many elements of the
Antarctic conservation system. These include, inter alia,
criteria for and establishment of SPA's and SSSI's, the Agreed
Measures, the Seals Convention, the Living Resources Convention
(CCAMLR), the emerging minerals regime and environmental impact
assessment procedures.

It is a tradition of the ATS that needed elements are developed
in advance of potentially disruptive activity but after suffi-
cient interest has been expressed to create the political will
to act. This interest, in turn, is driven by technological
development and an increase in human activity.

It is timely therefore for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties to request through their national committees that SCAR
review the criteria, procedures and data required to select
areas meriting special protection or management, and to recommend
changes needed to elaborate a complete system of protected areas
using information from all relevant sources. Based upon the
data available and the criteria developed, SCAR should also be
invited to give illustrative examples of areas which might be
made subject to new special management requirements. As part
of this exercise, SCAR should be invited to complete the review
and recommendation process called for in Recommendation VII-2.

. / .
3.

Secondly, SCAR should be invited to identify the types, organi-
sation and archiving of data needed to facilitate decisions re-
quired to achieve the intents and provisions of the Antarctic 
conservation system.

Following review of SCAR's report, the ATP's should consider
convening a meeting of information management experts to consider
how best to devise an information management system for use in
Antarctic decision-making.

Such an approach will assist in the consistent application of
Antarctic Treaty Recommendations, the development of future
Recommendations and serve to promote the further integration of
the Antarctic Treaty System.
