TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIII REUNION CONSULTATIVE


ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIII CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

BRUXELLES

1985                          ANT XIII/INF 12
7-18 octobre                 10.10.85.

ITEM 8 OF THE AGENDA :

IMPROVEMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN ANTARCTICA
AND COLLECTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF METEOROLOGICAL DATA

Information Paper submitted and referred to by
the South African Delegation.
ARGOS-SYSTEM AS AID TO SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATIONS

When the subject of Search and Rescue was discussed during the 18th
SCAR meeting in Bremerhaven 1984, the South African delegate on communi-
cation suggested that Antarctic operators should consider employing
the ARGOS system for search and rescue purposes.  Having had previous
experience with the system through an ongoing drifting weather-buoy
programme, the technique was strongly recommended.  In order to deter-
mine Service-ARGOS's stand on the use of the system for this purpose
the South African delegate was requested, as the representative for
SCAR, to approach and discuss the possibility with Service-ARGOS manage-
ment.  This was done and both Service-ARGOS as well as the Joint Tariff
Committee, the body presiding over tariffs, welcomed the idea of SCAR
participating in ARGOS application.

Service-ARGOS
Service-ARGOS was established as a co-operative project between CENTRE
NATIONAL D'ETUDES SPATIALES (CNES, France), the NATIONAL AERONAUTICS
and SPACE ADMINISTRATION (NASA, USA) and the NATIONAL OCEANIC and ATMOS-
HERIC ADMINISTRATION (NOAA, USA).  It offers capabilities for the satel-
lite-based location of fixed and moving platforms and the collection
of environmental data.  It will provide a continuous service for the
NOAA satellite programme until at least 1995.  The technical and
administration centre of the ARGOS system is Service-ARGOS, a sub-section
of CNES, Toulouse.
- 2 -

_ARGOS system application.

The ARGOS system has been designed and developed for a wide range of environmental studies to be carried out on land, air and sea.  Land-based applications normally centre around automatic weather stations (AWS), snow-data stations, hydrological stations and animal tracking. Air application comprises the tracking of free flowing balloons in the strato- as well as troposphere.  Also long-duration manned balloon voyages are catered for. Sea application are normally required by meteorologists and oceanographers i.e. position location and environmental data transmissions from free drifting weather buoys, moored buoys and drifting ice buoys.  This service has been an ongoing process since the inception of the system during the FGGE.

The possibility of having the same facility on board seagoing vessels was soon realised and South Africa, for example, has a system on board the ship, SA AGULHAS, the South African Antarctic research/supply ship whereby synoptic meteorological messages are read into an ARGOS terminal (ARGOS Newsletter December 1983). The terminal transmits the data every 200 seconds and, as soon as the polar orbiting NOAA satellites clear the horizon in sight of the SA AGULHAS, the data is received by the spacecraft, processed and the position of the ship is determined.  Not only is environmental data being received by the meteorologists but the position of the ship is known at all times.  No wonder that seagoing yachts are increasingly making use of this facility supplied by Service ARGOS. Yachts, however, do not normally carry terminals.  They are instead equipped with mini AWS's fitted with air-pressure and temperature sensors.  By making use of a 50 seconds transmission rate the position of yachts can also be determined during short orbital passes occuring to their east or west.

During the BOC Around-The-World-Alone race the 14 yachts which left from Cape Town, South Africa, on the second leg of a four-leg race were equipped with mini AWS's.  The result was that the exact position of every participating yacht was known at all times and of course meteorologists, especially those in the Southern Hemisphere, were delighted with the mass of additional data they received daily.  It was during the third leg of the race, between Sydney and Rio de Janeiro, that the mini AWS and System ARGOS made possible one of the most spectacular search and rescue ventures undertaken in the South Pacific.  SKOIERN 111, skippered by the French yachtsman Jacque De Roux, was damaged by heavy seas.  According to subsequent press reports SKOIERN 111 was poun-
- 3 -

Fig. 1  The synoptic situation at 00h00 on 9 February 1983.  Air pressure
reading 987,1 mb was received for 00h28 UT from SKOIERN 111 (AWS 16505).
Between 05h57 and 08h37, the same day, the distress alarm on the AWS was
activated.

Considering the synoptic analyses of 00h00 on 9 February given in fig
1 this could well have been the case.  The data given under 16505,
north-east of the centre of the depression, refers to that received from
SKOIERN 111 at 00h28 UT on the 9th.  Between satellite passes 05h57
and 08h38 she activated the distress facility on the AWS and what fol-
lowed was a most dramatic search and rescue venture.  Meteorological
and position data from the other yachts as well as SKOIERN 111 were
being received and transmitted during the entire operation.  The result
was that the progress of the operation could be followed at all stages.

/4
- 4 -

Fig. 2 shows that the yacht PERSEVERANCE, skippered by Richard
Broadhead from Britain, was alerted and from the 22h29 satellite pass
on the 9th it was clear that he turned south to the rescue of SKOIERN
111. At approximately midnight on 11 February PERSEVERANCE met up with
SKOIERN 111 and skipper Jacque de Roux was taken on board just before
SKOIERN 111 sank.

Fig. 2      After SKOIERN III activated the distress alarm PERSEVERANCE was
alerted. At approximately 22h29 UT she turned south and to the rescue.

System ARGOS uses exactly the same spacecraft as the official search-
and-rescue system COSPAS/SARSAT.  However System ARGOS has the very
important added advantage that the location of the transmitter - in
our case it could be an Antarctic field party - is known at all times
as well as the fact that the field party can forward environmental,
or any other data for that matter, to its headquarters and/or sponsors.

System description

The space segment of the ARGOS system comprises two NOAA low polar-orbi-
ting satellites (±850 km). These satellites are equiped with the ARGOS
Data Collection System (DCLS) which receives and processes data from
- 5 -

all transmitting platforms visible during a pass. . Fig. 3 shows that 
each of the two satellites in orbit simultaneously sees all the transmit-
ters within a 5 000 km diameter circle, the minimum elevation angle 
being 5 degrees.  As the satel-
lite  orbits,  the  visibility
zone centred on the satellite
ground track sweeps a swath
5 000 km in width encompassing
the North  and  South poles.
See fig. 4.


VMSIBILITY CIRCLE




Fig. 3

SATELLITE 2  SATELLITE 1
Fig. 4

As a result of the earth's
rotation  two  successive
swaths,  that  is  one  orbit
followed  by  the  next,  are
separated by 25 degrees longi-
tude on the equator.  There-
fore  an  element  of  side-lap
between two successive
swaths as shown in fig. 5.




Fig. 5

Location calculation

The most important feature of the ARGOS-system is the location-determina-
tion capability.  Location is determined by the calculation of the
Doppler effect on the frequencies received by the spacecraft.  Service-
ARGOS claims an accuracy of ± 500 m with respect to the true position
when the oscillator in use in the transmitter adheres to specifications.
Independent tests on the accuracy have been conducted by differenct
institutions and, although discrepancies have been noted, no serious
contradictions to the Service-ARGOS claims are known.  The South African
Weather Bureau on two occasions recovered drifting weather buoys from
- 6 -

the ocean by using the ARGOS location data.  On both occasions the buoys
were picked up without undue waste of time in searching.  To relate
one of these occasions, it was during October 1983 that the South
African Weather Bureau decided to recover buoy 20646 from the less use-
ful position 30S 14E and deploy it in an area of greater interest.
To facilitate the search, 20646 position data accurate to three decimal
places, was obtained from the Service-ARGOS, Toulouse computer.  Posi-
tions determined from seven successive satellite passes, from 15h55
on the 6th till 05h22 on the 7th, were obtained and forwarded to the
SA AGULHAS during the morning of the 7th.  During the same morning the
SATNAV position of the ship was determined and the buoy intercept was
dead-reckoned at 13h01 the same day.  Weather conditions in the search
area were not by any means ideal.  A 25 kt south-easterly wind was
blowing, the visibility was estimated at 6 to 8 km and the general state
of the ocean was that which mariners refer to as state 6.  The sun was
somewhat low in a hazy sky and this made the surface of the sea appear
silvery.  A SATNAV position calculation was done at 12h08 making the

30°S                                         30°S
14°E                                         30°S

Port Turn, maintain heading for 6 min
Port Turn, maintain heading for 15 min
Port Turn. Buoy in sight
SATNAV position 13h12 UT
Recovery point

05h23 
7 October 1983
01h35 
23h50 
19h46 
System-Argos 
positions 
6 October 1983 18h04 
15h55 
Track of S.A.
Agulhas
Buoy speed : 0.78kt
Ship speed 13.85kt

Track of drifting weather
Buoy 20646

5 October 1983
18h00 UT

14°E

Fig. 6    S.A. Agulhas recovered a drifting weather buoy from the South
Atlantic.  This figure shows the track of drifting weather buoy 20646 as
- 7 -

next fix possible at 13h12. At 13h04, 20646 had still not been sighted.
However its signal did come up on the Handar test set used for testing
and evaluating buoys before deployment. By 13h10 the signal on the
handar was fading and it was obvious that the ship had passed the buoy
without sighting it. The master of the SA AGULHAS decided to maintain
speed and heading till after the 13h12 SATNAV position determination.
This fix revealed that the SA AGULHAS was 1 km east of the expected
track. A 90° turn to port was carried out and the heading maintained
for six minutes. This was then followed by another 90° turn to port
with new heading being maintained for fifteen minutes. Finally another
90° turn to port was ordered.

Fig. 6 illustrates the manoeuvre described. It was whilst on track
after the last 90° turn to port that 20646 was sighted about 40° off
the port bow at 800 m.

Data availability
Users can obtain data in various ways. Meteorologists normally obtain
data via the Global Telecommunication System (GTS). Data can however
also be obtained via access to the international telex system. Access
is also possible via telephone at a transmission rate of 300 baud;
Worldwide data can be accessed through Transpac.

South African Delegation

South African Weather Bureau
Department of Transport
Republic of South Africa
