ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                 
KYOTO              
11-22 April 1994              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVIII ATCM/WP 7              

10 April 1994              

Original: English              

PREPARATION FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CEP:              
POSSIBLE TIME-FRAME, KEY TASKS, SUPPORT              

Agenda Item 6.b              

(Submitted by Australia)
wp 7

Preparation for the establishment of the CEP: Possible Time-frame, 
key tasks, support

Time-frame for establishment of CEP

Pending the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol, the ATCM 
should give attention to practical preparations for the CEP's 
establishment. Such consideration could include:

. expediting ratification and entry into force of the Protocol (in 
lead-up to ATCM XIX)

. reviewing adequacy of and possible improvements to ATCM handling 
of environmental matters in preparation for the establishment of 
the CEP, with suggested improvements being taken up in agenda for 
ATCM XIX (see also Item 6 (a) and 18 (c) (ATCM XVIII)

. identifying primary tasks/functions of the CEP (ATCM XIII, see 
below) (ATCM XVIII)

. in the above time-frame, giving constructive consideration to the 
establishment of a Treaty secretariat (see Item 7 (a)).

. the need to adopt, when the CEP is established, Rules of 
Procedure including period of election for Chairman (further to 
draft rule 6).

Functions/Tasks for Committee for Environmental Protection

. meetings of the CEP (annual and any intercessional), including a 
report to ATCM on its sessions

. co-ordination of advice and responses on:
  notifications of and responses to environmental emergencies

  notifications made in accordance with Article 13(3) of the Protocol 
on contingency plans established in accordance with Article 15 of 
the Protocol

  draft and final CEEs and reports on activities completed, (received 
under Article 3 of Annex I)

  information circulated under Article 6 of Annex I (list of IEEs, 
description of national procedures etc)

  information on permits issued under Annex II

  Parties Waste Management Plans

  Reports on implementation and review as required under Annex III
2

information on permits issued under Annex V

. establish data-base on protected areas system (Annex V)

. establish data-base on environmental assessments, actual impacts 
(drawing on CEEs, ATPs data on their lover level activity/impacts, 
and tourist and non-governmental-activity/impacts

. establish data-base on environmental base-lines including for 
monitoring cumulative impacts and for managing protected areas

. establish early contact with Antarctic scientific, logistic and 
technical agencies and instruments which have expertise in the 
protection of the Antarctic environment (SCAR, CCAMLR, COMNAP)

. establish early contact with relevant scientific, environmental 
and technical agencies and instruments on matters and activities 
which have been bearing on the protection and management of the 
Antarctic environment (MARPOL, Basel, Vienna, Climate Change, 
Biodiversity, London Dumping, Whaling, UNCLOS)

Pending entry into force Parties should anticipate the above 
requirements in the conduct of their Antarctic activities and in 
preparation for the ATCM.

Support for CEP

It was understood by Parties at ATCM XVII that the CEP would be 
assisted by the Antarctic Treaty secretariat (to be created) and 
would not require a separate secretariat of its own, but would make 
use of the administrative facilities provide by the host government 
at their sessions (ATCM XVII, para 35).

Pending entry into force of the Protocol and the establishment of 
a Treaty secretariat, the ATCM, in cooperation with outgoing and 
incoming host governments to the ATCM, should take responsibility 
for ensuring sound preparations for the establishment of the CEP, 
including by adjusting the ATCM agenda and meeting procedures and 
decisions to promote the implementation of the Protocol and 
anticipate the role of the CEP.

Item 18 (a) - Draft Agenda for ATCM XIX - Antarctic Environment 
Protection pursuant to the Madrid Protocol

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

(a) Implementation

(b) CEP

(c) Liability Annex
3

(d) relations with other instruments
      Antarctic Treaty system
      other Instruments

(e) environmental Impact Assessments (including general approach to 
      implementing all EIAs)

(f) Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora

(g) Waste Disposal and Waste Management

(h) Prevention of Marine Pollution

(i) Area Protection and Management

(j) Environmental Monitoring

(k) Inspection

(l) Emergency Response Action
