ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme REUNION CONSULTATIVE              


                                  KYOTO              
                                  11-22 April 1994              

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVIII ATCM/WP 22              
10 April 1994              
Original:English              

ANTARCTIC INSPECTION CHECKLIST              

Agenda Item 8 b              

(Submitted by SCAR)
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Kyoto, Japan
11-22 April 1994

Antarctic Inspection Checklist

Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty
Agenda Item 8 b

[Submitted by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
on behalf of SCAR and COMNAP]
JOIN SCAR/COMNAP WORKING PAPER

Following discussions at ATCM XVII under Item 8: Inspection under the Antarctic Treaty, the Meeting considered that in order to enhance the quality of inspections and to assist in comparing inspection results, there would be value in having an agreed checklist of items that might be referred to when conducting inspections.

The Meeting agreed to invite SCAR and COMNAP to prepare an inspection checklist, based on existing examples such as those indicated in paragraph 59 of the Final Report of the XVIth ATCM, to assist assessment of adherence to the requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection. It was recognized that such a checklist would not limit a Party's individual action in conducting inspections.

Accordingly, the attached Antarctic inspection checklist is provided for consideration by Treaty parties at this meeting.
ANTARCTIC INSPECTION CHECKLIST

This checklist, which is not intended to be exhaustive, is designed to provide an aide-memoire to observers who are appointed to 
carry out inspections of Antarctic stations, installations, ships, aircraft, etc, in accordance with the provisions of Article VII of 
the Antarctic Treaty. Furthermore, all items in the checklist will not necessarily be applicable to the facility being inspected.

It is recommended that observers research all relevant documents prior to undertaking inspections, including the Antarctic 
Treaty Exchange Information and the COMNAP/SCALOP Exchange of Information. This research will provide observers with 
relevant background information and enable them to focus on other areas of interest.

1.      General information

        1.1     Name of station visited
        1.2     Operating nation
        1.3     Location
        1.4     Date established
        1.5     Primary aim of the station (logistic/scientific etc)
        1.6     Plans for future use of the station

2.      Inspection details

        2.1     Date of visit
        2.2     Time of visit
        2.3     Duration of visit
        2.4     When was the last inspection?

3.      Personnel

        3.1     Name of officer in charge
        3.2     Total number of personnel on station
        3.3     Number of scientists on station
        3.4     Number of over-wintering personnel
        3.5     Maximum capacity of station
        3.6     Responsible agencies or ministries

4.      Scientific research

        4.1     Major scientific programs supported by the station
        4.2     What dedicated permanent scientific facilities exist on station?
        4.3     Number and nationality of scientists from other Antarctic programs
        4.4     Are radioisotopes used in scientific investigations?

5.      Physical description of station

        5.1     Area covered by station
        5.2     Approximate number and type of buildings
        5.3     Age and state of buildings
2

5.   Physical description of station - continued

     5.4    New or recent construction
     5.5    Sketch or map of the buildings
     5.6    Landing or dock facilities
     5.7    Roads
     5.8    Airstrips
     5.9    Helipads
     5.10   Nearby physical facilities (eg field huts)

6.   Communications

     6.1    Are there communication facilities not covered by SCALOP exchange of 
            information?
     6.2    What aerial systems exist for communications and science?

7.   Transport

     7.1    Number and type of ground vehicles
     7.2    Number and type of small craft
     7.3    Number and type of fixed and rotary wing aircraft
     7.4    Number of aircraft movements per year
     7.5    Cargo handling or earth moving equipment
     7.6    Frequency and method of re-supply

8.   Station facilities - Fuel storage/usage

     8.1    Types, amount and use of fuel: Diesel/Petrol/Aviation/Other
     8.2    Types and capacity of station storage containers
     8.3    What protection is there against leaks and spills?
     8.4    Are fuel pumping systems and storage tanks monitored (method)?
     8.5    Background information on fuel pipe-work (material, above ground, gravity feed, 
            valves)
     8.6    Is bulk fuel transferred (include transfer method)?
     8.7    After transfer are fuel lines blown through to empty them (method)?
     8.8    Are there field fuel depots (give details of quantity and type of fuel)?
     8.9    Who is responsible for fuel management?

9.   Station facilities - Water system

     9.1    Type of water supply and storage facility (RO, distillation, snow melt, treatment, 
            etc)
     9.2    Any problems with the availability of water supply?
     9.3    Is the quality of water being monitored?
     9.4    Consumption per head/day
3

10   Station facilities - Power generation

   10.1    Number, type and capacity of generators
   10.2    Annual fuel consumption for power generation
   10.3    Any use of alternative energy sources?

11   Station facilities - Medical

   11.1    Medical facilities and personnel
   11.2    Number of patient beds

12   Stations facilities - Hazardous chemicals

   12.1    Types and quantities of chemicals
   12.2    Storage and monitoring arrangements

13   Firearms/Explosives

   13.1    Number and type of firearms and the ammunition used
   13.2    Amount, type and use of explosives
   13.3    Storage of explosives and method of disposal

14   Military support activities

   14.1    Describe any support provided by military services to the station
   14.2    Details of military equipment held at the station

15   Antarctic Treaty Legislation

   15.1    Are station personnel familiar with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and 
           related agreements?
   15.2    Availability of relevant Antarctic Treaty documentation on station.
           Staff have access to regs of AT.

16   Emergency response capability

   16.1    Pollution (oil and chemical spills)
           a.  Is there an oil and chemical spill contingency plan? (Obtain copy of plan if available)
           b.  Does the station have equipment to handle a pollution incident?
           c.  Are personnel trained to deal with fuel and chemical spills?
           d.  Are pollution control training exercises carried out (frequency)?
           e.  Could the station provide assistance in the event of a pollution incident nearby 
               (describe)?

   16.2    General
           a.  Details of any incidents in the last year resulting in significant damage 
               to station facilities or the environment
           b.  How are incidents reported?
4

16. Emergency response capability - continued

16.3 Medical:
a.	Is there an evacuation plan for medical emergencies? (Obtain copy of plan if available)

17.	Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)

17.1 Are station management personnel aware of the requirement to conduct an EIA for 
    all new activities?
17.2 Have EIAs been prepared for activities currently being undertaken?
17.3 Are the environmental impacts of the station or associated activities being 
    monitored in any way (description)?
17.4 Key environmental monitoring indicators used to assess environmental impact

18.	Conservation of flora and fauna

18.1 How are station personnel made aware of the rules relating to the 
    conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna? (Obtain documentation if available)
18.2 Details of any native mammals, birds or invertebrates that have been killed, injured, 
    captured, handled, molested or disturbed during the current season. Were permits 
    issued and for what reasons? What methods were used to kill, capture and/or 
    handle the animals?
18.3 Has there been a significant impact on plants and animals in the vicinity of the 
    base? Were permits issued and for what reasons?
18.4 Are non-indigenous plant species or animals present. Were permits issued?
18.5 Are hydroponic activities carried out at the station?
18.6 Are there important wildlife or plant sites nearby (describe)?
18.7 What actions are taken to avoid accidental introduction of non-indigenous species
18.8 Do any local rules govern the use of aircraft and vehicles close to concentrations of 
    birds and animals?

19.	Waste management

19.1 Does the station have a waste management plan for the separation, 
    reduction, collection, storage and disposal of wastes? (Obtain copy if available)
19.2 Who is in charge of waste management on the station?
19.3 Is an annual waste management plan prepared (describe)?
19.4 Is training provided on the need to minimise the impact of wastes on the 
    environment?
19.5 Are any notices publicly displayed concerning waste management?
19.6 Current waste disposal techniques:
    a.	Landfill or to an ice pit (describe)?
    b.	Sea/ice discharge (describe)?
    c.	Is effluent (sewage, greywater) treated and monitored (describe)?
    d.	Open burning (describe)?
         What happens to the ash?
         What alternatives to open burning will be introduced by 1998/99?	+ photo

Details
diff. types
waste

Laboratory chemicals
disposal?
5

19. Waste management - continued

e.   High temperature incineration (describe)?
     What happens to the ash?
     Are emissions controlled or monitored (describe)?
f.   Removal to another station (describe)?
g.   Removal from the Treaty area (describe and quantify)?
     Where and how is waste finally disposed?
h.   Are any wastes recycled (describe)?

19.7 Are measures taken to prevent wastes which are to be removed from the Treaty area being dispersed by wind or accessed by scavengers?
19.8 Has an inventory of the locations of past activities (abandoned bases, old fuel depots) been prepared (describe)?
19.9 Are past activities being cleaned up or are there plans to do so (describe)?

20.  Management of protected areas

20.1 Are there any protected areas near the station (provide name, site number and distance from station)?
20.2 Are copies of the relevant management plans and maps of the protected areas held on station?
20.3 Have station personnel entered protected areas within the past year?  Were permits issued and for what reason?
20.4 Have there been any problems with station personnel or visitors not observing the restrictions of protected areas (describe)?
20.5 Are the boundaries of protected areas marked (describe)?
20.6 Does the protected area continue to serve the purpose for which it was designated?
20.7 Has any monitoring or management of nearby protected areas been carried out (describe)?
20.8 Do station personnel think any additional steps should be taken to protect these areas?

21.  Tourism

21.1 Has the station been visited by tourists or non-governmental expeditions within the last year?
     People per year:
     Numbers ashore at any one time:
     Cruise ships per year:
     Yachts per year
     Aircraft per year:
21.2 What procedures have been developed to facilitate or control tourist activities (describe)? (Obtain copy of procedures if available)
21.3 Have tourists caused any operational problems for the station or had an environmental impact (describe)?
21.4 Did the tour operators ask permission to visit the station? When did they request permission?
