ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                                               TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                               XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                               ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                               XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                               KYOTO
                                                               11-22 April 1994

                                                               XVIII ATCM/WP 18
                                                               10 April 1994
                                                               Original:English

THE REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

        Agenda Item 13

        (Submitted by the United Kingdom)
11-20 November 1992
Venice

THE REGULATION OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

(Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom)

Concerns have been expressed over increasing tourism and non-
governmental activities and their environmental impacts in
Antarctica. At the XVth Consultative Meeting it was agreed that
a comprehensive review of tourism and non-governmental
activities was needed and that this should take place within a
comprehensive environmental protection framework.

Subsequently, tourism and non-governmental activities were
included within the Environmental Protocol and its Annexes. The
Protocol indicates clearly that all activities in Antarctica are
governed by its provisions and makes explicit reference to
tourism and non-governmental activities in a number of its key
Articles.

Despite this comprehensive approach, some Consultative Parties
continue to express reservations that the scope of the Protocol
is too limited; that it is unable to deal adequately with the
problems of tourism and non-governmental activities, and that
further mandatory provisions are required.

At the XVIth ATCM proposals were tabled for a further Annex to
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to deal specifically
with tourism and NGO activities. A draft Annex has since been
prepared.

mgr/163                                         - 1 -
Recommendation XVI-13 calls for proposals, including proposals 
for such an Annex, to be considered at an informal Meeting of 
Treaty Parties.

The Need for Regulation

There is no disagreement amongst Treaty Parties that tourism 
and non-governmental activities must be regulated. Unregulated 
activities in Antarctica would lead to unacceptable impacts on 
the fragile Antarctic environment and criticism of the ATCPs' 
ability to provide for the effective governance of Antarctica.

It is therefore not a question of whether tourism and non-
governmental activities should be regulated but how.

No consensus has yet been established on whether the existing 
regime - provided by Recommendations IV-27, VII-7, VIII-4, VIII-9 
and X-8 and strengthened considerably by the rules of the 
Protocol - is adequate. Or, if it is not, and further 
regulation is necessary, what form such regulation should take.

The answers to these questions require prior assessment of:

    (a) the nature and scale of the potential problems and 
        impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities;

    (b) whether existing provisions adequately address those 
        potential problems and impacts.

The creation of further regulation in the absence of such an 
assessment is likely to lead to, at best, a duplication of 
existing legal measures and, at worst, to provisions which do 
not specifically address the predicted problems and impacts. A 
comprehensive assessment of the potential problems and impacts 
of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica has not 
been undertaken by the ATCM, though a number of recent papers 
(eg XVI ATCM Info 77, and WP 29) provide valuable pointers in 
the right direction.

- 2 -
The Potential Problems and Impacts of Tourism and NGO Activities 
in Antarctica

Commercial tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica 
have grown over the past decade at a considerable pace.  The 
1991/92 season saw over 6,500 tourists visiting the continent. 
Predictions are that this trend will continue.

This paper attempts to identify the problems and impacts 
associated with such activities and to determine whether, and if 
so, how, they are dealt with by existing ATS measures.  By such 
means areas have been identified where additional provisions may 
be considered appropriate or where the existing regime may need 
strengthening.  We have also identified areas where the existing 
regime is sufficient.

In viewing this issue, two important caveats should be borne in 
mind.  One is that despite the scale of tourist operations in 
Antarctica, the recorded impact of this industry on the 
Antarctic environment has so far been slight.  The accent of 
this paper is therefore directed at potential or predicted, 
rather than necessarily current, impacts.  Secondly, the 
identified problems and impacts are not exclusive to tourism and 
non-governmental activities.  Many, if not most, are common to 
the activities of State operators.  Indeed, there is a blurred 
distinction between the two with some tourist activities in 
Antarctica being organised and supported as an integral part of 
Governmental operations.

Issues such as vessel design, construction, manning;  physical 
impacts of development and liability have a commonality between 
Governmental and non-governmental activities.  Even the issue of 
cumulative impact, evident in tourism operations, is relevant 
elsewhere, for example, between competing science interests or 
in the concentration of Antarctic stations.

- 3 -
The potential problems and impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica can be grouped loosely into seven categories. These are:-

I     -   Impacts on Conservation;

II    -   Specific physical impacts;

III   -   Pollution;

IV    -   Impacts related to aircraft operations;

V     -   Impacts related to shipping operations;

VI    -   Information issues;

VII   -   Safety, insurance and liability;

There is a degree of overlap between these categories.

Recommendations

An Information Paper submitted by the UK has examined in greater detail the above categories, and has assessed each particular problem or impact area against existing Antarctic Treaty provisions, including those in the Environmental Protocol. From this assessment we conclude that a number of measures could be taken to strengthen provisions regulating tourism and non-governmental expeditions in Antarctica. It is recommended:-

- 4 -
1. That Treaty Parties produce in the near future new 
Guidelines for tour operators and expedition organisers, 
as well as for tourists and visitors. Such Guidelines 
should replace Recommendation VIII-9, 'Statement of 
Accepted Principles' and 'Guidance for Visitors to the 
Antarctic', which are now out-dated, (see Appendix 1).

2. That Treaty Parties introduce new provisions for 
information exchange regarding tourist and non-
governmental expeditions, (see Appendix 2.I).

3. That Treaty Parties develop an Observer System for 
tourist and non-governmental vessels to ensure compliance 
with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty system; to 
act as an information source for tour operators and 
visitors, and to report back to the Consultative 
Meeting, (see Appendix 2.I).

4. That Treaty Parties liaise with appropriate 
organisations such as the IMO, Marine Certification 
Societies, P & I Clubs with a view to exploring the need 
for, and elaborate details of, further provisions relating 
to, for instance, shipping, and liability (see Appendices 
2.II and 4).

5. That Treaty Parties maintain liaison with the IMO 
over the Antarctic Special Area designated under MARPOL 
(see Appendix 2.III).

6. That Treaty Parties develop, in layman's language, a 
set of guidelines to the Antarctic Treaty and its 
Environmental Protocol. Such information should be 
targetted at non-Contracting Parties, tour operators, 
non-governmental operations and the nationals of 
Contracting Parties, (see Appendix 3).

- 5 -
7. That SCAR and COMNAP be asked to convene [in liaison with IAATO] a Working Group to examine tourism and non-governmental expeditions in Antarctica, and for the Working Group to report back to the XVIII ATCM with its conclusions, (see Appendix 4).

8. That Treaty Parties introduce central co-ordination of the collaboration, collection, analysis and dissemination of information on tourism and non-governmental expeditions.

These recommendations are amplified by Appendices 1-4 in which actions are indicated which could be taken to strengthen Treaty provisions in relation to tourism, non-governmental activities and the potential problems and impacts of visitors on the Antarctic environment generally.

- 6 -
Appendix 1

A Code of Guidance addressed to tour operators and non-
governmental expeditions should be prepared. This Code should, 
at minimum, address the following issues:

- interactions with wildlife (with an explanation of the 
terms of Annex II);

- interference with, and use of, historic sites and 
monuments, abandoned and operational stations, huts, 
refuges and emergency caches;

- the collection of artefacts (man-made, biological and 
geological);

- entry into Antarctic Protected Areas (SPAs, SSSIs, 
CEMP sites etc);

- entry into, and use of vessels and vehicles in, 
remote, pristine locations (eg by helicopters, small 
craft land vehicles, fixed-wing aircraft);

- the disposal of litter and trash, the incidence of 
graffiti and fire-lighting;

- the depoting of aviation fuel and other supplies 
including guidance on spill prevention, containment 
and clean-up;

- the use of Governmental facilities, including 
aircraft-related facilities;

- the frequency of use of anchorages/channels.

- 7 -
Appendix 2

Additional Provisions need to address the following:

I.  Issues specific to tourism and non-governmental activities
    - Visits to, and use of, operational and abandoned 
      Antarctic stations, refuges, huts and emergency 
      caches. Provisions should address the following: 
      prior notification, phased visits, 'no-go' areas, 
      visitor conduct during visits, reporting procedures 
      (including the need for standardised reporting forms);
    - the need for Tour Operators to provide facilities 
      on board their vessels for Observers designated by 
      Antarctic Treaty Parties.

II. Issues related to operations in Antarctica generally

      (ie not specific to tourism and non-governmental 
      activities but common also to the operations of 
      Contracting Parties)

    - the design, construction, equipment and manning of 
      vessels in Antarctic waters, including:

            navigational equipment which should be carried 
            by vessels (over a certain tonnage) in Antarctic 
            waters;

            safety equipment (to meet Antarctic conditions) 
            which should be carried by vessels;

            oil-spill contingency equipment which should be 
            carried by vessels in Antarctic waters;

- 8 -
the training of ships' crews and the setting of 
standards for boat handling, (eg inflatables);

ice-pilotage experience of the Masters and/or 
First Officers of vessels navigating Antarctic 
waters;

- liability (under the terms of Article 16 of the 
Environmental Protocol);

- the collection of geological specimens (minerals, 
fossils, ventifacts etc).

NB:  A number of these issues will require liaison with 
appropriate organisations, eg the IMO, Maritime 
Certification Societies, P & I Societies etc.

III. Issues which are the primary responsibility of external 
organisations and not the Antarctic Treaty Parties

- the Antarctic Special Area provisions under MARPOL.

- 9 -
Appendix 3

Information needs to be prepared and disseminated on the 
following:

- A layman's interpretation (Green Handbook) on the provisions of the Environmental Protocol, and 
specifically how its provisions relate to tourism and non-governmental activities. (This Handbook needs to 
detail the rules relating to wildlife, waste disposal, protected areas etc);

- Recommendation XV-19 on hydrographic charting and the material prepared by the IHO on chart coverage in 
Antarctic waters (Special Publication 55) needs to be brought to the attention of vessels operating in 
Antarctic waters;

- (By Contracting Parties) material for use by their nationals;

- (By Tour Operators) material for the use of their potential and actual clients;

- A statement on the need for self-sufficiency by tourist and non-governmental organisations;

- a statement on the role and responsibilities of Contracting Parties in relation to tour and non-
governmental operators, eg to address the use or otherwise of the facilities of Contracting Parties.

- 10 -
Appendix 4

Further clarification and/or advice is needed on the following:

- [From SCAR (CEP)]. The means of addressing cumulative environmental impacts (eg their predictions through EIA procedures, identification, monitoring programmes, determination of carrying capacity) - taking into account the provisions of Annex I;

- (By the ATCM). The procedures for, and responsibilities of, tourism and non-governmental organisations in the preparation of EIAs including the dissemination, revision and submission of IEEs and CEEs;

- [From the IMO, COMNAP (and the Maritime Certification Societies)]. The design, construction, equipment and manning of vessels in Antarctic waters;
    - including the safety and navigational equipment that should be carried,
    - and including the oil-spill contingency equipment that should be carried;

- [From SCAR (CEP)]. The impact on the marine environment resulting from the frequent use of vessels in restricted anchorages and channels;

- [From the Maritime P & I Societies]. Insurance and liability issues relevant to environmental damage.

- 11 -
