ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                           KYOTO
11-22 April 1994
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVIII ATCM/WP 14
10 April 1994
Original: French

Implementation of the Madrid Protocol on
Environmental Protection in Antarctica

Agenda Item 6 a
(submitted by Belgium)
Implementation of the Madrid Protocol on
Environmental Protection in Antarctica

(Agenda Item 6 a)

I. The Madrid Protocol contains many articles which require the
adoption at the national level of measures for their implementation
(impact studies, monitoring, waste, marine pollution...)

II. Several provisions may be difficult to interpret and in this
regard it would be useful to exchange information for the purpose
of establishing a coordinated approach amongst the Contracting
States Parties to this international agreement.

III. To this end, the following questions could be put to the
delegations participating in the XVIII ATCM for consideration:

1.a. Article 8, article 3 and 4 and the provisions of annex III to
the Madrid Protocol are applicable to activities undertaken in
the Antarctic Treaty area regarding "scientific research
programmes, tourist and any other governmental or non
governmental activity in the Antarctic Treaty area for which
advance notice is required in accordance with article VII
paragraph 5 of the Antarctic Treaty..."

b. That being the case, are the aforementioned articles contained
in the Madrid Protocol then applicable to any activity
undertaken in Antarctica or are certain activities excluded
from their scope?

1
c. If such is the case, which activities are excluded?  (in 
addition to hunting and fishing activities regulated by the 
London Convention of 1972 and the Canberra Convention of 1980 
(see article 4 of the Protocol), we could consider for example 
the simple passage of a ship in the Antarctic Treaty area.

2. With regard to the activities mentioned in articles 8, 3 
paragraph 4 and in annex III:

a. Are these activities subject, under domestic law, to prior 
authorization (permit)?

b. What are the criteria used, under domestic law, which enable 
a Contracting Party to exercise jurisdiction:
        - activities undertaken by nationals (an individual or 
legal entity) of the Contracting State?

        - activities undertaken on the Contracting State's 
territory or which originate from the Contracting State's 
territory (see article VII, paragraph 5 of the Antarctic 
Treaty)?

        - activities undertaken by a foreign individual residing 
on the territory of the Contracting State or by a foreign 
legal entity with a place of business on the Contracting 
State's territory?

        - other criteria?

c. Are mechanisms provided for, under domestic law, in order to 
recognize the validity of impact study procedures carried out 
by a Contracting Party to the Madrid Protocol when the 
activity in question also falls within the scope of the

2
domestic law of another Contracting Party (for example an activity undertaken in the Netherlands by a Belgium national)?

3.a. With regard to the application of article VII of the Protocol, are the criteria used, under domestic law, to exercise the jurisdiction of a Contracting Party identical to those used for the application of article VIII?

b. If not, which criteria are used?

4.a. With regard to the application of annexes II and V, are the criteria used, under domestic law, to exercise the jurisdiction of a Contracting Party identical to those used for the application of article VIII?

b. If not, which criteria are used?

 
3
