ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                   XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/WP 30
11 April 1994
Original: Spanish

 
Inspections under Article VII
of the Antarctic Treaty

Item 9 of the Agenda
(submitted by Argentina)
Inspections under Article VII 
of the Antarctic Treaty

(Item 9 of the Agenda)

1.  We are pleased to note the increasing recognition of the 
importance of the proper exercise of inspection rights established 
under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty for the effective 
operation of the Treaty's system. Thus, inspections are a valuable 
monitoring tool used by the Parties to ensure compliance with the 
Treaty's purposes and principles and the Recommendations in force. 
Inspections also help to strengthen the trust amongst the 
Consultative Parties, and the rest of the international community. 
Finally, it avails the Parties of the opportunity to exchange 
information and experiences on activities in Antarctica.

    However, it is appropriate to highlight several aspects which, 
if they were to be further improved, would make inspections an even 
more useful tool.

    Firstly, it should be pointed out that an adequate balance is 
lacking with regard to stations subject to inspection. Indeed some 
have been inspected numerous times, some only a few, while others 
at this stage, have not been at all.

    The same holds true for the countries to which these stations 
belong. Some of them (those of Argentina and the former Soviet 
Union for example) are inspected very often, compared to those of 
other Parties.

    Secondly, with regard to checklists, it is noted that some 
include questions which, given their complexity and nature, cannot

1
be answered by the station, shift or aircraft manager, etc. In such
cases those questions would be best handled by the competent
national authorities. The said authorities must then be asked to
provide the relevant information through the customary diplomatic
channels.

Furthermore, several issues have been included which are not
strictly related to the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty and
of the Consultative Meetings' Recommendations in force. In this
connection, matters such as sites and places reached by the teams
during various expeditions, or the findings of scientific research
underway on location should not be included. This type of
information should be exchanged in the activity reports prepared by
each country in accordance with the provisions of Article VII
paragraph 5 of the Antarctic Treaty.

Argentina recognises the efforts made to include in the
checklists, those questions relating to the Protocol to the
Antarctic Treaty on the Protection of the Environment, even though
it has not yet been brought into force. In addition it notes that
the obligation of the States with regard to the Protocol is limited
to the adoption, individually and to every extent possible of
measures necessary for the implementation of said Protocol before
it enters into force. This is the understanding reflected in the
final report of the XIth Special ATCM.

Likewise, Argentina wishes to underscore the importance of the
use of the Antarctic Treaty's official languages for the inspection
forms, insisting on the need to respect the language of the station
to be inspected, particularly when it is one of the Treaty's four
official languages. To support this practice, all inspected
stations, ships and aircraft must be provided with a copy of the
questionnaire of the documents that are prepared with the answers
included therein.

2
In doing so, it will be possible to overcome comprehension problems due to the complex and technical nature of the questionnaire. In addition, this would contribute to a clearer and more fluent exchange of information.

2. With regard to the inspection of Argentine stations carried out during the summer of 1992/93 by the United Kingdom, Italy and the Republic of Korea under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, it would be appropriate to mention the following:

General Aspects

a) Article VII paragraph 1 of the Antarctic Treaty stipulates that, as a basic requirement to carry out an inspection, the names of designated observers shall be communicated to all other Contracting Parties. In addition to the fact that it is a provision of the Antarctic treaty, this advance notice is an established practice and a courtesy which should be observed without exception.

    In this particular case, Argentina did not receive prior notification from the United Kingdom. Notwithstanding, and in the spirit of cooperation and goodwill which governs the conduct of Parties, Argentina facilitated the execution of these inspections. Following the relevant consultations, explanations from the United Kingdom were forthcoming and appreciated.

    Argentina believes it essential for necessary measures to be taken so that this fundamental requirement is adhered to.

b) The inspection questionnaire was printed in English. In this regard, the comments already made on the use of official languages and the submission of a copy of the questionnaire with the answers provided also apply.

3
c) The questionnaire included questions which, because of their nature and complexity, could not be answered by a station manager. Thus, it would have been preferable if the relevant national authorities had answered these type of questions. In addition, said questionnaire included questions which had nothing to do with traditional inspection matters.

Specific aspects

a) Inspection of the Esperanza Station. The report indicates that there are buildings on said station which require maintenance and that an environmental impact assessment was not prepared (paragraph 4 page 44 of the report). In this connection, it should be pointed out that the buildings have been properly maintained, and that the Argentine Antarctic Institute has carried out an EIA of the Esperanza Station. This document was distributed to the groups of experts of SCAR and will soon be forwarded to the Parties through the customary channels.

Argentina does not understand the reasons why mention was made of the lack of supervision with regard to the entry of station staff into the protected areas located near said Station. On this point the report is not very precise. It should be emphasized that the Station staff receives very clear instructions as to procedure, and follow them accordingly.

The report highlights the existence on the Station of a number of military personnel which exceeds that of the scientific staff. On page 44, where Station staff is mentioned, the report indicates that close to half the staff carry out logistic functions " whereas the other half is made up of scientists ". In this regard, it should be recalled that under its Article 1, the Antarctic Treaty expressly authorizes the use of military personnel for any peaceful purposes. This is why Argentina is surprised to note that the team

4
of observers makes distinctions where the Antarctic Treaty does not.

Argentina wishes to emphasize that the inspection reports must, to every extent possible be clear and objective, to avoid creating doubt and giving rise to different interpretations.

b)    Inspection of the San Martin Station. The distinction which was made between the military and the scientific personnel also has application here. With regard to the content of page 24 of the report on the fact that San Martin is a small station which performs a limited number of scientific tasks, it should be underscored that the Treaty authorizes any activity provided that it be for a peaceful purpose. Scientific activities, although the most important, are but one of the activities recognized as making legitimate use of the Antarctic.

The concerns expressed by the team of observers regarding the handling of fuels were for the most part alleviated with the installation of three tanks, each with a capacity of 10 000 liters, which replaced the previous ones.

c)    Inspection of the Decepcion Station. Several observations made in the inspection report for this station do not seem appropriate, especially if we take into account the fact that during the 1992/93 and 1993/94 campaigns, this temporary station satisfactorily hosted not only Argentinian but also Spanish scientific personnel in accordance with the spirit of cooperation which characterizes the Antarctic Treaty system. It has thus become a source of support for various groups of researchers.

Given the above, it is clear that the Decepcion Station is being used, although not permanently.

5
Also, it should be pointed out that during the 1993/94 season,
cleanup and repairs of the scientific station were carried out and
the emergency post was renovated. These tasks are expected to be
completed during the summer campaign of 1994/95.

3. Argentina is convinced that these observations and comments
will be taken into account during future inspections.

 
●

 
●

 
                        6
