ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


KYOTO
11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/WP 1
10 April 1994
Original:English

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Agenda Item 6a

(Submitted by Germany)
XVIII ATCM/WP 1
10 April 1994
Original: English

Implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty
Agenda Item 6 a
(submitted by Germany)
Implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty

(Agenda Item 6 a)

According to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty activities referred to in Art 8 para 2 in the
Antarctic Treaty Area shall be subject to the procedures set out in
Annex I of the Protocol for prior assessment of their impacts to
the Antarctic environment or on dependant or associated ecosystems.

The activity may involve natural or juridical persons of more
than one Party to the Protocol or originate in a non-member state.
In the first case it would be inappropriate to oblige each relevant
Party to assess the planned activity. In the second case it has to
be assured that the activity is not undertaken without an
environmental impact assessment at all.

The Protocol itself does not contain provisions dealing with
this problem. Article 8 para 4 of the protocol does only regulate
the special case of more than one Party undertaking jointly an
activity.

Therefore, Germany proposes the following agreement to
regulate the responsibility for the environmental impact
assessment:

1. The mentioned responsibility shall normally fall upon the state
party to the Protocol in which the organizer of the activity has
his residence or in case that a juridical person is the
organizer, has its seat or principal place of business.

1
2. If an organizer has his residence in a non-member state or as a juridical person has its seat or principal place of business in 
a non-member state, the mentioned competence shall fall upon the 
state party to the Protocol from whose territory the activity is 
proceeding.

In the Final Act of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special 
Consultative Meeting, the Parties agreed that pending the entry into 
force of the Protocol it was desirable for all Contracting Parties to 
apply the Annexes of the Protocol in accordance with their legal 
systems and to the extend practicable.

Germany therefore considers it necessary to find an agreement 
about the responsibility for the environmental impact assessment 
before the Protocol enters into force and proposes the draft 
recommendation annexed to this working paper: 

 
2
Implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty

The representatives,

recalling the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty done at Madrid, 4th October 1991;

committed to an effective implementation of the provisions of the Protocol;

recommend to their governments that in accordance with their legal systems:

I. The responsibility for the environmental impact assessment set out in Annex I to the Protocol shall fall upon the Party to the Protocol in which the organizer of the activity has his residence or in case that a juridical person is the organizer, has its seat or principal place of business;

II. In case that the organizer has his residence in a non-member state or, as a juridical person, has its seat or principal place of business in a non-member state, the responsibility for the environmental impact assessment set out in Annex I of the Protocol shall fall upon the Party to the Protocol from whose territory the activity is proceeding.

3
