ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme REUNION CONSULTATIVE              

                                  KYOTO           
                                  11-22 April 1994           

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ              

XVIII ATCM/WP 5 Rev.1           
14 April 1994           
Original: Spanish           

The Antarctic System for Specially Protected Areas              
Historic Sites and Monuments              
Agenda Item 11 b              
(Submitted by Chile)             
The Antarctic System for Specially Protected Areas

(Agenda Item 11 b)

(b) Historic Sites and Monuments

Among the most important historic monuments of Western Antarctica are the remains of the whale factory of Decepción Island, archipelago of Southern Shetland.

"The earth station, built by the Chileans and subsequently run by the Norwegians"1, was operational from 1906 to 1931. Today there are imposing vestiges of its ponds, boilers, machinery, old wooden ships which are partially buried in the island's volcanic ash and lava.

There is also a cemetery with tombs and crosses, which was destroyed by the eruptions of 1967 and 1969. There are remains of a UK base and other facilities, vestiges of a Chilean base as well as summer retreats belonging to Argentinians and Spaniards. In a word, this is one of the landmarks of the Pole.

Given the spirit of international cooperation embodied in the Antarctic Treaty, this historic site avails us of the opportunity of carrying out restoration work. In so doing, we will be paying a well-deserved tribute to the pioneers while making an historic contribution for the benefit of the visitors who have turned Decepción Island into the most popular site of the region.

1       Antarctica and the South Atlantic by Robert Fox, London 1985, p. 183

1
Indeed, every year in January and February there are on average 50 
to 60 tourist and scientific ships and yachts.

Fortunately, Decepción Island's flora and fauna are not 
in any danger as they are virtually absent from the visited areas 
of the inner bay, with the exception of sites of special scientific 
interest. There are also hot springs which are a main attraction 
for visitors.

The Chilean delegation believes that the time has come to 
work together voluntarily albeit efficiently to collectively 
restore these important historical sites for which it intends to 
submit a project.

These relics should also include the monolith and the 
Adolfo Andresen's commemorative plaque which, as was agreed upon at 
the ATCM in Bonn in Recommendation XVI - 11, are to be placed in 
Caleta Balleneros as well as other mementos such as the plaque 
which was brought to Antarctica several months ago by Norwegian 
parliamentarians.

Thus would be established, in the Treaty's spirit of 
international cooperation, Antarctica's first open museum.

 
2
